CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS, 2018 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2018 
____________ 
Adopted: 2018 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROUND ROCK, TEXAS 
2018 
____________ 
Craig Morgan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Writ Baese, Mayor Pro Tem 
Tammy Young 
Rene Flores 
Matthew Baker 
Will Peckham 
Hilda Montgomery 
City Council 
____________ 
Laurie Hadley 
City Manager 
____________ 
Sara L. White 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROUND ROCK, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
2010 
____________ 
Alan McGraw 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carlos T. Salinas, Mayor Pro Tem 
Joe Clifford 
Rufus Honeycutt 
Kris Whitfield 
George White 
John Moman 
City Council 
____________ 
James R. Nuse 
City Manager 
____________ 
Stephan L. Sheets 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sara L. White 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Supplement Department Vice President, and Mary Talbot, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Sarah White, City Secretary, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Round Rock, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Round Rock, Texas. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. O-2018-5865 
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT AND ENACT A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS, SAID CODE TO BE ENTITLED "CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS, 2018;" PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER BY WHICH TO DEEM FUTURE ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE AS BEING INCORPORATED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR A SAVINGS CLAUSE; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES OR RESOLUTIONS; AND PROVIDING THAT THIS ORDINANCE AND THE CODE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE UPON SECOND AND FINAL READING. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Round Rock, as a Texas home-rule municipality, passes general and permanent legislation by adopting ordinances for the good government, peace, and order of the municipality; and 
    WHEREAS, heretofore the City has had all such ordinances codified in its "Code of Ordinances, 2010 Edition;" and 
    WHEREAS, Municipal Code Corporation was engaged to undertake a detailed review and reorganization of such 2010 Code to produce a comprehensive re-codification entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2018" and, further, to enable the entire body of the Code to be continuously maintained and accessed electronically; and 
    WHEREAS, through a process of review and consultation with City staff, Municipal Code Corporation has now completed the re-codification process and has produced the 2018 version of the Code of Ordinances; and 
    WHEREAS, such "Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2018" requires formal adoption and enactment; Now Therefore 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS, 
I. 
    The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2018," published in hardcopy and electronically by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Part I (Charter), Part II (Chapters 1 through 44 and Appendix), and Part III (Zoning and Development Code), is hereby formally adopted and enacted. 
II. 
    The 2018 Code represents a re-codification of the 2010 Code as amended through Supplement No. 40, with ordinances adopted thereafter through and including September 28, 2017 being included in the 2010 Code. 
III. 
    Future additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make such addition or amendment a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the 2018 Code so that reference to the 2018 Code includes all such additions and amendments. 
IV. 
A.  All ordinances, parts of ordinances, or resolutions in conflict herewith are expressly repealed. 
B.  The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. 
C.  The City Council hereby finds and declares that written notice of the date, hour, place and subject of the meeting at which this Ordinance was adopted was posted and that such meeting was open to the public as required by law at all times during which this Ordinance and the subject matter hereof were discussed, considered and formally acted upon, all as required by the Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code, as amended, and the Act. 
    READ and APPROVED on first reading this the 13th day of  September   , 2018. 
    READ, APPROVED and ADOPTED on second reading this the 27th day of  September   , 2018. 
  
/s/  CRAIG MORGAN 

      CRAIG MORGAN, Mayor   City of Round Rock, Texas 
ATTEST: 
  
/s/  SARA L. WHITE 

      SARA L. WHITE, City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. O-2017-4119  2- 9-2017 Include 1 O-2017-4343  4-27-2017 Include 1 O-2017-4835 11- 9-2017 Include 1 O-2018-5091  1-25-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5096  2- 8-2018 Include 1 R-2018-5346  4-12-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5461  5-24-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5779  9-13-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5788  9-13-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5866  9-27-2018 Include 1 R-2018-5954  9-27-2018 Include 1 O-2018-5955  9-27-2018 Include 1 O-2018-6037 12-20-2018 Include 2 O-2018-6161 12-20-2018 Include 2 O-2019-0080  2-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0081  2-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0083  2-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0084  2-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0085  2-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0094  2-28-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0097  2-28-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0103  2-28-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0124  3-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0129  3-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0136  3-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0137  3-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0138  3-14-2019 Include 2 O-2019-0201  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0202  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0203  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0204  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0205  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0206  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0207  5- 9-2019 Include 3 O-2019-0208  5- 9-2019 Include 3 R-2019-0188  5- 9-2019 Include 3  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
    We, the people of Round Rock, Texas in order to establish a home rule municipal government that will provide for the future progress of our City through local self government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter, hereinafter referred to as "Charter," in accordance with the statutes of the state of Texas; and do hereby declare the citizens of the City of Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas, residing within the legally established boundaries of said City, to be a political subdivision of the state of Texas incorporated forever under the name of the "City of Round Rock" with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note- Printed in this part is the Home Rule Charter of the city, which was approved at an election held on August 13, 1977. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Provisions which are obsolete are indicated by editor's note. 
State Law reference- Charter to be consistent with constitution and general laws, art. XI, § 5; home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9. 

ARTICLE 1. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.01. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state and by this Charter, all powers of the City of Round Rock, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "City," shall be vested in an elected council, hereinafter referred to as the "City Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager, who in turn shall be held responsible to the City Council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the City. All power of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the state constitution or the statutes of the state. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021. 
Sec. 1.02. - The boundaries. 
    The bounds and limits of the City are hereby established and described as being those boundaries heretofore established in the original incorporated proceedings of the said City, filed of record on July 11, 1977, in the office of the Clerk of the County Court of Williamson County, Texas and those boundaries established and changed thereafter in all annexation ordinances and proceedings of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1.03. - Extension of boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods hereinafter designated: 
(a)  Extending Limits in Accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43, as amended: Where such additional territory adjoins the corporate limits of the City and contains three or more inhabitants qualified to vote for members of the state legislature, such adjacent territory may be annexed to the City in the manner and in conformity with the procedure set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43, as amended. 
(b)  Annexation of the Unoccupied Lands on Petition of Owners: The owners or owner of any land which is without residents, or on which less than three voters reside, contiguous and adjacent to the City may, by petition in writing to the City Council, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The City Council shall thereafter, and not less than five and not more than thirty days after the filing of such petition, hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petitions as the City Council may see fit. If the City Council grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance receive and annex such territory as a part of the City. 
(c)  Annexation by Amendment to Charter: The boundary limits of the City may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed thereto by amendment to the Charter of the City. 
(d)  Extending Limits by Action of the City Council: The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said City, with or without the consent of the residents or the owners of the territory annexed. 
(e)  Annexation by Any Other Method Provided by Law: Additional territory may also be annexed to the City in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided by law or in such manner as shall be provided by ordinances or resolutions of the City Council. Same shall be in addition to the methods hereinabove provided. 
(f)  Annexed Territory to Become Part of the City: Upon completion of any one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the City, and said land and its residents and future residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the City and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43. 
Sec. 1.04. - Contraction of boundaries. 
    Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City any territory not suitable or necessary for City purposes, and lying adjacent to the corporate limits, the City Council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory if the same be inhabited, or without any such petition if the same be uninhabited, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said City; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the City and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained; and when said ordinance has been duly passed the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said City, and from and after the entry of such ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said City, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said City, and the City shall continue to levy, access and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the City as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Disannexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.141 et seq. 
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 

Sec. 2.01. - General. 
    The City may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the state of Texas or any agency thereof, the Federal Government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the state of Texas; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the state of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The City may own or acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation or may sell, lease, hold, manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the City Limits, subject to the limitations hereinafter set out, and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities, may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants or notes of the City; may appropriate the money of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its residents; and may provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 2.02. - General powers adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the state of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The City shall have and may exercise all the powers of a home rule city as enumerated in Article 1175, Chapter 13, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the state of Texas of 1925 and in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 2.03. - Eminent domain. 
    The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution and laws of the state of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 251. 
Sec. 2.04. - Zoning in general. 
    The City Council shall have full power and authority to zone the City and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and legislative bodies thereof by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Title 7, Subtitle A and Title 12, Subtitle A, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
ARTICLE 3. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.01. - Number, selection and term. 
    The City Council shall be composed of the Mayor and six (6) Council members. The Mayor and all Council members shall be elected from the City at large and each Council member shall occupy a place on the City Council, such places being numbered 1 through 6 consecutively. The Mayor and Council members shall be elected in the manner provided in Article 5 of this Charter to serve for three (3) year terms. 
    In order to provide for an orderly transition from two (2) year terms to three (3) year terms, at the first general election held under this amended Article, two (2) Council members shall be elected to serve two (2) year terms and two (2) Council members shall be elected to serve three (3) year terms. The places which shall be elected to two (2) year terms shall be determined by drawing lots at the first regular City Council meeting held after this amended Article is adopted. The following year, and each year thereafter, all elections shall be for three (3) year terms. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
    In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, the Mayor and each Council member shall meet the conditions of Section 5.02 while in office, and shall reside within the City while in office. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Age and residence requirements for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003. 
Sec. 3.03. - Judge of election qualifications. 
    The City Council shall be the final judge of all elections and of qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
    The Mayor and Council members shall receive compensation as may be fixed by ordinance; provided, however, that they shall be entitled to all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official council duties upon approval by the City Council. Regardless of whether or not the Mayor and Council members receive compensation for their service, they shall not be considered to be employees of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters April 5, 1986; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.05. - Mayor and Mayor Pro-tem. 
    The Mayor shall be the official head of the City government. The Mayor shall be the chairman of, and shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The Mayor shall vote on every proposition before the City Council, but shall have no power to veto. The Mayor shall see that all ordinances, bylaws, and resolutions of the City Council are faithfully obeyed and enforced. Except as provided in Section 4.01, the Mayor shall, when authorized by the City Council, sign all official documents such as ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, grant agreements, contracts, and bonds. The Mayor shall appoint special committees he or she deems advisable and as instructed by the City Council. The Mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter or as may be imposed upon him or her by the City Council. 
    The Mayor Pro-tem shall be a Council member elected by the City Council at the first regular City Council meeting following each regular City election. The Mayor Pro-tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor, and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the Mayor. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 3.06. - Vacancies, forfeiture, filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies: The office of a Council member or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon his or her death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of his or her office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office: If the Mayor or any Council member: 
(1)  fails to maintain the qualifications as required in Sections 3.02 and 5.02 herein; 
(2)  has been found by at least a 2/3 vote of the City Council to have violated any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(3)  is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(4)  fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular City Council meetings without being excused by the City Council, 
the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting, declare the office to be vacant and shall fill such vacancy as set forth in Subsection (c) below of this Section 3.06. 
(c)  Filling of Vacancies: 
(1)  When any vacancy shall occur on the City Council, and there remains an unexpired term of more than 12 months, a special election shall be called to fill such vacancy in accordance with Art. 11, §11 of the Texas Constitution. 
(2)  When any vacancy shall occur on Place 1 through Place 6 of the City Council, and there remains an unexpired term of 12 months or less, the City Council by majority vote may appoint a person who meets all of the qualifications of §3.02 to fill the vacancy until the next regular City Election date. If the City Council elects not to appoint such a person to fill the vacancy, then the City Council shall call a special election to fill such vacancy in accordance with Art. 11, §11 of the Texas Constitution. 
(3)  When any vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor, and there remains an unexpired term of 12 months or less, the City Council by majority vote may appoint one of the Councilmembers to fill the vacancy until the next regular City Election date. If the City Council elects not to appoint a Councilmember to fill the vacancy of Mayor, then the City Council shall call a special election to fill such vacancy in accordance with Art 11, §11 of the Texas Constitution. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; April 5, 1986; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.07. - General powers and duties. 
    All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, and the City Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.08. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding Other Office: Except where authorized by law, no Mayor or Council member shall hold any other City office or City employment during his or her term as Mayor or Council member and no former Mayor or Council member shall hold any compensated appointive City office or City employment until one year after the expiration of his or her term as Mayor or Council member. 
(b)  Appointments and Removals: Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City employees whom the City Manager or any of his or her subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the City Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such employees. 
(c)  Interference with Administration: Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 3.16, the City Council or its members shall deal with City employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor its members shall give orders to any such employee, either publicly or privately, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. This subsection shall not prohibit the Mayor and Council from giving direction and supervision to the assistant(s) appointed pursuant to Section 3.17 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 10, 2008; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.09. - Meetings of the City Council. 
    The City Council shall hold at least two regular meetings each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the City and its citizens. The City Council shall fix, by ordinance, the days and time of the regular meetings. Special meetings of the City Council shall be held on the call of the Mayor or of a majority of the City Council members. Notice of all meetings of the City Council shall be given in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551, as amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.10. - Quorum. 
    Four City Council members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and no action of the City Council, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the City Council, except where a greater number of affirmative votes is expressly provided herein. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 3.11. - Rules of procedure. 
    The City Council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business and the rules shall provide that citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in regard to any matter under consideration. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.12. - Voting. 
    The City Council shall provide for minutes being taken and recorded of all meetings, and such minutes shall be a public record. Except as required by state law, there shall be no requirement for the taking and recording of minutes of meetings held in executive or closed session in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. 
    All members of the City Council present, including the Mayor, shall vote upon every resolution or ordinance, except where there is a conflict of interest, the reason for which shall be stated concisely in the records. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.13. - Ordinances in general. 
    Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the City Council only in written or printed form. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. 
    Any ordinance which levies a fine or penalty and those dealing with budget and/or tax, franchises, public utilities or the setting of their rates, shall be read at two regular meetings before the same shall become effective. 
    All other ordinances shall not be finally passed until they have been read on two separate days not less than twelve (12) hours apart; provided however if an ordinance has been introduced at a regular meeting of the City Council, the requirements for reading on two separate days may be dispensed with by an affirmative vote of all the City Council members present. 
    Any ordinance introduced pursuant to Section 9.01(e)(2) may be adopted and finally passed at the meeting at which it is introduced. 
    The final reading of each ordinance shall be read in full unless a written or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the City Council prior to such meeting. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Round Rock, Texas." 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 10, 2008) 
State Law reference- Code of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 53. 
Sec. 3.14. - Emergency ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, property, or the public peace, the City Council may adopt emergency ordinances. Such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the borrowing of money, except as provided in Article 8, Section 8.05. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. Such emergency clause shall require the affirmative vote of five members of the City Council. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of five members of the City Council shall be required for adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for other adopted ordinances and shall become effective in the same manner. Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the day on which it became effective, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 3.15. - Bonds for city employees. 
    The City Council shall require bonds of all municipal employees who receive or pay out any monies of the City. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the City Council and the cost thereof shall be borne by the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.16. - Investigative body. 
    The City Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, office, or employee of the City, and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence material to the inquiry. The City Council shall provide by ordinance, penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 3.17. - Assistant(s) for the Mayor and Council. 
    The Mayor and Council, along with the City Manager, shall have the power to direct and supervise one or more assistant(s) appointed by the City Manager to provide clerical and administrative support services to the Mayor and Council. The aforesaid assistant(s) shall deal with other City employees solely through the City Manager, and shall not give orders to any such employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 10, 2008; May 6, 2017) 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Sec. 4.01. - City Manager. 
(a)  Appointment and Qualifications: The City Council by majority vote of the entire City Council shall appoint a City Manager. The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the City Council so long as the method ensures orderly, nonpartisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The City Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of such person's executive and administrative training, experience and ability and need not when appointed be a resident of the City; however, during the tenure of his or her office the City Manager shall reside within the City. The City Manager shall be bonded at City expense in an amount to be determined by the City Council. 
(b)  Compensation: The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the City Council according to his or her experience, education, and training. The compensation shall be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the City Council may change it at their discretion. 
(c)  Term and Removal: The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definitive term but may be removed at the discretion of the City Council, by vote of the majority of the entire City Council. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the City Council. 
(d)  Powers and Duties: The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City, and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City and to that end shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  see that all state laws and City ordinances are effectively enforced; 
(2)  appoint, suspend or remove all or any one of the directors of departments, except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)  appoint, suspend or remove such Assistant City Managers as may be deemed necessary by the City Council to assist the City Manager in carrying out the day to day management responsibilities; 
(4)  attend all meetings of the City Council except when excused by the City Council, and shall have the right to take part in the discussions; 
(5)  prepare the budget annually and submit it to the City Council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption; 
(6)  prepare and submit to the City Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year; 
(7)  keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem advisable; 
(8)  make other such reports as the City Council may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies subject to his or her discretion and supervision; and 
(9)  perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the City Council, as consistent with this Charter. 
(e)  Acting City Manager: The City Manager, within sixty (60) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City Clerk, a qualified administrative employee of the City to be the Acting City Manager in his or her absence or disability. Such designation shall be subject to the prior approval of the City Council. The Acting City Manager is authorized to perform the same powers and duties as the City Manager while acting in the City Manager's stead. No member of the City Council shall serve as Acting City Manager. From time to time the City Manager may remove and appoint another Acting City Manager, also with the prior approval of the City Council. The Acting City Manager shall perform the duties of the City Manager until the City Manager returns or his or her disability shall cease or until the City Council designates another person to perform such duties. 
(f)  Contracts and Purchases: The City Council may by ordinance set a maximum amount for which the City Manager and/or other city employees shall be authorized to execute contracts and/or to expend funds for budgeted items; provided however, that all contracts and expenditures must comply with state laws requiring competitive bids. The City Council may by ordinance establish an amount above which all contracts or purchases must be approved in advance by the City Council. All contracts and purchases shall be handled in a manner to obtain the best value for the City. 
(g)  Execution of Documents: If so authorized by the City Council, the City Manager and/or other city employees shall have the authority to execute, on behalf of the City, standard form documents, including but not limited to deeds, releases of liens, rental agreements, easements, right-of-way agreements, joint use agreements, and other similar documents, under the following conditions: 
(i)  The execution of the document is necessary to carry out a public works project; utilize, maintain or improve a City facility, street, right-of-way, easement, park or other City property, or to implement other City policies; provided that such project, program or policy has been approved by the City Council; 
(ii)  That all blanks are filled in on any document correctly and that such document is consistent with the objectives approved by the City Council; and 
(iii)  That the form of such document shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 4.02. - Administrative departments. 
    There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and may be established by ordinance and, excepting as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the direction of the City Manager. 
    The City Council shall have power by ordinance to establish administrative departments or offices not herein provided by this Charter. The City Council may discontinue, redesignate, or combine any of the departments and/or administrative offices. No changes shall be made by the City Council in the organization of the administrative service of the City until the recommendations of the City Manager thereon shall have been heard by the City Council. 
    The head of each department shall be a director who shall have supervision and control over said department. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual and the City Manager may head one or more departments. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 4.03. - Municipal Court. 
(a)  There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a "Municipal Court" for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of the state of Texas relative to municipal courts. 
(b)  The judge of said court shall be appointed by the City Council to serve at the discretion of the City Council. The judge shall be an attorney licensed and practicing in the state of Texas and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the City Council. 
(c)  There shall be a clerk of said court appointed by the City Manager. 
(d)  The clerk of said court and deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual, and necessary to be performed, by the clerks of courts, in issuing process of said courts, and conducting the business thereof. 
(e)  The City Council shall have the power to create and appoint additional judges as provided by law. 
(f)  All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29. 
Sec. 4.04. - City attorney. 
    The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the state of Texas, who shall be the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall receive for his or her services such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney, or such other attorneys selected by the City Attorney with the approval of the City Council, shall represent the City in all litigation. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the City and all elected officials, employees and departments thereof. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 4.05. - City Clerk. 
    The City Manager shall appoint the City Clerk and such Assistant City Clerks as the City Council shall deem advisable. The duties of the City Clerk, and Assistant City Clerks, shall be as follows: 
(a)  to give notice of City Council meetings; 
(b)  to keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings; 
(c)  to authenticate by his or her signature and record in full a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions; and 
(d)  to perform such other duties as the City Council shall assign, and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 5.01. - City elections. 
(a)  Schedule. The regular City Election will be held annually in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 41. The City Council shall, by ordinance, establish the general election date. Elections for candidates who are unopposed may be canceled in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 2, subch. C. The City Council shall be responsible to specify places for holding such election. 
(b)  Special Elections. The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, order a special election under conditions specified elsewhere in this Charter, for initiative or referendum of ordinances, bond issues, Charter amendments, recall of the Mayor or Council members or other purposes deemed appropriate by the City Council. The City Council will fix the time and place for holding such special elections, and provide all means for holding same. 
(c)  Voter Eligibility List. A certified list of voter registrants within the City, as prepared by the County Election Administrator, shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk. If for a purpose relating only to a City election or to candidates or issues involved in such election, any organization, group or person requests a list of qualified voters of the City, permission to copy the current list shall be granted by the City Clerk. 
(d)  Conduct and Regulation of Elections. All City elections shall be governed by the constitution of the state of Texas, general laws of the state, this Charter, and ordinances of the City, in the order named. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed or approved by the City Council. Sample ballots identical to the voting machine format for the specific election shall be posted in the voting place(s) for purpose of voter orientation. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; May 15, 2004; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 5.02. - Filing for office. 
(a)  Eligibility to File. Each candidate for an elective City office shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  be a registered voter of the City; 
(2)  have resided for at least twelve (12) months preceding the election within the corporate limits of the City, including territory annexed prior to the filing deadline; and 
(3)  not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the City. "In arrears" is defined herein to mean that payment has not been received within ninety (90) days from due date. 
(b)  Additional restrictions. In addition to the foregoing qualifications, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  An incumbent seeking reelection must file for the same Council Place number presently serving. 
(2)  No candidate may file for more than one office or Council Place number per election. 
(3)  No employee of the City shall continue in such employment after filing for an elective office of the City. 
(4)  No candidate shall be placed on the ballot unless his or her application is accompanied by either (1) a filing fee of two hundred-fifty dollars ($250), or (2) a petition signed by qualified voters residing in the City equal in the number to the greater of: (a) one hundred, or (b) one-half of one percent of the total votes received by all candidates for mayor in the most recent mayoral regular election. The signed petition shall be filed with the City Clerk, together with the candidate's sworn application. Each signer next to his or her signature shall indicate the signer's date of birth, date of signing, the signer's printed name, and the street address of his or her place of residence, including the county of residence. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
State Law reference- Age and residence requirements for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003. 
Sec. 5.03. - Official ballots. 
(a)  Names on Ballot. The name of each candidate nominated for office, except those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation or symbol, and in the form designated by the candidate. If two or more candidates have the same surname or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot. 
(b)  Order of Listing. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Clerk. 
(c)  Early Voting Ballots. Procedures for early voting shall be consistent with V.T.C.A, Election Code, title 7, subtitle A. 
(d)  Ballots for Ordinances, Bond Issues, and Charter Amendments. An ordinance, bond issue or Charter amendment, to be voted on by qualified voters of the City, shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, approved by a majority of the entire City Council describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. The words "FOR" and, below it, "AGAINST" shall be printed to the left of the proposition so that the voter may cast his or her vote in accordance with ballot instructions. 
(e)  Write-In Votes. Procedures for write-in votes shall be consistent with V.T.C.A., Election Code, as amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 5.04. - Canvassing. 
    The City Council shall, at a special meeting called for that purpose or at its next regular meeting, canvass the returns from any municipal election and declare the results of said election to be official. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council, by totals for each candidate, or for or against each issue submitted. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 5.05. - Election by majority. 
    A majority vote for an elective office is that number of votes which is greater than one-half of the total number of valid ballots cast for the office concerned. Any candidate for elective office who receives a majority vote shall be declared elected. If none of the candidates for an elective office receives a majority vote, none of such candidates shall be elected. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 5.06. - Run-off election. 
    In the event no candidate for an elective office receives a majority of the votes cast for that elective office in the regular or special election or there is a tie for first place, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates who received the greater number of votes. Such run-off election shall be held in accordance with V.T.C.A., Election Code, as amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
State Law reference- Tie vote, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 2.002. 
ARTICLE 6. - RECALL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly entitled "Recall of Officers," which was renamed by an amendment approved by voters on May 6, 2017. 

Sec. 6.01. - Scope of recall. 
    Any City elected official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the City or appointed by the City Council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from the office by the qualified voters of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.02. - Petition for recall. 
    Before the question of recall of such elected official shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of the City Clerk; which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the number of qualified voters as currently certified to by the County Election Administrator. Such petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought. 
    A signature on a petition for recall is valid only if the petition includes the following information with respect to each signer: 
(a)  the signer's residence address, including the county; 
(b)  the signer's date of birth and the signer's voter registration number; 
(c)  the date of signing; and 
(d)  the signer's printed name. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.03. - Recall procedure. 
    Any qualified voters of the City may make and file with the person performing the duties of City Clerk an affidavit containing the name or names of the elected official(s) whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The City Clerk shall immediately notify in writing the elected official(s) sought to be removed that the affidavit has been filed and shall inform the elected official(s) of its statement of grounds. The City Clerk shall within a period of two (2) working days from the time the affidavit was filed thereupon make available to the qualified voters making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The City Clerk shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Clerk shall bear the signature of the City Clerk and be of such form as prescribed in Section 6.04 of this Article, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The City Clerk shall enter in a record to be kept in his or her office the name of the qualified voters to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number to said person. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.04. - Form of recall petition. 
    The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the City Council of the City of Round Rock, must distinctly and specifically state the ground(s) upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, noncompliance with this Charter, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the elected official(s) sought to be removed, notice of such matters and things with which he or she is charged. Recall petition papers provided by the person performing the duties of City Clerk shall be in form substantially as follows: 
    We the undersigned qualified voters of the City of Round Rock hereby demand the question of removing (Name of Person) from the office of (Name of Office) be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters of the City. The charges and specifications upon which this demand for removal is predicated are as follows: 
__________ 
_____
Signature _____
Printed Name _____
Address, 
including county _____
Date of Birth _____
Voter 
Registration No.  
The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"STATE OF TEXAS, COUNTY OF WILLIAMSON 
I, ________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Sworn and subscribed to before me this _______ day of _______, ___. 
___________ 
Notary Public in and for 
Williamson County, Texas" 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.05. - Various papers constituting recall petition. 
(a)  The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription list, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this Article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts or copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such original petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of City Clerk on the same day, and the said Clerk shall immediately notify, in writing by registered mail, the elected official(s) so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to such elected official's address. 
(b)  Certification procedures as described in Section 7.04 shall be followed in certification of the recall petition. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.06. - Presentation of recall petition to City Council. 
    The person performing the duties of City Clerk shall present such certified petition to the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 6.07. - Public hearing to be held on recall petition. 
    The elected official whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the City Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit such elected official to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the City Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.08. - Recall election to be called. 
    If the elected official whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the City Council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election, the date of which election shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Election Code. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.09. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: "Shall (Name of Person) be removed from the office of (Name of Office) by recall?" 
(b)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in order indicated: 
"FOR the removal of ________ by recall." 
"AGAINST the removal of ________ by recall." 
Sec. 6.10. - Result of recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies in the City Council are filled. 
    In no instance shall an elected official removed from office by recall election succeed himself or herself, nor shall such elected official's name appear on a ballot for elective office of the City within a period of two (2) years following the date of the election at which such elected official was removed from office. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.11. - Recall; restrictions thereon. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against any elected official of the City within six (6) months after such elected official's election or appointment, nor within six (6) months after an election for such elected official's recall. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 6.12. - Failure of City Council to call an election. 
    In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or to order such recall election, or to discharge any other duties imposed upon said City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the County Judge of Williamson County, Texas, or other judge of competent jurisdiction shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of City Clerk or by the City Council. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Sec. 7.01. - General authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the City Council, except ordinances appropriating money or levying of taxes, or applicable to zoning, not in conflict with this Charter, the state Constitution, or the state laws; and, if the City Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed, to adopt or reject it at a City election. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the City Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the City Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes, or applicable to zoning, or to the issuance of bonds. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 7.02. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; affidavit. 
    Any five (5) or more qualified voters of the City may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating that they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
    No later than ten (10) days after the date that the aforesaid affidavit is filed and received by the City Clerk, supplemental affidavits may be filed adding names to the petitioners' committee membership. 
    The affidavit shall also designate one member as the Committee Chairperson and state the name, address and email address (if any) of the Committee Chairperson to which all notices provided herein shall be served. The name of the Committee Chairperson may be changed by an amendment to the affidavit signed by at least a majority of the committee members. 
    All notices provided for herein may be served on the Committee Chairperson by personal delivery, by electronic document transfer to the current email address, if any, or by mail, which shall be complete upon deposit of the paper, enclosed in a postpaid, properly addressed wrapper, in a post office or official depository under the care and custody of the United States Postal Service. 
    Within ten (10) business days after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the person performing the duties of City Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; May 15, 2004; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 7.03. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least five percent (5%) of the number of total qualified voters of the City as currently certified to by the County Election Administrator, or 250, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
A signature on a petition for initiative or referendum is valid only if the petition includes the following information with respect to each signer: 
(1)  the signer's residence address, including county; 
(2)  the signer's date of birth and voter registration number; 
(3)  the date of signing; and 
(4)  the signer's printed name. 
(c)  Affidavit of Circulator. When filed, each paper of a petition shall have attached to it an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in the circulator's presence, that the circulator believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time for filing petitions. Petitions must be filed within forty-five (45) days after the initial issuance of the appropriate blanks to the petitioners' committee. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; May 15, 2004) 
Sec. 7.04. - Determination of sufficiency. 
(a)  Certificate of City Clerk. Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the person performing the duties of City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall immediately upon completion of certification serve a copy of the certificate to the Committee Chairperson, as set forth in Section 7.02. 
(b)  Sufficient Petition, Final Determination. If the petition is certified sufficient, the person performing the duties of City Clerk shall present the certificate to the City Council by the next regular City Council meeting and the certificate shall be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Insufficient Petition, Final Determination. If a petition is certified insufficient, and the petitioners' committee does not elect to request City Council review under subsection (d) of this section within the time required, the City Clerk shall present a certificate to the City Council by the next regular City Council meeting which shall be a final determination of the insufficiency of the petition. 
(d)  Insufficient Petition, Appeal. If a petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) working days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the City Council. The City Council shall review the certificate at its next regular meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the City Council's determination shall then be a final determination. 
(e)  Court Review: New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to review in a court of competent jurisdiction and higher. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 7.05. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is determined to be sufficient, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended, and such suspension shall continue until the City Council repeals the ordinance or the ordinance is upheld by election. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 7.06. - Action on petitions. 
(a)  Action by City Council. Within sixty (60) days after the date the initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the City Council shall: 
(1)  adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance; or 
(2)  repeal a referred ordinance; or 
(3)  call an election on the proposed or referred ordinance as specified in Section 7.06(b). 
(b)  Submission to Voters. The election on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held on the next available uniform election date as required by state law. Said called election may coincide with a regular City election should such City election fall within the specified period. Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six (6) months, and no ordinance substantially the same as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on substantially the same as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within two (2) years from the date of such election. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Publication of Proposed and Referred Ordinance. The person performing the duties of City Clerk shall give such notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance calling said election. 
(d)  Withdrawal of Petition. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the time the petition has been determined to be sufficient by filing with the City Clerk a request for withdrawal signed by at least eighty percent (80%) of the members of the petitioners' committee. Upon filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; May 10, 2008; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 7.07. - Form of ballots. 
    The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances shall also set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall set forth upon separate lines the words: 
"FOR THE ORDINANCE," and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." 
Sec. 7.08. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the City Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail. 
(b)  Repeal or Amendment of an Initiated Ordinance. An ordinance adopted by initiative may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by a vote of five (5) or more of the City Council members qualified and serving. 
(c)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a referred ordinance vote against the ordinance, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a referred ordinance vote for the ordinance, it shall be considered in effect and petition shall become void. 
(d)  Adoption of an Ordinance Repealed by Referendum. An ordinance repealed by referendum may be reenacted at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by a vote of five (5) or more of the City Council members qualified and serving. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000) 
ARTICLE 8. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq.; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 301 et seq. 

Sec. 8.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of each October and end on the last day of September of the succeeding year. All funds collected by the City during any fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenues, shall belong to such fiscal year and, except for funds derived to pay interest and create a sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness of the City, may be applied to the payment of expenses incurred during such fiscal year, except as provided in this Charter. Any revenues uncollected at the end of any fiscal year, and any unencumbered funds actually on hand, shall become resources of the next succeeding fiscal year. 
State Law reference- City fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05. 
Sec. 8.02. - Public record. 
    Copies of the budget adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public for inspection upon request. 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201. 
Sec. 8.03. - Annual budget. 
(a)  Content. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities and, except as required by law or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems desirable or the City Council may require. A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted with the budget. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, with reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the City's debt position and include such other material as the City Manager deems desirable. The budget shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year, compared to the estimate for the budgeted year. It shall include in separate sections: 
(1)  an itemized estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division, and office; 
(2)  reasons for proposed increases or decreases of such items of expenditure compared with the current fiscal year; 
(3)  a separate schedule for each department, indicating tasks to be accomplished by the department during the year, and additional desirable tasks to be accomplished, if possible; 
(4)  a statement of the total probable income of the City from taxes for the period covered by the estimate; 
(5)  tax levies, rates, and collections for the preceding five years; 
(6)  an itemization of all anticipated revenue from sources other than the tax levy; 
(7)  the amount required for interest on the City's debts, for sinking fund and for maturing serial bonds; 
(8)  the total amount of outstanding City debts, with a schedule of maturities on bond issue; 
(9)  anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuring fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the City and the proposed method of its disposition (subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget); 
(10)  a Capital Improvement Program, which may be revised and extended each year to indicate capital improvements pending or in process of construction or acquisition, and shall include the following items: 
i.  a summary of proposed programs; 
ii.  a list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
iii.  cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
iv.  the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired; and 
(11)  such other information as may be required by the City Council. 
(b)  Submission. On or before the first day of August of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a proposed budget and an accompanying message. The City Council shall review the proposed budget and revise same as deemed appropriate prior to general circulation for public hearing. 
(c)  Public Notice and Hearing. The City Council shall post in the City Hall a general summary of the proposed budget and a notice stating: 
(1)  the times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
(2)  the time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
(d)  Amendment Before Adoption. After the hearing, the City Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income plus funds available from prior years. 
(e)  Adoption. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the final day of the last month of the fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. Should the City Council take no final action on or prior to such day the budget, as submitted, together with its proposed tax levy, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the City Council. No budget shall be adopted or appropriations made unless the total of estimated revenues, income and funds available shall be equal to or in excess of such budget or appropriations, except as otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 10, 2008) 
State Law reference- Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 102; when charter provisions control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.011. 
Sec. 8.04. - Administration of budget. 
(a)  Payments and Obligations Prohibited. No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the City Manager or designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriations and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be the cause for removal of any employee who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligations, and such employee shall also be liable to the City for any amount so paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants, certificates of indebtedness, or certificates of obligation, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. 
(b)  Financial Reports. The City Manager shall submit to the City Council at least quarterly the financial condition of the City by budget item, and budget estimate versus accruals for the fiscal year to date. The financial records of the City will be maintained on an accrual basis to support this type of financial management. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000; May 6, 2017) 
Sec. 8.05. - Emergency appropriations. 
    At any time in any fiscal year, the City Council may, pursuant to this section, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than regular or recurring requirements, to protect the public health, safety or welfare. Such appropriation shall be by ordinance adopted by the favorable votes of five (5) or more of the City Council members qualified and serving, and shall be made only upon recommendation of the City Manager. The total amount of all emergency appropriations made in any fiscal year shall not exceed the amount allowed by state law. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 8.06. - Borrowing to meet emergency appropriations. 
    In the absence of unappropriated available revenues or other funds to meet emergency appropriations provided for under the preceding Section 8.05, the City Council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money to meet such deficit as provided by law. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 8.07. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
    In any fiscal year, in anticipation of the collection of the ad valorem property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the City Council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money, not to exceed in any fiscal year an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the budget for that fiscal year. Such borrowing shall be by the issuance of negotiable notes of the City, each of which shall be designated, "Tax Anticipation Note for the Year ___" (stating the tax year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which issued. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 8.08. - Depository. 
    All monies received by any person, department or agency of the City for or in connection with affairs of the City shall be deposited promptly in the City depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the City Council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance. All checks, vouchers, or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the City depositories shall be signed by the Mayor or City Manager and countersigned by an authorized designee, as approved by City Council ordinance. Provided, that the City Council, under such regulations and limitations as it may prescribe, may by ordinance authorize the use of machine-imprinted facsimile signatures of said Mayor and City Manager and authorized designee on such checks, vouchers and warrants. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004) 
State Law reference- Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105. 
Sec. 8.09. - Purchase procedure. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the City shall be pursuant to a requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged and no contract order shall be binding upon the City unless the City Manager certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation and allotment balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979, as amended by Charter amendment approved by voters April 5, 1986) 
State Law reference- Competitive bidding, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.021 et seq.; exemptions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 252.022, 252.023. 
Sec. 8.10. - Independent audit. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as it may be deemed necessary, the Council shall cause an independent audit to be made of all accounts of the City by a certified public accountant. The certified public accountant so selected shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its elected officials. Upon completion of the audit, a copy of the audited annual financial report shall be placed in the public library and placed on file in the City Clerk's office as public record. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004; May 10, 2008; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
State Law reference- Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 103. 
ARTICLE 9. - BONDS 

Sec. 9.01. - Borrowing for capital improvements. 
(a)  Borrowing. The City Council shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the public interest. 
(b)  General Obligation Bonds and Certificates of Obligation. The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds and certificates of obligation for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the state of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City previously issued. All such bonds or certificates of obligation shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the state of Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which they were issued. 
(c)  Revenue Bonds. The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the state of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest therein pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the state of Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which issued. 
(d)  Bonds Incontestable. All bonds of the City having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall and after said exchange, be incontestable. 
(e)  The procedure for adoption of any ordinance relative to borrowing for capital improvements shall be: 
(1)  A copy of the proposed ordinance shall be furnished to (1) each member of the City Council, (2) the City Attorney, and (3) any citizen of the City for inspection upon request to the City Clerk, at least three days before the date of the meeting at which the ordinance is to be considered. 
(2)  Any ordinance relative to borrowing for capital improvements may be adopted and finally passed at the meeting at which it is introduced. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
ARTICLE 10. - TAX ADMINISTRATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq.; local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 301 et seq. 

Sec. 10.01. - Department of taxation. 
    There shall be established a Department of Taxation to assess and collect taxes, the head of which shall be the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall give a surety bond for faithful performance of his or her duties, including compliance with all controlling provisions of the state law bearing upon the functions of such office, in a sum which shall be fixed by the City Council at not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00.) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may contract with an outside agency or other governmental entity to assess and collect City taxes and to perform the duties of the City's Tax Assessor/Collector. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 15, 2004) 
Sec. 10.02. - Powers of taxation. 
    The City shall have the power to levy, assess, and collect taxes of every character and type not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the state of Texas, and for any municipal purpose. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 10.03. - Assessment of property for tax purposes. 
    All property, real, personal or mixed, having a situs within the corporate limits of the City on January 1 of each year, not expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to taxation by the City for such year. The mode and manner of making renditions, tax lists, assessments, and tax rolls shall be governed by state law. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 10.04. - Taxes: when due and payable. 
    All taxes due the City on real or personal property shall be payable at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid before February 1, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent, and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as provided by ordinance or state law. The City Council may provide further by ordinance that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the City may be paid in installments. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax roll shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 10.05. - Tax liens. 
    The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon real or personal property as of January 1 upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same. The lien, charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against a nonresident. All taxes upon real estate and personal property shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property on which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 10.06. - Joint interest in property. 
    The City shall not be required to make separate assessments of joint or conflicting interests in any real estate. It is provided, however, that the owner of any such interest may furnish to the City Tax Assessor/Collector at any time before April 1 of each year a written description of any parcel of land in which the owner has an interest less than the whole, showing the amount of the owner's interest therein, and the City Tax Assessor/Collector may thereupon assess such interest as a separate parcel. 
    The City Tax Assessor/Collector may receive the taxes on part of any lot or parcels of real estate or an undivided interest therein, but no such taxes shall be received until the person rendering the same shall have furnished the City Tax Assessor/Collector a full description of the particular part or interest on which payment is tendered. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 10.07. - Arrears of taxes offset to debt against City. 
    The City shall be entitled to counterclaim and offset against any debt, claim, demand or account owned by the City to any person, firm or corporation who is in arrears, and no assignment or transfer of such debt, claim, demand or account after said taxes are due, shall affect the right of the City to so offset the said taxes against the same. 
Sec. 10.08. - (Repealed by charter amendment approved by voters May 15, 2004). 
ARTICLE 11. - FRANCHISE OF PUBLIC UTILITIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 401 et seq. 

Sec. 11.01. - Powers of the City. 
    In addition to the City's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the City shall have such further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the state of Texas. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.02. - Franchise; power of City Council. 
    The City Council shall have power to grant, amend, renew or extend by ordinance all franchises of all public utilities of every character including any person, business or corporation providing cable television or community antenna television service, operating within the City, and for such purposes is granted full power. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except to persons, firms or corporations taking all or substantially all of the holder's business in the City and except with the approval of the City Council expressed by ordinance. No franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.03. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
    In determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as to the value of any franchise granted by the City. 
Sec. 11.04. - Right of regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions or amendments to public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the City to: 
(a)  repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or for failure otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing; 
(b)  require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public; 
(c)  establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility. If the franchise or ordinance does not prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility, then it shall keep its accounts in accordance with the utility system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the appropriate state and/or Federal utility regulatory agencies; 
(e)  examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility at any time and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility; 
(f)  impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public; and 
(g)  adopt procedural rules and regulations dealing with public utilities which shall conform to the requirements of the appropriate state regulatory agencies. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.05. - Consent of property owners. 
    The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility, but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owners of any right of action for damage or injury to property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.06. - Extensions. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant. In case of an extension of public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Sec. 11.07. - Other conditions. 
    All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the City heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a utility, which shall include the right to require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this Article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchises. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the City Council or the voters of the City in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant, including the right to require such compensation or rental as may be permitted by the laws of the state of Texas. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.08. - Franchise records. 
    Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of public utility franchise shall file with the City certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the City. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 11.09. - (Repealed by charter amendment approved by voters May 15, 2004). 
ARTICLE 12. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 12.01. - Boards and commissions [established]. 
    The City Council shall have authority to establish by ordinance such boards and commissions as it may deem necessary for the conduct of City business and management of municipal affairs. The authority, functions and responsibilities of such boards and commissions shall be such as is spelled out in the ordinance establishing them. All existing boards and commissions heretofore established shall be continued in accordance with the ordinance or other acts under which they have been created, or until the City Council shall by ordinance abolish, modify or alter the ordinance or acts under which they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter the elected City Council shall have paramount authority over all matters affecting the budgets, appropriation of funds, expenditures, purchases and sale of properties and procedures for accounting therefor, consistent with the express provisions of this Charter and applicable provisions of the state constitution and laws of this state. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
Sec. 12.02. - Qualifications [for Planning and Zoning Commission]. 
(a)  Each candidate for an appointment as a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  be a registered voter of the City; 
(2)  have resided for at least twelve (12) months preceding appointment within the corporate limits of the City, including territory annexed prior to appointments; and 
(3)  not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the City. "In arrears" is defined herein to mean that payment has not been received within ninety (90) days from due date. 
(b)  In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall continue to meet the conditions of Section 12.02(a) while in office. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
Sec. 12.03. - Members filing for office. 
    No member of a Board or Commission shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office of the City. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; May 6, 2000) 
Sec. 12.04. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of nine (9) members serving two (2) year terms which the City Council shall establish by ordinance. 
    The Commission shall have the power and be required to: 
(1)  be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the City Council; 
(2)  recommend to the City Council for its action an official zoning map and recommend any changes to the map; 
(3)  study plats and plans of proposed subdivisions and insure that all plats and plans conform to the City's subdivision and development ordinances; and 
(4)  perform such other functions as may be duly delegated to them from time to time by the City Council. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
ARTICLE 13. - POLICE DEPARTMENT DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES 

Sec. 13.01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for the appeal of certain disciplinary actions for Officers (as defined below) of the Round Rock Police Department. This Article is not applicable to the Chief of Police or to employees of the Police Department who are not sworn police officers or to police officers who are in a probationary period. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 15, 2004) 
Sec. 13.02. - Definitions. 
(a)  Chief. "Chief" means the Chief of Police of the Round Rock Police Department. 
(b)  Day. "Day" means a calendar day. 
(c)  Demotion. "Demotion" means a change in duty assignment of an Officer from a position in one pay grade to a position in a lower pay grade. 
(d)  Department. "Department" means the City of Round Rock Police Department. 
(e)  Disciplinary Matrix. "Disciplinary Matrix" means the disciplinary matrix adopted, maintained and amended from time to time by the Chief. 
(f)  HR Director. "HR Director" means the City's Director of Human Resources. 
(g)  Officer. "Officer" means a sworn police officer employed by the Department who has served for one year following the successful completion of the Department's field training program. 
(h)  Probationary Officer. "Probationary Officer" means a sworn police officer employed by the Department who has not completed the Department's field training program or who has served for less than one year following the successful completion of the Department's field training program. 
(i)  Suspension. "Suspension" means a disciplinary action whereby an Officer is involuntarily relieved of duty for more than twenty-four hours without pay. Suspension, as used herein, does not mean being relieved of duty for twenty four hours or less or being relieved of duty without loss of pay. 
(j)  Termination. "Termination" means a disciplinary action whereby an Officer is permanently relieved of duty. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 15, 2004) 
Sec. 13.03. - Appeals to a Hearing Examiner. 
(a)  Notice of Appeal. If the Chief determines to impose a disciplinary action that includes Suspension, Demotion, or Termination, and the Officer is not satisfied with such decision, the Officer may elect to appeal the decision to a Hearing Examiner. In order to exercise the right of appeal, the Officer shall file with the Chief a written notice of appeal on forms provided by the City within three (3) calendar days of being notified of the Chief's decision to impose Suspension, Demotion, or Termination. The written notice of appeal shall not be effective unless the Officer agrees to waive and release any and all rights the Officer might have to appeal the Chief's decision to a court of law. 
(b)  Selection of Hearing Examiner. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the Chief shall notify the HR Director. The HR Director and the Officer shall attempt to agree on the selection of a Hearing Examiner on or before 10 days after the date the notice of appeal is filed. If no agreement is reached within the specified time, the HR Director shall request a list of seven qualified neutral arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association or the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or their successors in function. The Officer and the HR Director may agree on one of the seven arbitrators on the list. If they do not agree within 25 days after the date the notice of appeal was filed, the Officer and the HR Director shall on the 25th day after the appeal was filed alternate striking a name from the list and the name remaining is the Hearing Examiner. In the event that the 25th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, then the parties shall strike the list on the next work day. The parties shall agree on a date for the hearing that is within the time period prescribed in paragraph (d) below. 
(c)  Hearing Examiner's Jurisdiction and Authority. The Hearing Examiner has jurisdiction to hear appeals from a decision of the Chief to Suspend, Demote or Terminate an Officer. Upon consideration of the testimony, evidence, arguments, and briefs, the Hearing Examiner may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Chief. If the Hearing Examiner determines to modify the decision, the Hearing Examiner's authority to so modify is limited to the level of discipline outlined in the Disciplinary Matrix. 
(d)  Appeal Hearing. The appeal hearing shall begin as soon as possible, but in any event within 60 days after the date the appeal is filed. If the hearing is not begun within 60 days after the date the appeal is filed, the Suspension, Demolition or Termination is upheld and the appeal is withdrawn if the Officer is not ready to proceed and the appeal is sustained if the Chief is not ready to proceed. In computing the 60-day period, a period of delay not to exceed 30 calendar days because of a continuance granted at the request of the Chief or the Officer on good cause being shown, or because of the unavoidable unavailability of the Hearing Examiner on the date of the hearing. In no event may a Hearing Examiner grant a continuance of more than 30 days in a hearing involving Termination. A Hearing Examiner may grant a continuance beyond the 30-day period upon good cause being shown in a hearing involving Suspension or Demotion unless the Officer has another disciplinary action pending. 
(e)  Subpoenas. The Hearing Examiner shall have the power to issue subpoenas. 
(f)(1)  Expedited Procedure. The parties may agree to an expedited hearing procedure. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in an expedited procedure the Hearing Examiner shall render a decision on the appeal within 10 days after the date the hearing closed. 
(f)(2)  Non-expedited Procedure. In an appeal that does not involve an expedited hearing procedure, the Hearing Examiner shall make a reasonable effort to render a decision on the appeal within 30 days after the date the hearing ends or the briefs are filed. The Hearing Examiner's inability to meet the time requirements imposed by this paragraph does not affect the Hearing Examiner's jurisdiction, the validity of the disciplinary action, or the Hearing Examiner's final decision. 
(g)  Final Decision. The Hearing Examiner's decision is final and binding on all parties. No party shall have the right to appeal a Hearing Examiner's decision except as provided in paragraph (i) below. 
(h)  Fees and Expenses. The Hearing Examiner's fees and expenses are shared equally by the Officer and the City. The costs of a witness are paid by the party who calls the witness. 
(i)  District Court Appeal. A district court may hear an appeal of a Hearing Examiner's award only on the grounds that the Hearing Examiner was without jurisdiction or exceeded its jurisdiction or that the order was procured by fraud, collusion, or other unlawful means. If the basis for the appeal of the Hearing Examiner's award is based on the grounds that the Hearing Examiner was without jurisdiction or exceeded its jurisdiction, the petition must be filed in district court within 10 days of the Hearing Examiner's decision. An appeal must be brought in a district court in Williamson County, Texas. 
(Charter Amendment approved by voters May 15, 2004) 
(Subsections renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-08-07-10-9B1) 
ARTICLE 14. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14.01. - Publicity of records. 
    All public records of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any person at all reasonable times, provided that records closed to the public by law shall not be considered public records for the purpose of this section. During normal office hours, any person or any duly authorized representative of the press or other news media shall have the right to examine any such public records belonging to the City and shall have the right to make copies thereof under such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council or by this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201. 
Sec. 14.02. - Publication requirements. 
    The City Council shall cause to be published all ordinances, notices and other matter required by the constitution and/or laws of the state of Texas to be published. The City Council may by ordinance establish additional publication requirements not in conflict with this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 10, 2008) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 14.03. - Nepotism. 
    No person related, within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, to the Mayor or any member of the City Council or City Manager shall be employed or appointed to any elective office, position of the City. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall have been employed by the City at least two (2) years prior to and at the time of the election or appointment of the elected official related in the prohibited degree. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 6, 2017) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Degrees of relationship, nepotism prohibitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573. 
Sec. 14.04. - Personal financial interest. 
    No member of the City Council or employee of the City shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in contract with the City, nor shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the City of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved provided such stock ownership amounts to less than one percent (1%) of the corporation stock or as falls within the scope of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 131.903 as now or hereafter amended. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any elected official or employee of the City found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his or her elected office or employment. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the persons or corporation contracting with the City shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the City Council. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest of local government officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171. 
Sec. 14.05. - Assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its elected officials, employees, or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters May 6, 2017) 
State Law reference- Garnishment, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 63; garnishment of municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101. 
Sec. 14.06. - Power to settle claims. 
    The City Council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City, except suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 14.07. - Notice of claim against City. 
    Before the City shall be liable to damage, claim, or suit for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property has been damaged or someone in such person's behalf shall give the City Manager or the City Clerk notice in writing under oath within forty-five (45) days after the date of the alleged damage or injury stating specifically in such notice when, where and how the injury or damage was sustained, setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible, and giving the names and addresses of all witnesses known to claimant upon whose testimony claimant is relying to establish the injury or damage. In case of injuries resulting in death, the person or persons claiming damage shall within forty-five (45) days after the death of the injured person give notice as required above. Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean the City waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution and laws of the state of Texas. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Notice of claims for death or personal injury, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101. 
Sec. 14.08. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Activities Prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any City employment because of race, sex, political or religious opinions or affiliations. 
(2)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City employment or appointive City office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his or her test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(3)  No City elected official or candidate for City office shall orally, by letter or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any candidate or for any political party or political purpose whatever from any City employee. 
(4)  No employee of the City shall make, solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate or of any political party to be used in a City election or for or against any candidate for City office or take any part in the management, affairs or political campaign of any political party in a City election, but such employee may exercise all rights as a citizen to express opinions and to cast his or her vote. Nothing in this paragraph is intended to prohibit said person from participating in school district, special district, county, state, or national campaigns, elections, and political parties. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who either individually or with others willfully violates any provisions of the foregoing Subsection 14.08(a) shall be ineligible for appointment or election to a elected office or to employment in the City for a period of four (4) years, and if such person is an elected official or employee of the City at the time of such violation, he or she shall immediately forfeit the office or employment such person holds. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Restrictions on contributions and expenditures, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 253; employment discrimination, V.T.C.A., Labor Code ch. 21. 
Sec. 14.09. - Separability. 
    If any section or part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 14.10. - Submission of Charter to voters. 
    The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter concludes that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the voters of the City at an election to be held for that purpose on August 13, 1977. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the City Council shall cause the City Clerk to mail a copy of this Charter to each registered voter of the City as appears from the latest certified list of registered voters. If a majority of the registered voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall become the Charter of the City of Round Rock, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the City Clerk shall file an official copy of the Charter with the Records of the City. The Clerk shall furnish the Mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by signature and the seal of the City, shall be forwarded by the Mayor to the Secretary of the state of Texas and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the registered voters voting at such election. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 14.11. - Amendment of Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9, as amended. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Charter amendments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.004. 
Sec. 14.12. - Charter Review Commission. 
    The City Council shall appoint at its first regular meeting of 1979 and not later than every fourth year thereafter, a Charter Review Commission of seven (7) citizens of the City. 
(a)  The duties of the Charter Review Commission are as follows: 
(1)  inquire into the operation of the City Government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision. To this end public hearings may be held; and the Commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any elected official or employee of the City and require the submission of any of the City records which it may deem necessary to the conduct of such hearing; 
(2)  propose any recommendations it may deem desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of the Charter by the several departments of the City government; 
(3)  propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this Charter to improve the effective application of the Charter to current conditions; and 
(4)  report its finding and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the City Council. 
(b)  Action by the City Council. The City Council shall receive and have published in the official newspaper of the City any report presented by the Charter Review Commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and if any amendments be presented as of such report, may order such amendment or amendments to be submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9, as amended. 
(c)  Term of Office. The term of office of such Charter Review Commission shall be six (6) months, or sooner if a report is presented to the City Council prior to said term of office. If during such six (6) month term no report is presented to the City Council, then all records of the proceedings of such Commission shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the City Clerk and shall become a public record. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979; January 20, 1996; November 8, 2011; May 6, 2017) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Charter commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.002. 
Sec. 14.13. - Rearrangement and renumbering of Charter provisions. 
    In order to preserve unity, the City Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections, and paragraphs of this Charter or any amendments thereto, and upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the City Manager, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 14.14. - Security or bond not required. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceedings in which the City shall be a party for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of the City, but all actions, suits, and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given. The City shall have all remedies of appeal provided by law to all courts without bond or security of any kind. For the purposes of all such actions, suits, proceedings and appeals, the City shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if the bond undertaking or security has been executed and given. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 6.002. 
Sec. 14.15. - Drilling operations. 
    The City Council may, by ordinance, prohibit the drilling of water wells for commercial, industrial and agricultural purposes, and may provide regulations for the drilling and use of water wells for commercial, industrial, agricultural and domestic purposes. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters November 6, 1979) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
State Law reference- Water wells and drilled or mined shafts, V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 28. 
ARTICLE 15. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.01. - Schedule. 
(a)  This Charter shall take effect immediately following adoption by the voters, and shall be fully operable within one (1) year after adoption, except as provided in "(c)" of this Section. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of this Charter, the present members of the City Council filling elective offices will continue to fill those offices for the terms to which they were elected. If this Charter is adopted, the City Council shall, by a majority vote, at its first regular meting after the adoption of this Charter, appoint one additional Council member to serve for a term to coincide with the term of the Council members who are elected in even numbered years, or until successor is elected and qualified. Thereafter the City Council shall be elected as provided in Section 3.01 of this Charter. Persons, who on the date this Charter is adopted are filling appointive positions with the City which are retained under this Charter, may continue to fill these positions for the term for which they were appointed, unless removed by the City Council or by other means provided for in this Charter. 
(c)  Conversion of the accounting system from a cash basis to an accrued cost basis shall occur at the beginning of the second fiscal year after adoption of this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 15.02. - Elected officials and employees. 
(a)  Rights and Privileges Preserved. Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are City elected officials or employees at the time of its adoption. 
(b)  Continuance of Office or Employment. Except as specifically provided by this Charter, if at the time this Charter takes full effect a City employee holds any office or employment which is or can be abolished by or under this Charter, he or she shall continue in such office or employment until adoption of some specific provision under this Charter directing that such elected official or employee vacate the office or employment. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996; May 6, 2017) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 15.03. - Effect of Charter on existing law. 
    All codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter, and not in conflict with this Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances and demands, of or against the City, fixed or established before such date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of the beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this Charter. 
(Charter amendment approved by voters January 20, 1996) 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
Sec. 15.04. - Pending matters. 
    All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, franchises, and legal or administrative proceedings in existence at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall continue until consummation. All renewals or new rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, franchises, and legal or administrative proceedings arising after the adoption of this Charter shall be conducted pursuant to this Charter. 
(Section renumbered pursuant to Ordinance No. G-04-06-24-16B1) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum Date  Section 
this Charter November 6, 1979 3.01 
3.06 
3.12 
6.03 4.01 
5.02 
5.04 
6.01 
6.02 
7.01 
8.09 
12.02 
12.03 
12.04 
14.12 
14.14 
14.15 April 5, 1986 3.04 
3.06 
8.09 January 20, 1996 Arts. 1-15 May 6, 2000 1.01 
5.01 
5.02 
5.03 
6.02 
6.03 
6.04 
7.02 
7.03 
7.06 
7.08 
8.04 
12.03 May 15, 2004 3.05 
4.01 
5.01 
7.02-7.04 
8.08 
8.10 
10.01 
11.09 
13.01 
13.02 
13.03 May 10, 2008 3.08 
3.17 
7.06 
8.04 
8.10 
14.02 November 8, 2011 3.05 
3.10 
4.01 
4.05 
5.01-5.03 
6.02-6.06 
6.12 
7.01 
7.02 
7.04 
7.06 
8.10 
9.01 
12.02 
12.04 
14.07 
14.10 
14.12 May 6, 2017 3.01 
3.04 
3.06(c) 
3.08 
3.15-3.17 
4.01(e)-(g) 
4.04 
5.02(b) 
5.05, 5.06 
Art. 6 title 
6.01-6.05 
6.07, 6.08 
6.10, 6.11 
8.04(a) 
8.10 
14.03-14.05 
14.08 
14.12(a)(1) 
15.02  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2018" and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Round Rock City Code." 
(Code 1995, § 1.100) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 53. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency or officer shall include any successor agency or officer. 
    Chapter. Whenever the words "this ordinance," "section," "subsection," "paragraph," or "article" are used, they shall pertain to the chapter or section of this Code of Ordinances in which they are found unless specifically and clearly in reference to a separate chapter or section. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Round Rock in the County of Williamson and State of Texas. 
    City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The terms "city manager," "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other city officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
    Council. Whenever the term "council," "this council," "the council" or "governing body" is used, it shall mean the city council of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" means the County of Williamson or the County of Travis, Texas, whichever is applicable. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
    Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Public place. Whenever the term "public place" is used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall mean any public road, street, alley, park, building, or other property of the city or any other place to which people commonly resort for the purpose of business, recreation, or amusement. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The terms "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    V.A.C.S. The abbreviation "V.A.C.S." means the Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended or revised. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." means the Vernon's Texas Code Annotated, as amended or revised. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1995, § 1.300) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; headings; history notes, editor's notes and state law references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The same rule of construction shall also apply to all chapter, article, division and subdivision headings. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parenthesis at the end of each section are not part of the enacted Code and are merely for historical purposes. 
(c)  The editor's notes and state law references appearing at the end of sections and as footnotes are not part of the enacted Code and are merely annotations. 
(Code 1995, § 1.200) 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code, and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That chapter _____, section _____, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That chapter _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered section _____, which said section shall read as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  In the event it is desired to delete a section from the Code, the following language shall be used: "That chapter _____, section _____, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, is hereby deleted from said Code of Ordinances." 
(Code 1995, § 1.400) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance consistent with this Code providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(12)  Any zoning map amendments; 
(13)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances or resolutions designating one-way streets, no-parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for utility services or connections; 
(15)  Ordinances relating to personnel or the amounts of retirement annuities and service credits; 
(16)  Any special ordinance or temporary ordinance; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1995, § 1.500) 
Sec. 1-8. - Conflicts. 
    Whenever the standards and specifications in any Code provision conflict with those contained in another Code provision, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever, in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations, in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; and 
(2)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence. 
(e)  Prosecution or conviction under this Code shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1995, §§ 1.601-1.604; Ord. No. 2072, 11-10-1983; Ord. No. 2188, 8-22-1985; Ord. No. 2297, 9-10-1987) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; punishments, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 12. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq.; organization of municipal government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 5 et seq.; home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq.; form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-19. - Regular meetings. 
    Under authority of section 3.09 of the city Charter, the city council has designated the following days and times to conduct its two regular monthly meetings: 
(1)  Except for the month of December, the two regular monthly meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  During the month of December, the two regular monthly meetings of the city council shall be held on the first Thursday at 6:00 p.m. and the third Thursday at 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1001; Ord. No. 505, 9-9-1977; Ord. No. G-01-09-13-14A1, 9-13-2001; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10A1, § I, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2017-4589, § I, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-20. - When regular meeting date conflicts with a holiday. 
    Whenever the regular meeting date falls on a holiday recognized by the city, the meeting of the city council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the Tuesday immediately preceding the regular Thursday meeting date. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1002; Ord. No. 771, 11-13-1980; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10A1, § II, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2017-4589, § II, 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-21. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the city council may be held on such dates and at such times as called by the mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem, or of a majority of the city council members. Public notice of all special meetings of the city council shall be given as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1003; Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11A1, 3-22-2001) 
Sec. 2-22. - Council work sessions. 
    If required, city council work sessions will generally be held on the Tuesday prior to the Thursday council meeting of each month and will generally commence at 7:30 a.m. City council work sessions may be held at such other times as may be necessary or beneficial. Public notice of all city council work sessions shall be given as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1004; Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11A1, 3-22-2001; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10A1, § III, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 2-23. - Council retreats. 
    The city council may hold one or more retreats annually. Public notice of all city council retreats shall be given as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1005; Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11A1, 3-22-2001) 
Sec. 2-24. - Compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and members of the city council shall be paid as follows: 
Mayor: $1,000.00 per month. 
Members of the council: $750.00 per month. 
(b)  The mayor and members of the city council shall be entitled to benefits on the same basis as all other city employees. 
(c)  As additional compensation and in accordance with section 3.04 of the City Charter, city council members are hereby allowed to participate in the city's health insurance plan. 
(d)  As additional compensation and in accordance with section 3.04 of the City Charter, the mayor and council members shall each receive a vehicle allowance in the amount of $200.00 per month. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1006; Ord. No. G-07-10-11-12A2, § I, 10-11-2007) 
Sec. 2-25. - General city elections and commencement of terms. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 5.01(a) of the City Charter, the general election will be held annually in May on the uniform election date established in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 1 et seq. 
(b)  The terms of each newly elected mayor or councilmember shall commence on the date of the first regularly scheduled city council meeting held more than ten days following the election or runoff, if necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1007; Ord. No. 2461, 2-22-1990; Ord. No. G-93-03-11-8A, 3-11-1993; Ord. No. G-04-06-24-16E1, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. G-05-05-26-11A1, 5-26-2005) 
Sec. 2-26. - Agenda and rules of procedure for council meetings. 
(a)  Agenda. 
(1)  Preparation. The city manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared an agenda for each city council meeting, work session, or retreat. 
(2)  Placement of agenda items by council members. The city manager shall include on such agenda any item, other than a proclamation, which is requested by two or more council members, provided that such requests are timely and in writing. The city manager shall include on such agenda any proclamation which is requested by any council member. 
(3)  Public availability of agenda. In addition to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551, the city council agenda and supporting materials, excluding exempt materials, shall be made available to any member of the public who properly requests same. However, any member of the public requesting the city council agenda and/or supporting materials, excluding exempt materials, shall pay all costs associated with the reproduction of the city council agenda and/or supporting materials, excluding exempt materials, in accordance with the standards established by the general services commission. The city council agenda shall also be made available to the public on the city's internet website. 
(4)  Consent agenda. 
a.  Definition. Any items to be brought before city council which are considered by the city manager to be routine, noncontroversial, and needing no discussion may be placed on the consent agenda. For purposes of example only, the following are routine items which may be considered for placement on the consent agenda: Approval of minutes, approval of license applications and bonds, approval of payment of contracts, approval of annexations, approval of the unanimous recommendations of advisory committees, setting dates for hearings, accepting deeds, easements, final reading and adoption of ordinances, resolutions, approval of publishing notices, and leases/agreements previously approved in principle. All of the foregoing examples are demonstrative only and are not meant or intended to be exclusive. 
b.  Placement on consent agenda. 
1.  All items placed on the consent agenda shall be treated as one agenda item. Each item included on the consent agenda shall be numbered separately and be reasonably explained. 
2.  All second readings of ordinances approved unanimously on first reading shall presumptively be placed on the consent agenda. 
3.  The consent agenda portion of the printed agenda shall be preceded by an explanatory note to the public, in substantially the same wording as follows: "All matters listed hereunder as the consent agenda are considered to be routine by the city council and will be enacted by one motion in the form listed below. There will be no separate discussion of these items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed from the consent agenda upon the request of any council member and will be considered separately." 
c.  Consideration of items on consent agenda. 
1.  Questions and explanation of consent agenda items will be permitted, but there shall be no general discussion or debate. 
2.  The city council shall vote on the consent agenda as one item, so passage of the consent agenda will be passage of each item included thereon. Failure to pass the consent agenda will not defeat each item included thereon; in such event, each item shall be considered individually. 
3.  Prior to the consent agenda being voted upon, any item included thereon shall be removed upon the request of any council member. A request for removal from the consent agenda may be made either in writing or verbally. Any item removed from the consent agenda shall be considered as a separate action item at the meeting on which such item appears on the consent agenda. 
(b)  Rules of procedure and conduct of council meetings. 
(1)  Chair. All city council meetings shall be presided over and conducted by the mayor or, in his absence, the mayor pro tem. 
(2)  Rules of order. All meetings of the city council shall be conducted generally in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, in its most current revised edition. 
(3)  Parliamentarian. The city attorney shall be designated as parliamentarian and shall make rulings on parliamentary procedure when requested to do so by a council member or when the legality or validity of a council action might be affected. 
(4)  Presentation by city staff. With the exception of the consent agenda, city staff shall make any presentation necessary for a public hearing or before consideration of a possible action item. 
(5)  Citizen communication. 
a.  Opportunity to address council provided. An opportunity for any person to address the city council at any regular meeting shall be provided under an agenda item entitled "Citizen Communication." 
b.  Procedure for citizen placing item on agenda. To place an item on the agenda under "Citizen Communication," a written request therefor shall be filed with the city clerk no later than six days prior to the day of the meeting for which discussion of the matter is requested. Such written request shall contain the following: 
1.  A brief, concise statement of the matter to be addressed; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the person filing the request; 
3.  The name of the group or organization, if any, that the person is representing; 
4.  An estimate of the amount of time required to present the matter. 
Except as authorized by a majority of the city council, discussion on each item under "Citizen Communication" shall be limited to no longer than 15 minutes total. 
c.  Limitation on council taking action. No matter brought before the city council during "Citizen Communication" may be acted upon by the city council unless the specific matter appears on the posted agenda as provided by law. 
d.  Procedure for citizen addressing council when item not on agenda. 
1.  Any person wishing to address the city council concerning a matter not on the agenda under "Citizen Communication" may do so, provided that he limits such presentation to three minutes, and provided that he has previously delivered to the city clerk a registration card identifying the topic on which the person desires to address the city council. 
2.  The registration card shall include the following information: 
(i)  Full name; 
(ii)  Business and/or residential address; 
(iii)  Business and/or residential telephone number; 
(iv)  Representation; 
(v)  Agenda item or topic; 
(vi)  Brief statement of position, e.g., for or against an agenda item or summary of communication. 
3.  Persons properly and timely submitting registration cards will be heard after the items on the agenda have been heard. 
4.  Persons addressing the city council concerning a matter not on the agenda shall be limited to no more than three minutes. However, the mayor may expand the time limit set forth up to one additional three-minute period if the presenter requests an extension and if no council member objects. If a council member objects to the presenter's request for an extension, then the city council shall vote to approve or disapprove the request for extension. 
5.  If the number of persons signing up to address the council during "Citizen Communication" exceeds a total of ten, the mayor may limit the time for each person to less than three minutes unless a council member objects. If a council member objects to the time limitation, then the city council shall vote to approve or disapprove the time limitation. 
6.  Either the city clerk or the city attorney shall serve as timekeeper for any presentation made to the city council. 
7.  The mayor may deny any presenter the opportunity to address the city council if the presentation made or offered is substantially repetitive of a presentation previously made. 
e.  Procedure for citizens addressing the council during public hearings. 
1.  Any person wishing to address the city council concerning a public hearing may do so, provided that he or she limits such presentation to three minutes, and provided that he or she has previously delivered to the city clerk a registration card identifying the public hearing on which the person desires to address the city council. 
2.  The registration card shall include the following information: 
(i)  Full name; 
(ii)  Business and/or residential address; 
(iii)  Business and/or residential telephone number; 
(iv)  Representation; 
(v)  The topic of the public hearing; 
(vi)  Brief statement of position, e.g., for or against an agenda item or summary of communication. 
3.  Persons addressing the city council concerning a public hearing shall be limited to no more than three minutes. However, the mayor may expand the time limit set forth up to one additional three-minute period if the presenter requests an extension and if no council member objects. If a council member objects to the presenter's request for an extension, then the city council shall vote to approve or disapprove the request for extension. 
4.  If the number of persons signing up to address the council during a public hearing exceeds a total of ten, the mayor may limit the time for each person to less than three minutes unless a council member objects. If a council member objects to the time limitation, then the city council shall vote to approve or disapprove the time limitation. 
5.  Either the city clerk or the city attorney shall serve as timekeeper for any presentation made to the city council. 
6.  The mayor may deny any person the opportunity to address the city council if the presentation made or offered is substantially repetitive of a presentation previously made or is not relevant to the matter for which the public hearing is held. 
(6)  Call of agenda items. The mayor may call each agenda item by number or short caption only. It shall not be necessary to call an agenda item by its complete caption. 
(7)  Council vote. The city clerk shall maintain, and the minutes shall reflect, all votes made by the city council in open meeting. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1008; Ord. No. 570, 10-26-1978; Ord. No. G-98-09-24-9B1, 9-24-1998; Ord. No. G-00-07-25-12B1, 7-25-2000; Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11A1, 3-22-2001; Ord. No. G-06-04-13-9A1, 4-13-2006; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10A1, § IV, 4-12-2012) 
Secs. 2-27-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Matters affecting public officers and employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 141 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-56. - Employee personnel policies. 
    Pursuant to the Charter and the city manager form of government, the city manager has the authority to establish and amend the city's personnel policies and procedures. A copy of the current personnel policies and procedures manual, as amended from time to time by the city manager, shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 7.100; Ord. No. 2282, 4-23-1987; Ord. No. G-93-12-09-9B, 12-9-1993; Ord. No. G-00-11-09-9B1, 11-9-2000; Ord. No. G-12-07-26-F5, § I, 7-26-2012) 
Sec. 2-57. - Nepotism. 
(a)  A person is related to a city official or employee within the third degree by consanguinity if such person is the parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, great-grandparent or great-grandchild of the city official or employee, or if the person is an aunt or uncle who is the sister or brother of one of the city official or employee's parents, or is a nephew or niece who is a child of the city official or employee's brother or sister. 
(b)  A person is related to a city official or employee within the second degree by affinity if such person is the parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent or grandchild of the spouse of the city official or employee. 
(c)  No city official or employee shall appoint, confirm the appointment of, or vote for the appointment or confirmation of another person as a city official, officer or employee if such person is related to such city official or employee within the third degree by consanguinity or the second degree by affinity. 
(d)  No member of the city council shall vote to appoint or to confirm the appointment of another person as a city official, officer or employee if such member of the city council knows, or has reason to believe, such person is related to another member of the city council within the third degree by consanguinity or the second degree by affinity. 
(e)  No city official or employee shall participate in any deliberation or decision regarding the employment, service or status of an individual who could not be employed or appointed under this section but, under state law, is permitted to continue in a position held by such individual prior to the city official or employee being elected or appointed. This provision shall not be applicable to decisions applicable to a bona fide class or category of city officials or employees of which any such individual is a member. 
(f)  No member of the city council or candidate for such office shall take affirmative action to influence the appointment, confirmation, reappointment, reconfirmation, employment, reemployment, change in status, compensation or dismissal of a city official, officer or employee that is related to such member of the city council or candidate within the third degree by consanguinity or the second degree by affinity. 
(g)  No city official or employee shall appoint or employ to any office, position or clerkship of the city, any person that is related within the third degree by consanguinity or the second degree by affinity to any member of the city council or to the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 1.901.1; Ord. No. G-02-08-22-12B2, 8-22-2002) 
State Law reference- Nepotism prohibitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573. 
Sec. 2-58. - Employee compensation policies adopted. 
    The following employee compensation manuals and reports, as amended, copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  Employee Performance Appraisal System Manual, dated February 9, 1987. 
(2)  Classification Manual, dated February 6, 1987. 
(3)  Final Compensation Report, dated February 9, 1987. 
(Code 1995, § 7.200; Ord. No. 2282, 4-23-1987) 
Sec. 2-59. - Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
    The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. Ordinances providing for administration of the Texas Municipal Retirement System have not been codified herein. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 7.400; Ord. No. 243, 10-8-1973; Ord. No. 244, 10-8-1973; Ord. No. 2140, 11-20-1984; Ord. No. 2152, 2-14-1985; Ord. No. 2445, 12-28-1989; Ord. No. 2446, 12-28-1989; Ord. No. 2447, 12-28-1989; Ord. No. 2449, 1-11-1990) 
Secs. 2-60-2-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-77. - Police department. 
(a)  Establishment of police department. 
(1)  The Police Department of the City of Round Rock is hereby created. 
(2)  The director of the department shall be the chief of police who shall be appointed by the city manager. The chief of police shall be a licensed peace officer in the state, or shall obtain said accreditation within a reasonable amount of time of taking the office. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the chief of police. 
(1)  The chief of police, as director of the police department, shall carry out functions of the department relating to public safety, and enforcement of state, federal and local laws. 
(2)  The chief of police shall have supervision and control of the police department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The chief of police shall organize the police department. 
(4)  The chief of police shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1001.1; Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10E1, § I, 9-13-2007; Ord. No. O-2014-1988, § I, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-78. - Fire department. 
(a)  Establishment of fire department. 
(1)  The Fire Department of the City of Round Rock is hereby created. 
(2)  The director of the fire department shall be the fire chief who shall be appointed by the city manager. The fire chief shall be a licensed fire fighter and emergency medical technician in the state, or shall obtain said accreditations within a reasonable amount of time of taking the office. The fire chief shall not be a member of the classified service and shall not be under the civil service protection. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the fire chief. 
(1)  The fire chief, as director of the fire department, shall carry out functions of the department relating to public safety, and enforcement of fire prevention, fire inspection, and fire regulation ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  The fire chief shall have supervision and control of the fire department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The fire chief shall organize the fire department. 
(4)  The fire chief shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(c)  Establishment of appointed position of assistant fire chief. 
(1)  The position of assistant fire chief is hereby created. 
(2)  Such position shall be filled by appointment of the fire chief in accordance with applicable subsections of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.014. 
(d)  Firefighters civil service classifications and numbers of positions. 
(1)  V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 143, dealing with municipal civil service for firefighters, was implemented effective October 30, 2001. V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.021(a) thereof requires that the city's governing body establish the classifications of all firefighters and prescribe the numbers of positions in each classification. 
(2)  The following civil service classifications are hereby established, and the following numbers of positions in each classification are hereby prescribed: 
Civil Service Classification Number of Positions Assistant fire chief 2 Battalion chief 9 Captain 18 Lieutenant 19 Driver 34 Firefighter 72 Total 154  
(e)  Assignment pay plan. An assignment pay plan is hereby established for firefighters, and assignment pay under such plan shall be paid in the following amounts and under the following conditions as established by the fire department or by city ordinance. The maximum number of assignment pay areas allowed for any firefighter not assigned to a FRAP team, arson team, technical rescue station, hazmat station or a wildland station is two. The maximum number of assignment pay areas for a firefighter assigned to a FRAP team, arson team, technical rescue station, hazmat station or a wildland station is three. 
(1)  Technical rescue personnel. The amount of $75.00 per month shall be paid to persons assigned to a specialized technical rescue team which performs technical rescues, i.e., confined space rescue, heavy rescue, high angle rope rescue, swift water rescue, and trench rescue. A technical rescue technician assigned to the technical rescue response station shall be paid an additional $75.00 per month. 
(2)  Technical rescue team supervisor. The amount of $250.00 per month shall be paid to a person who supervises the technical rescue team. In addition to having a mastery of the specialized team training, the technical rescue team supervisor manages all three work shifts, coordinates with outside vendors, and administers all programs dealing with delivery of a comprehensive training and professional development program encompassing technical rescue team goals and objectives. A person serving in this role will not be entitled to technical rescue team pay or technical rescue response station pay. 
(3)  Hazardous materials personnel. The amount of $75.00 per month shall be paid to persons assigned to a specialized hazardous materials response team which identifies, stabilizes, and mitigates the community's exposure to hazardous chemicals. A hazardous materials technician assigned to a hazardous materials response station shall be paid an additional $75.00 per month. 
(4)  Hazardous materials response team supervisor. The amount of $250.00 per month shall be paid to a person who supervises the hazardous materials team. In addition to being certified as a hazardous materials technician and having a mastery of the specialized team training, the hazardous materials response team supervisor manages all three work shifts, coordinates with outside vendors, and administers all programs dealing with delivery of a comprehensive training and professional development program encompassing hazardous materials team goals and objectives. A person serving in this role will not be entitled to hazard materials response team pay or hazardous materials response station pay. 
(5)  Wildland fire personnel. The amount of $75.00 per month shall be paid to persons assigned to a specialized wildland fire team which performs wildland duties. A firefighter on the wildland fire team assigned to the wildland fire response station shall be paid an additional $75.00 per month for a total of $150.00 per month. 
(6)  Wildland team coordinator. The amount of $250.00 per month shall be paid to a person who coordinates the wildland personnel. A person serving in this role shall not be entitled to wildland fire team pay or wildland fire response station pay. 
(7)  Air management personnel. The amount of $75.00 per month shall be paid to persons assigned to a specialized air management team which repairs, maintains, and annually tests self-contained breathing apparatus in accordance with NIOSH and NFPA standards. 
(8)  First responder advanced provider (FRAP) personnel. The amount of $100.00 per month shall be paid to firefighters assigned to a paramedic school while acquiring special medical training and prior to being assigned to a specialized first responder advanced provider (FRAP) team. The amount of $200.00 per month shall be paid to firefighters while undergoing the medical director's clearing process. The amount of $300.00 per month shall be paid to EMT-intermediate or equivalent certification to FRAP team members credentialed by the medical director. The amount of $500.00 per month shall be paid to EMT-paramedic FRAP team members credentialed by the medical director. Paramedics and intermediates who are not participating as FRAP team members shall not receive assignment pay. 
(9)  Arson investigators. The amount of $300.00 per month shall be paid to a person assigned to a specialized arson investigation team certified by the Texas Commission of Fire Protection as an arson investigator and assigned by the fire chief. 
(10)  Administrative assignment. The amount of $300.00 per month shall be paid to a person who is assigned by the fire chief to perform one of the following administrative roles: training specialist; training officer; emergency preparedness coordinator; battalion chief of prevention (fire marshal); special operations battalion chief, fire inspector; emergency medical coordinator; or special projects. For special projects assignment only, a prorated amount of $1.875 per hour will be received for special projects that last less than 30 days. A person temporarily assigned to light duty, modified duty, or administrative assignment during a disciplinary investigation is not eligible for administrative assignment pay. 
(11)  Bilingual support team personnel. The amount of $100.00 per month shall be paid to members of a team composed of persons who are working on developing fluency in conversational Spanish and who successfully pass an annual level 1 examination in this area, and such team members shall handle Spanish translation responsibilities on assigned shifts. The amount of $200.00 per month shall be paid to members of a team composed of persons who speak conversational Spanish and who successfully pass an annual level 2 fluency examination, and such team members shall handle Spanish translation responsibilities as an essential function of their employment with the city. The battalion chief of training shall be responsible for maintaining an up-to-date roster of fire department bilingual support team personnel, scheduling the annual level 1 and level 2 examinations, and notifying the director of human resources of test outcomes and eligibility of persons to receive such assignment pay. 
(f)  Certification and education incentive pay plan. A certification and education incentive pay plan is hereby established for firefighters, and assignment pay under such plan shall be paid in the following amounts and under the following conditions as established by the fire department or by city ordinance: 
(1)  Certification pay shall be paid as follows: (i) intermediate shall be paid at a rate of $50.00 per month; (ii) advanced shall be paid at a rate of $100.00 per month; and (iii) master shall be paid at a rate of $150.00 per month. For a fire department employee to receive certification pay, the employee must: (i) be issued a certification by the Texas Commission on Fire Protection or the Texas Department of Health; (ii) attain a level of certification at least one discipline above that which is required for the position held; and (iii) obtain approval of the appropriate compensation level for the certification(s) by the fire chief. The certification pay amounts shall be paid as one cumulative amount based upon the highest certification. A fire department employee who holds an intermediate certificate shall receive $50.00 per month; a fire department employee who holds an advanced certificate shall receive a cumulative amount of $150.00 per month; and a fire department employee who holds a master shall receive a cumulative amount of $300.00. 
(2)  Education incentive pay shall be paid as follows: (i) the amount of $125.00 per month shall be paid to fire department employees holding an associate's degree from an accredited college or university; (ii) the amount of $240.00 per month shall be paid to fire department employees holding a bachelor's degree from an accredited university; (iii) the amount of $320.00 per month shall be paid to fire department employees holding a master's degree form an accredited college or university. A fire department employee with a minimum of sixty (60) hours from an accredited college or university, but without an associate's, bachelor's, or master's degree, who has received education incentive pay on or before November 6, 2014 shall continue receiving the amount of $125.00 in education incentive pay, as if the employee held an associate degree. 
(g)  Access to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.089(g) file. 
(1)  Access to a firefighter's otherwise confidential V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.089(g) file is an inherent right, in their official capacities, of the city council, the city manager, and the director of firefighters' civil service. 
(2)  In addition to those persons listed in subsection (g)(1) of this section, access to a firefighter's otherwise confidential V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 143.089(g) file shall be specifically granted to the department head of the fire department, the city attorney, and outside attorneys retained by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.002.1; Ord. No. G-05-06-23-13B1, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. G-05-07-28-10B1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. G-06-05-11-12A1, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. G-06-12-07-10B2, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. G-07-05-10-7A1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. G-08-02-28-10D1, § I, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. G-08-04-10-10B1, § I, 4-10-2008; Ord. No. G-10-01-14-7A1, § I, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. G-11-10-27-9B1, § I, 10-27-2011; Ord. No. G-11-10-27-9B2, § I, 10-27-2011; Ord. No. G-13-07-25-G2, § I, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. O2014-1988, § II, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2016-3438, § I, 5-12-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-4581, § I, 7-13-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5955, § I, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 2-79. - Planning and development services department. 
(a)  Establishment of planning and development services department. 
(1)  The planning and development services department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of planning and development services who shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of planning and development services shall exercise the duties and responsibilities of the zoning administrator. The director of planning and development services is sometimes referred to in this Code as the "PDS director". 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of planning and development services. 
(1)  The director of the planning and development services department shall carry out functions of the department relating to urban planning activities, including but not limited to the following: development services, current planning, long range planning, building and civil inspections, and code enforcement. The director of planning and development services shall also administer the zoning ordinance found in chapter 46 of this Code. 
(2)  The director of planning and development services shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of planning and development services shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of planning and development services shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1003.1; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. O-2016-3761, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 2-80. - Finance department. 
(a)  Establishment of finance department. 
(1)  The finance department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the chief financial officer ("CFO") who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the CFO. 
(1)  The CFO shall carry out functions of the department, including but not limited to the following: head the financial activities of the city in the areas of accounting, reporting, purchasing, utility billing/collection, treasury, property tax, project finance, rate design, budget, and municipal court(s). 
(2)  The CFO shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The CFO shall organize the department. 
(4)  The CFO shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1004.1; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. O-2016-3761, § II, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 2-81. - Library department. 
(a)  Establishment of library department. 
(1)  The library department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of the library who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the library director. 
(1)  The director of the library department shall carry out functions of the department, including but not limited to the following: Plan, organize and direct the activities, services, and programs of the public library. 
(2)  The director of the library shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of the library shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of the library shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1005.1; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-82. - Parks and recreation department. 
(a)  Establishment of parks and recreation department. 
(1)  The parks and recreation department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of parks and recreation who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the parks and recreation director. 
(1)  The director of the parks and recreation department shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including but not limited to the following: Acquisition, planning, development and maintenance of the park system, forestry, recreational activities and recreation centers. 
(2)  The director of parks and recreation shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of parks and recreation shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of parks and recreation shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1006.1; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-83. - Human resources department. 
(a)  Establishment of human resources department. 
(1)  The human resources department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of human resources who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the human resources director. 
(1)  The director of the human resources department shall carry out functions of the department, including but not limited to the following: Direct activities related to human resources administration, employee relations, employee classifications, employee compensation and benefits, employee training and development as well as employee health, safety and risk management. 
(2)  The director of human resources shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of human resources shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of human resources shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1007.1; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-84. - Utilities and environmental services department. 
(a)  Establishment of utilities and environmental services department. 
(1)  The utilities and environmental services department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of utilities and environmental services, who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of utilities and environmental services. 
(1)  The director of utilities and environmental services shall plan, direct, and review the functions of the department, including but not limited to the following: Water and wastewater line maintenance and repair, plant operations, inflow and infiltration section, utility support section, solid waste services, drainage utility, laboratory services, industrial pre-treatment, and household hazardous waste services. 
(2)  The director of utilities and environmental services shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of utilities and environmental services shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of utilities and environmental services shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1008.1; Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10E1, § III, 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. O2014-1988, § III, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-85. - Transportation department. 
(a)  Establishment of transportation department. 
(1)  The transportation department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of transportation who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of transportation. 
(1)  The director of transportation shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including but not limited to the following: Transportation engineering; traffic operations; street maintenance and repair; and city shop; development of short and long range plans and implementation of department goals and objectives. 
(2)  The director of transportation shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of transportation shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of transportation shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(5)  Subject to the approval of the city manager, the director of transportation shall appoint an individual to hold the position of the city engineer. The city engineer shall be a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1009.1; Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10E1, § IV, 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. O2014-1988, § IV, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-86. - General services department. 
(a)  Establishment of general services department. 
(1)  The general services department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of general services department who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of general services. 
(1)  The director of general services shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including facilities management operations and future planning of city facilities, establishing procedures for maintenance, repair and/or replacement of facilities and grounds, administer the development of fleet administration standards and vehicle operating policies and directing the maintenance, repair replacement and disposal of vehicles and equipment. 
(2)  The director of general services department shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of general services department shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of general services department shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1010.1; Ord. No. G-03-06-12-9A2, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-87. - Information technology department. 
(a)  Establishment of information technology department. 
(1)  The information technology department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of information technology department who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of information technology. 
(1)  The director of the information technology department shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including the acquisition, planning, operation, maintenance and inventory of all technology and communications equipment owned, leased or operated by the city. 
(2)  The director of information technology shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of information technology shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of information technology shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C1, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 2-88. - Communications and marketing department. 
(a)  Establishment of communications and marketing department. 
(1)  The communications and marketing department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of communications and marketing department who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of communications and marketing department. 
(1)  The director of the communications and marketing department shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including the content management of city websites, city social media channels, video production and operation of government access channel(s), media relations, citizen participation initiatives, city arts and culture activities, branding and marketing of downtown, including events, special event permitting, and promotion and marketing of the benefits of shopping locally. 
(2)  The director of communications and marketing shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of communications and marketing shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of communications and marketing shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3761, § III, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 2-89. - Sports management and tourism department. 
(a)  Establishment of sports management and tourism department. 
(1)  The sports management and tourism department of the city is hereby created. 
(2)  The head of the department shall be the director of sports management and tourism department who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties of the director of the sports management and tourism department. 
(1)  The director of the sports management and tourism department shall plan, direct, and review all functions and operations of the department, including the facility management operations for the sports tourism facilities owned by the city, the organization of the convention and visitors bureau, and the promotion and scheduling of sports tourism events and conventions. 
(2)  The director of sports management and tourism shall have supervision and control of the department, subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(3)  The director of sports management and tourism department shall organize the department. 
(4)  The director of sports management and tourism department shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives, and orders for the administration of the department, including but not limited to discipline within the department. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3761, § IV, 9-8-2016) 
Secs. 2-90-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Financial disclosure by and standards of conduct for local government officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 145; regulation of conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171; disclosure of certain relationships with local government officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 176. 

Sec. 2-116. - Policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that city officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government in recognition of these goals. A code of ethics for all city officials and employees is adopted. 
(b)  This code of ethics has four purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials and employees; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials, candidates, and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who fail to abide by its terms. 
(c)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns, or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns, except as expressly provided herein. 
(Code 1995, § 1.901) 
Sec. 2-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appears before means a person appears before the city council or commission when such person publicly states his name and address, signs a sheet provided at the podium for that purpose, and addresses the council or commission. 
    Appointee means persons appointed or confirmed by the mayor or city council; provided, however, for the purposes of this definition, the term "appointee" does not include municipal judges. 
    Business dealings means any activity involving the exchange of economic benefits. 
    Business entity means any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, or any legal entity organized for profit. 
    Candidate means every person who declares for or files for any office of the city to be filled by election. 
    City official means the mayor, every member of the city council, the city manager, the assistant city manager, the communications director, the public affairs and business development director, the city attorney, the city secretary, the planning director, the chief financial officer, the finance director, the library director, the police chief, the fire chief, the parks and recreation department director, the human resources director, the chief of operations, the director of public works, and persons acting in the capacity of the aforementioned city officials, appointees, or employees. 
    Compensation means any economic benefit received in return for labor, services, property, or investment. 
    Economic benefit means any money, real or personal property, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, credit, loan, discount, service, or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated. 
    Employee means any person employed by the city whether under civil service regulations or not, including those individuals on a part-time basis, but such term shall not be extended to apply to any independent contractor. 
    Family member means the spouse, parent or child, and the parents of a spouse, city official, appointee, or city employee. 
    Gift means a favor, hospitality, or economic benefit other than compensation but which does not include campaign contributions reported as required by state law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of kinship, or any value received by will, intestate succession, or as a distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust established by a spouse or ancestor. 
    Identification means, for a natural person, the person's name, street address, city and state; for any entity other than a natural person, the name, address, city and state of the entity's principal location or place of business, the type or nature of the entity, the date on which it came into existence, the state of incorporation, if any, and the names of the partners or trustees, if any. 
    Income means economic benefit received. 
    Intentionally. A person acts intentionally, or with intent, with respect to the nature of his conduct or to a result of his conduct when it is his conscious objective or desire to engage in the conduct or cause the result. 
    Knowingly. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of his conduct or to circumstances surrounding his conduct when he is aware of the nature of his conduct or that the circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result. 
    Pecuniary gain means any use, benefit or thing of value that can be valued in money. 
    Source of income means any business entity, employment, investment, or activity which earned or produced income, including interest, dividends, royalties or rents, which has been paid to or for the credit of a city official, candidate or family member or which would be taxable to said city official, candidate or family member under the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, even though not actually paid or credited. 
    Substantial interest means a person has a substantial interest in a business entity if he and/or a family member: 
(1)  Owns ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity; 
(2)  Owns ten percent or more or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or 
(3)  Funds received from the business entity exceed ten percent or more of the person's gross income for the previous year. 
A person has a substantial interest in real property if he, his parent or child, or if married his spouse or his spouse's parent, controls or has an interest in the property and the interest has a market value of $2,500.00 or more. 
(Code 1995, § 1.902) 
Sec. 2-118. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Gifts. No city official, appointee, or employee shall intentionally or knowingly solicit or accept any contribution, gift, or economic benefit with actual or constructive knowledge that same is: 
(1)  Offered or given with intent to influence the judgment or discretion of such employee or official; or 
(2)  Given in consideration of the favorable exercise of such employee or official's judgment or discretion in the past. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  No city official, appointee, or employee shall intentionally or knowingly disclose any confidential information gained by reason of said official or employee's position concerning the property, operations, policies or affairs of the city, or use such confidential information for the pecuniary gain of said official, employee, or others. 
(2)  No city official, appointee, or employee shall intentionally or knowingly use one's official position or city owned facilities, equipment, or supplies for the pecuniary gain or advantage of said official, employee, or others, or use city owned vehicles, printing facilities, postage facilities or long distance telephone service for personal reasons, for pecuniary gain or advantage, or in any political campaign. 
(3)  Except as otherwise specifically authorized by ordinance, no city official or appointee shall intentionally or knowingly appear before the body of which the official is a member while representing himself, or any other person, group, association, interest, or business entity. 
(4)  No city official or employee shall intentionally or knowingly represent directly or indirectly any private person, group, or interest other than himself or a family member before any department, agency, commission or board of the city for economic benefit or pecuniary gain. 
(5)  No member of the planning and zoning commission shall intentionally or knowingly represent directly or indirectly any private person, group, or interest other than himself or a family member before any city employee or department with respect to any matter that may come before the planning and zoning commission or the zoning board of adjustments. 
(6)  No city official, appointee, or employee shall vote on or participate in any decision making process if the official or employee has a direct financial interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration. No city official, appointee, or employee shall vote on or participate in any decision making process on any matter concerning real property or a business entity if the city official, appointee, or employee has a substantial interest in the business entity or real property. 
(7)  No city official or employee shall intentionally or knowingly accept other employment or engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper discharge of official duties and responsibilities, or which would tend to impair independent judgment in the performance of said official duties. 
(8)  None of the foregoing shall be construed to prohibit any city official, appointee, or employee from representing his interest in his owner-occupied homestead before the council, board, commission or any department except for the body of which the official is a member, or the department by which the employee is employed. 
(9)  In any action or proceeding in the municipal court of the city which was instituted by a city official or employee in the course of official duties, no city official shall knowingly represent anyone other than himself or a family member. If a council member elects to have a trial in municipal court, the city council, without the participation of the affected council member, shall appoint a special judge to preside over the trial. 
(10)  No city official shall act as a surety for any person or business entity that has any contract with the city, or on any bond required by the city for any city official or employee. 
(Code 1995, § 1.903; Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C2, § I, 6-9-2011) 
State Law reference- Bribery and corrupt influence, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 36. 
Sec. 2-119. - Disclosure of interest. 
(a)  If any city official or appointee has a substantial interest in any real property or business entity involved in any decision pending before the body of which the city official or appointee is a member, the city official or appointee shall not vote or otherwise participate in the consideration of the matter. 
(b)  If any employee has a substantial interest in any real property or business entity involved in any decision pending before the department by which the employee is employed, the employee shall not participate in the consideration of the matter. 
(c)  In the case of a city official or appointee, the city official or appointee shall publicly disclose, verbally or in writing, the nature and extent of such interest to the body on which the city official or appointee serves prior to any discussion or determination of the matter to be considered or immediately upon discovery of the conflict of interest. The statement of disclosure shall be included in the official minutes of the body. 
(d)  In the case of an employee, the employee shall disclose such information in writing to the employee's supervisor and to the city secretary prior to any consideration of the matter. The city secretary shall keep a file of employee statements of disclosure and said file shall be a public record of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.904) 
Sec. 2-120. - Financial disclosure. 
(a)  No later than April 30 of each year, each city official shall file a sworn financial disclosure statement with the city secretary reflecting the financial situation of the city official as of December 31 of the previous year. Notwithstanding any other term or provision of this division, as used in this section: 
(1)  The term "family member" shall include only the city official, and the spouse and the minor children of the city official; 
(2)  The term "substantial interest" shall include only the interests of the city official, the spouse and minor children of the city official; and 
(3)  The annual financial disclosure statement shall not include the assets or property of any person other than those of the city official, the spouse and minor children of the city official. 
(b)  A newly employed or appointed city official shall file a sworn financial disclosure statement with the city secretary within 30 days from the date the position with the city is assumed. Said statement shall reflect the financial situation as of date of employment or appointment and for the previous 12 months; provided, however, such city official shall not be required to include in such statement the requirements of subsections (d)(6), (7), and (8) of this section. 
(c)  Each candidate shall file a sworn financial disclosure statement with the city secretary within 15 days of filing for office, reflecting the financial situation of the candidate as of December 31 of the year previous to the election date. 
(d)  Each person required to file a financial disclosure statement shall do so on a form supplied by the city which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The person's name, residence address, business address, telephone number, name of all family members and all names under which the person or family member does business. 
(2)  Identification by street address, and legal description of all real property located within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in which the person has a substantial interest. 
(3)  Identification of each business entity owning property or doing business within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in which the person has a substantial interest. 
(4)  Identification of each person or business entity to whom the person or family member owed a debt of $10,000.00 or more during the reporting period, but not including debts owed to persons related within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity and excluding loans to a political campaign which were reported as required by law; if repaid during the reporting period, the date of repayment shall be stated. 
(5)  Identification of each source of income amounting to ten percent or more of the person's or family member's gross annual income as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
(6)  Identification of the donor of each gift of more than $150.00 in value received by the person or family member, including the value of the gift, where such donor has appeared before and requested action of the city council during the reporting period. 
(7)  Identification of the donor of two or more gifts of an accumulated value of $600.00 or more received by the person or family member, where such donor has appeared before and requested action of the city council during the reporting period. 
(8)  Identification of all individuals or business entities that: 
a.  He or a business entity in which he has a substantial interest has had business dealings involving one or more transactions of $500.00 or more each, for a total of $2,500.00 or more; and 
b.  Have appeared before and requested action of the city council during the reporting period. 
Identification shall also be required of all individuals who have an ownership interest of 25 percent or more in a business entity as described in subsection (d)(8)a of this section above and who appears before and requests some action on the part of the city council, even though the action does not concern such business entity. 
(e)  The city secretary shall maintain all financial disclosure statements required to be filed herein as public records and retain them for a period of three years, after which statements shall be returned to the person filing them or be destroyed. 
(f)  A city official, appointee, or employee shall immediately and publicly identify, either verbally on the record or in writing, all individuals or business entities that: 
(1)  He or a business entity in which he has a substantial interest or has had business dealings involving one or more transactions of $500.00 or more each, for a total of $2,500.00 or more, within the immediately preceding 12-month period; and 
(2)  Appear before and request some action of the city council, board or commission of which such reporting person is an advisor or member. 
Such immediate identification shall also be required of all individuals who have an ownership interest of 25 percent or more in a business entity as described in subsection (f)(1) of this section and who appear and requests some action on the part of the city council, board or commission, even though the action does not concern such business entity. Such identification shall be made prior to any decision or determination of the matter or immediately upon discovery of such business dealings. 
(g)  Within 30 days of being appointed to the planning and zoning commission and on each anniversary of that date, each member of such commission shall file with the city secretary a sworn statement identifying by street address and legal description all real property located within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in which the member has a substantial interest. 
(h)  Any person who appears before the city council or commission who has had business dealings in the immediately preceding 12-month period involving one or more transactions of $500.00 or more each, for a total of $2,500.00 or more, with a council member, commissioner, or business entity in which a council member or commissioner has a substantial interest, shall disclose such business dealings at the time of the appearance. Any person who shall intentionally or knowingly fail to make the aforesaid disclosure shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Code 1995, § 1.905) 
Sec. 2-121. - Ethics review commission. 
(a)  An ethics review commission is hereby established to be composed of seven members, all of whom shall reside in the city. 
(b)  Each commission member shall be appointed by the city council and shall occupy a position on the commission, such positions being numbered 1 through 7. 
(c)  The commission members shall be appointed to two-year staggered terms. Positions 1, 3, 5, and 7 shall expire on May 1, 1991, with successive two-year terms, and positions 2, 4, and 6 shall expire on May 1, 1992, with successive two-year terms. 
(d)  All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. A member shall hold office until his successor has been appointed by the city council. 
(e)  The commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman to one-year terms. The vice-chairman shall act as chairman in the absence of the chairman. 
(f)  Four or more members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, but no action of the commission shall be of any force or effect unless it is adopted by the favorable vote of four or more members. 
(g)  The commission shall meet at least once a year to review this section and may make recommendations to the city council for amendments hereto. 
(h)  The commission shall render advisory opinions on potential conflicts of interest or violations of this division at the request of a city official, member of a city or commission, or employee subject to the terms of this division. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered within a reasonable time, but in no event later than 30 days after a request therefor is received by the commission. 
(i)  It shall be a defense to an alleged violation of this division that the person accused previously requested an advisory opinion of the commission and acted on such opinion in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated by the person requesting the opinion. Such advisory opinion shall also be binding on the commission in any subsequent charges concerning the person requesting the opinion. 
(j)  Independent legal counsel shall be utilized to advise the commission and participate in hearings. The city council shall annually designate and retain independent counsel who shall be a duly licensed attorney in the state. 
(Code 1995, § 1.906) 
Sec. 2-122. - Disposition of alleged violations. 
(a)  A sworn complaint based on personal knowledge alleging a violation of this division shall specify the provisions of this division alleged to have been violated, and shall name the city official, candidate, or employee being charged. 
THE STATE OF TEXAS: 
COUNTY OF WILLIAMSON: 
TO: THE ETHICS REVIEW COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS: 
COMES NOW (complainant), and makes this complaint, UPON HIS/HER PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE AND UNDER OATH against (name of person complained against), and would show the Commission that: 
On or about the _______ day of _______, ___, 
(insert date of the action, or omission, complained of) 
___________, 
(name of person complained against) 
a/an (insert appropriate designation; city official, candidate, employee, board of commission member) of the City of Round Rock, Texas, violated the following provision(s) of Division 3, Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, to wit: (specify by section and subsection number the provision(s) alleged violated), by committing the following act, or omission, to-wit: 
_____
(Describe above, the action, or omission, alleged to violate each Code provision cited. You may attach additional pages if more space is required.) 
(b)  Upon the aforesaid sworn complaint of any person being filed with the city secretary's office, or on its own initiative, the commission shall consider possible violations of this division by city officials, candidates and employees. A complaint shall not be deemed to be filed on the initiative of the commission save and except the complaint be signed and sworn to by two members of the commission, one of which is the chairman of the commission, after consultation with the legal counsel of the commission. A complaint filed by an individual member of the commission shall be deemed to have been filed in the commission member's capacity as a private citizen and, in such event, the member of the commission filing the complaint shall not thereafter participate in a commission meeting at which such complaint is considered save and except that the commissioner filing the complaint may participate as a complainant at such meeting. 
(c)  A complaint alleging a violation of this division must be filed with the city secretary within two years from the commission of the action alleged as a violation, and not afterward. 
(d)  Not later than three working days after the city secretary receives a sworn complaint, the city secretary shall acknowledge the receipt of the complaint to the complainant, and provide a copy of the complaint to the city attorney, the independent counsel, the commission and the person complained against. Not later than ten working days after receipt of a complaint, the commission shall notify in writing the person who made the complaint and the person complained against of a date for a preliminary hearing. If the commission does not hold a preliminary hearing within 20 working days of receipt of the complaint, it shall notify the person who made the complaint of the reasons for the delay and shall subsequently give him the appropriate notification. 
(e)  The commission may consider possible violations of this division on its own initiative. Within seven days of the commission's decision to consider a possible violation of this division, the commission shall draft a written complaint specifying the provisions of this division alleged to have been violated and shall file a copy with the city secretary, and provide a copy to the city attorney, the independent counsel, and the person complained against. Not later than 15 days after the drafting of the complaint, the commission shall notify in writing the person complained against of the date for the preliminary hearing. 
(f)  After a complaint has been filed and during the pendency of a complaint before the commission, a member of the commission may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except at a meeting of the commission; provided that a member may consult with the attorney or the staff liaison for the commission as to process, procedure and legal issues. 
(g)  As soon as reasonably possible, but in no event more than 60 days after receiving a complaint, the commission shall conduct a preliminary hearing. 
(1)  The issue at a preliminary hearing shall be the existence of reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this division has occurred. The person filing a complaint, or the independent counsel in cases considered upon the commission's own initiative, shall state the alleged violation and shall describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence which would be presented to prove the alleged violation as stated in the written complaint. Statements at a preliminary hearing shall be under oath, but there shall be no cross examination or requests for persons or evidence issued for the hearing. Members of the commission may question the complainant, the independent counsel for the commission, or the city official or employee named in the complaint. 
(2)  The city official or employee named in the complaint shall have the opportunity to respond, but is not required to attend or make any statement. The official or employee may describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence which would be presented to disprove the alleged violation. If the official or employee agrees that a violation has occurred, he may so state and the commission may consider the appropriate sanction. 
(3)  The complainant and the city official or employee named in the complaint shall have the right of representation by counsel. 
(4)  At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the commission shall decide whether a final hearing should be held, provided the commission may proceed to determine the appropriate sanction if the charged city official, appointee, or employee does not object and admits the charged violation, and the commission determines that there are no fact issues to be resolved. If the commission determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this division has occurred, it shall schedule a final hearing. If the commission does not determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this division has occurred, the complaint shall be automatically dismissed. A decision to conduct a final hearing is not a finding that a violation has occurred. 
(5)  The commission, at any time during the preliminary hearing, may also dismiss a complaint if the complaint does not allege conduct which would be a violation of this division. Before a complaint is dismissed for failure to allege a violation, the complainant shall be permitted one opportunity, within ten days of such preliminary hearing, to revise and resubmit the complaint. 
(6)  The complainant, the independent counsel, and the city official or employee named in the complaint may ask the commission at a preliminary hearing to request certain persons and evidence for a final hearing, if one is scheduled. 
(h)  Final hearing. 
(1)  The final hearing shall be held as expeditiously as possible following the determination by the commission that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this division has occurred, but in no event shall it be held more than 30 days after said determination. The commission may grant two postponements, not to exceed 15 days each, upon the request of the city official or employee named in the complaint. 
(2)  The issue at a final hearing shall be whether a violation of this division has occurred. The commission shall make its determination based on clear and convincing evidence in the record. All witnesses shall make their statements under oath. If the commission determines that a violation has occurred, it shall state its findings in writing, shall identify the particular provisions of this division which have been violated, and within five working days shall deliver a copy of the findings to the complainant, if any, the person named in the complaint and the city secretary. 
(3)  If a complaint proceeds to a final hearing, the commission may request witnesses to attend and testify, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and request the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence needed for the performance of the commission's duties or exercise of its powers, including its duties and powers of investigation. 
(i)  Sanctions. 
(1)  If the commission determines that a violation of this division has occurred, it shall proceed directly to determination of the appropriate sanctions. A violation of this division shall not be subject to criminal penalties under this Code. The commission may receive additional testimony or statements before considering sanctions, but is not required to do so. If the city official or city employee named in the complaint acted in reliance upon a written opinion of the city attorney, the commission shall consider that fact. 
(2)  If the commission determines that a violation has occurred, it may impose or recommend the following sanctions: 
a.  A letter of notification shall be the appropriate sanction when the violation is clearly unintentional, or when the official or employee's conduct complained of was made in reliance on a written opinion of the city attorney. A letter of notification shall advise the official or employee to whom it is directed of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. The commission may direct a letter of notification to any official or employee covered by this division. 
b.  A letter of admonition shall be the appropriate sanction in those cases in which the commission finds that the violation is minor and/or may have been unintentional, but calls for a more substantial response than a letter of notification. The commission may admonish any official or employee covered by this division. 
c.  A reprimand shall be the appropriate sanction when the commission finds that a violation has been committed intentionally or through disregard of this division. The commission may reprimand any official or employee covered by this division. A reprimand directed to a city official or board or commission member shall also be sent to the city council. A reprimand directed to an employee shall be sent to the city manager and included in said employee's personnel file. A letter of reprimand directed to an elected city official shall be transmitted to the city secretary and published in the official newspaper of the city, and shall be sent to the city council. 
d.  A recommendation of removal from employment or a recommendation of suspension from employment, as well as a recommendation for length of suspension, shall be the appropriate sanction when the commission finds that a serious or repeated violation of this division has been committed intentionally or through culpable disregard of this division by city employees. A recommendation of suspension of city employees shall be directed from the commission to the city manager. In such cases the final authority to carry out such recommendations to suspend from employment and the length of suspension shall be with the city manager. 
e.  A letter of censure shall be the appropriate sanction when the commission finds that a serious or repeated violation of this division has been committed intentionally or through culpable disregard of this division by an elected city official. A letter of censure directed to an elected city official shall be transmitted to the city secretary, published in the official newspaper of the city, and shall be sent to the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 1.907; Ord. No. 2469, 4-26-1990; Ord. No. 2518, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. G-02-09-12-12A1, 9-12-2002) 
Secs. 2-123-2-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish a police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 

Sec. 2-143. - Police reserve established; membership. 
    An auxiliary police force to be known as police reserve is hereby established. It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and whose applications for membership have been accepted and who have complied with all the rules, regulations and orders provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. It shall be composed of not more than 20 members. The police reserve shall be separate and distinct from the police department of this city but shall be headed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 7.301) 
Sec. 2-144. - Chief of police to command police reserve. 
    The members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control, and command of the chief of police of the city, subject to state law, provisions of the ordinances of the city, and of this section. Members shall be appointed from a list of eligible persons compiled as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1995, § 7.302) 
Sec. 2-145. - Qualifications for eligibility. 
    A list of eligible persons, accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or supplemented immediately by fingerprinting by the police division, shall be compiled. Such fingerprints shall be checked by the identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of any such person. The application shall include the residence of the applicant. Each applicant shall be an actual resident of the state, and shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks appointment. He shall furnish three references. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police. Each person whose name is on the list of eligible persons shall subscribe to an oath that he will observe and obey the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of this state, and the laws of this nation, this state and this city, and that he will carry out the duties of a member of the police reserve of this city to the best of his ability. Other qualifications for eligibility shall be the same as for members of the regular police department of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 7.303) 
Sec. 2-146. - Duties of police reserve. 
    The duties of the police reserve, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department of this city in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency designated by the chief of police. The chief may by order establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve, to fix specific duties of its members, and he may command members of the police reserve to obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out their orders. The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1995, § 7.304) 
Sec. 2-147. - Identification cards. 
    An identification card or such other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief of police may prescribe shall be issued to each member, who must carry the card or other identification at all times while on duty, and must surrender it upon the termination of his membership. All commissions shall be good until revoked. 
(Code 1995, § 7.305) 
Sec. 2-148. - Termination of membership. 
    Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police. Any member may resign from the police reserve at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of police of his resignation. 
(Code 1995, § 7.306) 
Sec. 2-149. - Chief of police may diminish or expand membership. 
    The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve as exigency may require, within the limits hereinbefore established. 
(Code 1995, § 7.307) 
Sec. 2-150. - Rules and regulations for reserve police. 
(a)  Carrying of firearms. An appointment to the police reserve force must be approved by the city council before the person appointed may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. On approval of the appointment of a member who is not a peace officer as described by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 2.12, the person appointed may carry a weapon only when authorized to do so by the chief of police and only when discharging official duties as a peace officer. 
(b)  Breaking and entering. No member of the police reserve shall break into or otherwise forcibly enter upon private property or enter the dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of the member of the police department of this city who then and there requests his aid in the enforcement of the law. 
(c)  Power of arrest. A member of the police reserve shall have the following powers of arrest and no others: 
(1)  He may arrest an offender without a warrant when the offense is committed in his presence or within his view, if the offense is one classed as a felony, or as an offense against the public peace. 
(2)  He may lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful arrest when authorized by the chief of police or requested by any regular member of the police department of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 7.308) 
Sec. 2-151. - Penalties for violation. 
    In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as a member of the police reserve, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police, shall subject any member to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the chief. 
(Code 1995, § 7.309) 
Sec. 2-152. - Unlawful to impersonate police reserve member. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided for in section 1-9 for any person to wear, carry, or display a police reserve identification card or otherwise represent himself to be connected with the police reserve, unless he is in fact a member thereof in good standing. 
(Code 1995, § 7.310) 
Sec. 2-153. - Uniform and badges of police reserve. 
    The chief of police shall prescribe the uniform and badges for the members of the police reserve and direct the manner in which the same shall be worn. Any person other than a member of said force who shall wear such uniform or badge shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Members of the police reserve shall wear uniforms and badges at all times while on duty. 
(Code 1995, § 7.311; Ord. No. 568, 10-12-1978) 
Secs. 2-154-2-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - POLICE DEPARTMENT DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-175. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to establish procedures for administering certain disciplinary actions for officers (as defined in section 2-177) of the police department. 
(b)  This division is not applicable to the chief of police or to employees of the police department who are not sworn police officers or to police officers who are in a probationary period. 
(c)  This division is not applicable to disciplinary actions involving written reprimands and suspensions of 24 hours or less. This division is applicable to suspensions, demotions, and terminations, as those terms are defined in section 2-177. 
(Code 1995, § 7.501) 
Sec. 2-176. - General policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to resolve employment problems by utilizing an informal process between the supervisor and the employee whenever possible. When this is not possible, it is recognized that a more formal disciplinary process may be necessary. Disciplinary actions not covered by this division will be administered in accordance with the city's Human Resources Policies and Procedures Manual and the policies and procedures of the police department, as applicable. The Human Resources Policies and Procedures Manual will govern all employment issues not specifically covered in this division. 
(Code 1995, § 7.502) 
Sec. 2-177. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief means the chief of police of the city police department. 
    Day means a calendar day. 
    Demotion means a change in duty assignment of an officer from a position in one pay grade to a position in a lower pay grade. 
    Department means the city police department. 
    Disciplinary matrix means the disciplinary matrix adopted, maintained and amended from time to time by the chief. 
    HR director means the city's director of human resources. 
    Officer means a sworn police officer employed by the department who has served for one year following the successful completion of the department's field training program. 
    Probationary officer means a sworn police officer employed by the department who has not completed the department's field training program or who has served for less than one year following the successful completion of the department's field training program. 
    Suspension means a disciplinary action whereby an officer is involuntarily relieved of duty for more than 24 hours without pay. Suspension, as used herein, does not mean being relieved of duty for twenty four hours or less or being relieved of duty without loss of pay. 
    Termination means a disciplinary action whereby an officer is permanently relieved of duty. 
(Code 1995, § 7.503) 
Sec. 2-178. - Relief of duty pending disciplinary action. 
    An officer may be relieved of duty pending disciplinary action or an internal affairs investigation. An officer placed on relief of duty pending disciplinary action is without authority to exercise the duties and powers of a police officer. A supervisor is authorized to place an officer on such leave without loss of pay. Only the chief is authorized to place an officer on such leave without pay. 
(Code 1995, § 7.504) 
Sec. 2-179. - Grounds for disciplinary action. 
(a)  An officer may not be suspended, demoted, or terminated except for just cause which shall be defined as one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Conviction of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Violations of the Round Rock Home Rule Charter; 
(3)  Acts of incompetency; 
(4)  Neglect of duty; 
(5)  Discourtesy to the public or to a fellow employee while the officer is in the line of duty; 
(6)  Acts showing lack of good moral character; 
(7)  Drinking intoxicants while on duty, or intoxication while off duty; 
(8)  Conduct prejudicial to good order; 
(9)  Refusal or neglect to pay just debts; 
(10)  Absence without leave; 
(11)  Shirking duty or cowardice; 
(12)  Violation of an applicable department rule, policy or order; or 
(13)  Violation of an applicable city ordinance, rule or policy. 
(b)  An officer may not be suspended, demoted, or terminated for an act that occurred earlier than the 180th day preceding the date the officer is suspended, demoted or terminated. If the act is allegedly related to criminal activity, the officer may not be suspended, demoted, or terminated for an act that is discovered earlier than the 180th day preceding the date the officer is suspended demoted or terminated. Nothing is this section is intended to preclude the city from considering prior disciplinary action as part of the disciplinary process. 
(Code 1995, § 7.505) 
Sec. 2-180. - Disciplinary action review panel. 
(a)  Creation and purpose. There is hereby created a disciplinary action review panel (DARP) consisting of four members. The DARP membership is not permanent but shall be appointed on a case-by-case basis as needed. The members of the DARP are appointed and administered by the HR director. The DARP has two different functions, depending on what type of disciplinary action is being considered. One function is to hear appeals with respect to suspensions and demotions, and the other function is to make non-binding recommendations to the chief with respect to terminations. 
(b)  Members. The four members of the DARP will be as follows: 
(1)  The chairperson shall be an employee of the city holding the position one level below the department director in a department other than the police department; 
(2)  One member shall be a mid-level supervisor from the applicable officer's work group who is not a direct supervisor and does not have knowledge of the facts underlying the disciplinary action being reviewed; 
(3)  One member shall be a peer of the officer being disciplined; and 
(4)  One member shall be a citizen selected at random from a list of qualified citizen volunteers nominated annually by the chief. 
(c)  Appointment of members. The HR director shall appoint the members of the DARP in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  Employees in the officer's chain of command are not eligible to serve; 
(2)  The officer's peer shall not be currently assigned to the officer's work group; and 
(3)  Employees who have had any disciplinary action taken against them within the immediately prior 12 months are not eligible to serve. 
(d)  Officer's right to object to member. The officer shall have a right to express his objection and to request the removal of a DARP member on the grounds of a personal conflict or bias. The decision of the HR director on such a request shall be final and non-appealable. 
(e)  Members' responsibilities. The members of the DARP shall have the following responsibilities and obligations: 
(1)  Each member shall advise the HR director if he believes that there exists a personal conflict or bias with respect to a particular disciplinary action; 
(2)  Each member shall maintain confidentiality of all facts and circumstances concerning the disciplinary action; and 
(3)  Each member shall make his determination based on the testimony and evidence presented and not on bias, prejudice or extraneous matters. 
(f)  Chairperson duties and responsibilities. The chairperson of the DARP shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To preside over the hearing and to ensure that the officer is afforded a fair and impartial hearing and that each DARP member has an opportunity to participate; 
(2)  To determine the witnesses to be heard, the documentary evidence to be considered, and to resolve any procedural issues; 
(3)  To clear the hearing room of all non-DARP members before and during the deliberation; 
(4)  To moderate the deliberation to ensure that each DARP member is allowed an adequate opportunity to express views and concerns; 
(5)  To ensure that the DARP's recommendation is based on the relevant evidence allowed at the hearing and not on extraneous or irrelevant matters; 
(6)  To prepare a written summary of the DARP's recommendation determined by a majority vote of the DARP members, and to secure the signature of the DARP members to the written recommendation. In the event of a tie vote, the DARP will so inform the chief without making a recommendation; and 
(7)  To forward the written recommendation to the chief within three days of the DARP's decision. 
(g)  HR director duties and responsibilities. The HR director shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To appoint the members of the DARP within 15 days of receipt of an officer's notice of appeal from a suspension or demotion or within ten days of receipt of the chief's notice that termination of an officer is being considered; 
(2)  To arrange a hearing location and schedule the hearing of the DARP within 30 calendar days of receipt of an officer's notice of appeal from a suspension or demotion or within 20 days of receipt of the chief's notice that termination of an officer is being considered; and 
(3)  To prepare and distribute a notice of hearing at least seven days prior to a DARP hearing. The notice shall be distributed to the chief, the officer, the officer's supervisor, and the city attorney. 
(h)  DARP procedures. All hearings of the DARP shall be held in accordance with the following rules and procedures: 
(1)  DARP hearings are not opened to the public and they shall not be recorded. The only persons having a right to attend a DARP hearing are the officer being disciplined, the officer's personal or legal representative, the officer's supervisor, and a representative of the city attorney's office. 
(2)  The DARP shall consider all facts, testimony, and documents that it considers relevant to the disciplinary action being reviewed. The DARP may request information from individuals and request documents for its review. The DARP shall not be bound by traditional or legal rules of evidence, but the DARP is expected to base its decision on the evidence heard at the hearing and not anything that occurs outside the hearing. 
(3)  The officer is entitled to examine and review any documents, papers, books, or other evidence considered by the DARP regarding the disciplinary action being reviewed. 
(4)  The officer shall be granted a reasonable amount of time to present his evidence and to make arguments related to the disciplinary action being reviewed. 
(5)  The DARP shall render its written decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(6)  When possible, the DARP will render its written decision immediately and will notify the officer at the conclusion of the hearing and forward the written decision to the chief. If the DARP is not able to render a decision immediately, the Officer and other parties will be notified of the time and place the DARP will reconvene to render its decision. 
(Code 1995, § 7.506) 
Sec. 2-181. - Suspension and demotion. 
    Before an officer may be suspended or demoted, the officer's supervisor shall make a written recommendation regarding such action to the chief. If the chief determines that it is appropriate to impose such discipline, the officer's supervisor shall give written notice thereof to the officer. The written notice to the officer shall include a summary explanation of the facts and circumstances, and copies of any documents, which were considered in establishing the grounds for the suspension or demotion. The officer may appeal such decision by giving written notice thereof to the chief, which notice must be received by the chief no later than three calendar days following the imposition of the discipline. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the chief will notify the HR director who will proceed to impanel the DARP to hear the appeal. The DARP will meet, hear evidence, and render its recommendation as set forth above. The chief will consider the recommendation of the DARP, but the final decision regarding discipline remains with the chief. If the chief's decision is to not impose either suspension or demotion, the decision is final and not subject to further appeal. If the chief's decision is to impose either suspension or demotion and the officer is not satisfied with the decision, the officer may appeal to a hearing officer as set forth in section 2-183. The chief's decision becomes final if no notice of appeal is filed in accordance with section 2-183. 
(Code 1995, § 7.507) 
Sec. 2-182. - Termination. 
    Before an officer may be terminated, the officer's supervisor shall make a written recommendation regarding such action to the chief. If the chief determines that termination is not appropriate, the chief will refer the matter back to the supervisor with appropriate explanation. If the chief determines that it is appropriate to consider termination, the chief will notify in writing the affected officer and the HR director, who will proceed to impanel the DARP. The written notice to the officer and the HR director shall include a summary explanation of the facts and circumstances, and copies of any documents which were considered in establishing the grounds for the termination. After the DARP convenes to hear the matter, it will forward its written recommendation to the chief. After considering the recommendation of the DARP, the chief will make his decision to impose termination, impose an alternative disciplinary action, or impose no disciplinary action. If the chief's decision is not to impose either suspension, demotion, or termination, the decision is final and not subject to further appeal. If the chief's decision is to impose either suspension, demotion or termination and the officer is not satisfied with the decision, the officer may appeal to a hearing officer as set forth in section 2-183. The chief's decision becomes final if no notice of appeal is filed in accordance with section 2-183. 
(Code 1995, § 7.508) 
Sec. 2-183. - Appeals to a hearing examiner. 
(a)  Notice of appeal. If the chief determines to impose a disciplinary action that includes suspension, demotion, or termination and the officer is not satisfied with such decision, the officer may elect to appeal the decision to a hearing examiner. In order to exercise the right of appeal, the officer shall file with the chief a written notice of appeal on forms provided by the city within three calendar days of being notified of the chief's decision to impose suspension, demotion, or termination. The written notice of appeal shall not be effective unless the officer agrees to waive and release any and all rights the officer might have to appeal the chief's decision to a court of law. 
(b)  Selection of hearing examiner. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the chief shall notify the HR director. The HR director and the officer shall attempt to agree on the selection of a hearing examiner on or before ten days after the date the notice of appeal is filed. If no agreement is reached within the specified time, the HR director shall request a list of seven qualified neutral arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association or the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or their successors in function. The officer and the HR director may agree on one of the seven arbitrators on the list. If they do not agree within 25 days after the date the notice of appeal was filed, the officer and the HR director shall, on the 25th day after the appeal was filed, alternate striking a name from the list, and the name remaining is the hearing examiner. In the event that the 25th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, then the parties shall strike the list on the next work day. The parties shall agree on a date for the hearing that is within the time period prescribed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Hearing examiner's jurisdiction and authority. The hearing examiner has jurisdiction to hear appeals from a decision of the chief to suspend, demote or terminate an officer. Upon consideration of the testimony, evidence, arguments, and briefs, the hearing examiner may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the chief. If the hearing examiner determines to modify the decision, the hearing examiner's authority to so modify is limited to the level of discipline outlined in the disciplinary matrix. 
(d)  Appeal hearing. The appeal hearing shall begin as soon as possible, but in any event within 60 days after the date the appeal is filed. If the hearing is not begun within 60 days after the date the appeal is filed, the suspension, demotion or termination is upheld and the appeal is withdrawn if the officer is not ready to proceed, and the appeal is sustained if the chief is not ready to proceed. In computing the 60-day period, a period of delay is allowed not to exceed 30 calendar days because of a continuance granted at the request of the chief or the officer on good cause being shown, or because of the unavoidable unavailability of the hearing examiner on the date of the hearing. In no event may a hearing examiner grant a continuance of more than 30 days in a hearing involving termination. A hearing examiner may grant a continuance beyond the 30-day period upon good cause being shown in a hearing involving suspension or demotion unless the officer has another disciplinary action pending. 
(e)  Subpoenas. The hearing examiner shall have the power to issue subpoenas. 
(f)  Expedited procedure. The parties may agree to an expedited hearing procedure. Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in an expedited procedure the hearing examiner shall render a decision on the appeal within ten days after the date the hearing closed. 
(g)  Nonexpedited procedure. In an appeal that does not involve an expedited hearing procedure, the hearing examiner shall make a reasonable effort to render a decision on the appeal within 30 days after the date the hearing ends or the briefs are filed. The hearing examiner's inability to meet the time requirements imposed by this subsection does not affect the hearing examiner's jurisdiction, the validity of the disciplinary action, or the hearing examiner's final decision. 
(h)  Final decision. The hearing examiner's decision is final and binding on all parties. No party shall have the right to appeal a hearing examiner's decision except as provided in subsection (j) of this section. 
(i)  Fees and expenses. The hearing examiner's fees and expenses are shared equally by the officer and the city. The costs of a witness are paid by the party who calls the witness. 
(j)  District court appeal. A district court may hear an appeal of a hearing examiner's award only on the grounds that the hearing examiner was without jurisdiction or exceeded his jurisdiction or that the order was procured by fraud, collusion, or other unlawful means. If the basis for the appeal of the hearing examiner's award is based on the grounds that the hearing examiner was without jurisdiction or exceeded his jurisdiction, the petition must be filed in district court within ten days of the hearing examiner's decision. An appeal must be brought in a district court in Williamson County, Texas. 
(Code 1995, § 7.509) 
Sec. 2-184. - Time deadlines. 
    The officer and the chief may modify or extend any deadline provided for herein by mutual agreement in writing. The failure of the officer to comply with any of the deadlines provided for herein shall result in a forfeiture of the officer's right to appeal, and the chief's decision will be considered final. 
(Code 1995, § 7.510) 
Sec. 2-185. - Departmental rules and procedures. 
    The police department and the human resources department are authorized to adopt departmental rules and procedures to implement this division that are not inconsistent with the terms and provisions herein. 
(Code 1995, § 7.511; Ord. No. G-03-06-12-9B1, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. G-02-06-13-13A1, 6-13-2002) 
Sec. 2-186. - Amendments to division. 
    Any ordinance which amends this division shall not be finally passed until all of the following have occurred: 
(1)  Notice of the proposed amendment shall be posted on the official police department bulletin board for at least 14 days prior to the first public hearing to be held on the proposed amendment. The notice shall also include the date, time, and place of the first public hearing required in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)  At least two public hearings on the proposed amendment shall be held by the city council at regular council meetings. The first reading of the ordinance shall not occur at the same meeting as the first public hearing. The second public hearing may be held at the same meeting as the first reading of the ordinance; and 
(3)  The ordinance must be read at two separate regular meetings of the city council. The city council may not dispense with the second reading of the ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 7.512) 
Secs. 2-187-2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-211-2-228. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-05-24-H2, § I, adopted May 24, 2012, repealed div. 2 of this art. IV, §§ 2-229-2-238, entitled "Community Development Advisory Commission" which derived from: Code 1995, §§ 1.3001-1.3010; and Ord. No. G-99-05-13-12B4, adopted May 13, 1999. 

Secs. 2-229-2-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-270. - Committee created. 
    The city council shall provide for the appointment of a capital improvement advisory committee (CIAC), and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a capital improvement advisory committee under state law. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3201) 
Sec. 2-271. - Membership, terms and compensation. 
(a)  Appointment. The P&Z members shall serve as the CIAC, and the city council's action of appointing the P&Z members shall be deemed to be their simultaneous appointment as members of the CIAC. If the P&Z does not have at least one representative from the real estate, development, or building industries, then one such representative shall be appointed by the city council as an ad hoc voting member of the CIAC. If the impact fee is to be applied in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city, the CIAC membership must include a representative from that area. 
(b)  Terms. Terms for CIAC members that are P&Z members shall cease or expire when their P&Z term ceases or expires. The term for an ad hoc voting member or member residing in the ETJ, who is not a member of the P&Z, shall be for two years, and shall expire on August 31; provided, however, that the members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall not serve on the CIAC for more than eight consecutive years. 
(c)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council, as necessary, for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(d)  Removal. CIAC members who are P&Z members shall be removed in accordance with the conditions of removal for a P&Z member. A CIAC member who is not a member of the P&Z shall serve at the will of the city council. 
(e)  Compensation. Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from available funds approved in advance. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3202; Ord. No. O-2019-0138, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 2-272. - Powers and duties. 
    The CIAC serves in an advisory capacity and is established to: 
(1)  Advise and assist the city council in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the capital improvements plan and file written comments; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan; 
(4)  File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the city council any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fee; and 
(5)  Advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvement plan and impact fee. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3203) 
Sec. 2-273. - Procedures. 
(a)  Officers. The chairperson of the CIAC shall be elected from the membership of the CIAC by a majority of the members. A vice-chair to serve in the chairperson's absence shall be likewise elected. 
(b)  Meetings. All meetings of the CIAC shall be open to the public. In addition to its regular meetings, meetings also may be called upon the request of the chairperson of the CIAC, or upon written request of three members, or upon notice from the city manager that a matter requires the consideration of the CIAC. 
(c)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the CIAC and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by a majority of those present. 
(d)  Notice of meetings. Public notice of all meetings of the CIAC shall be posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(e)  Rules of proceedings. The CIAC shall adopt its own rules of procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with laws applicable to the CIAC or any provisions of this Code. 
(f)  Minutes. The CIAC shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote indicating that fact. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3204) 
Sec. 2-274. - Limitations. 
(a)  The CIAC shall be advisory in nature and have no authority to obligate the city in any financial way, nor shall the CIAC have the authority to make expenditures of city funds. 
(b)  The CIAC shall not request any work done on its own authority nor promise the citizens that work will be done. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3205) 
Secs. 2-275-2-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-323. - City depositories. 
(a)  All monies to be deposited in city depositories. All monies received by any person, department or agency of the city for or in connection with affairs of the city shall be deposited promptly in the city depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the council in accordance with the rules and regulations as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  City depositories to be designated for 24 months. Except as otherwise provided herein, the official depository or depositories shall be designated as such by the council for a period of 24 months beginning at the start of the city's fiscal year in even-numbered years. 
(c)  Applications for custody of city funds accepted. Within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city secretary shall cause the publication of notice that applications for the custody of city funds will be accepted for the upcoming period terminating on September 30, 1980. Thereafter the city secretary shall cause the publication of said notice on or about the first day of August of each even-numbered year. Said notice shall be published not less than one nor more than four weeks before the meeting in which the depository or depositories are to be selected. 
(d)  City secretary to accept applications. All applications shall be delivered to the city secretary on or before the day of the meeting designated in the published notice. 
(e)  Eligibility of applicants. Any banking corporation, association, or individual banker doing business within the city is authorized to submit applications. 
(f)  Authority to select depositories. The selection of the depository or depositories and the requirements for qualification thereof shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105. 
(g)  City council to designate depository. As soon as the selected depository or depositories qualify as required by subsection (f) of this section, the city council shall by resolution designate the said banking corporation, association, or individual banker as the official depository or depositories of the funds of the city. It shall then be the duty of the city manager to transfer to said depository all of the funds in his hands belonging to the city, and immediately upon the receipt of the money thereafter, he shall deposit the same with said depository to the credit of the city. 
(h)  When selected depository fails to qualify. If any banking corporation, association, or individual banker, after having been selected as such depository, shall fail to qualify as required by subsection (f) of this section, then the selection of that banking corporation or association as the depository shall be set aside and be null and void, and the city council shall, after the notice published in the manner hereinbefore provided, proceed to receive new applications and select another depository. 
(i)  Other requirements. If the city council shall at any time deem it necessary for the protection of the city, it may by resolution require the depository to give new bond or pledge new securities as required by subsection (f) of this section, and upon failure to do so within five days after the service of a copy of the resolution on said depository, the city council may proceed to select another depository in the manner hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1101; Ord. No. 560, 9-14-1978) 
State Law reference- Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105. 
Sec. 2-324. - Authorized signatures. 
(a)  Under authority of section 8.08 of the city Charter, all checks, vouchers, or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depositories shall be signed by the mayor or city manager and countersigned by the assistant city manager. 
(b)  Under authority of section 8.08 of the city Charter, all checks, vouchers or warrants for withdrawal of money from the city depositories hereafter can be signed by machine imprinted facsimile signatures of the mayor, city manager, and assistant city manager of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1102; Ord. No. 506, 9-9-1977; Ord. No. G-00-02-24-10B1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. G-04-06-24-16E3, 6-24-2004) 
Sec. 2-325. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Returned item charges. Where payment for any fine, fee, permit, license, service, or other item is required by this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the city and such payment is made by check, credit card, debit card, electronic funds transfer, or other payment method, a fee in an amount not exceeding the maximum allowed by applicable law shall be charged if the item is returned or the item is not paid for any reason by the issuer's bank or other financial institution. 
(b)  Convenience charges. Where payment of any fine, fee, permit, license, service or other item is required by this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the city and such payment is made through a customer initiated on-line payment system available through the city's web page or through the city's interactive voice response (IVR) system, an additional fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid for the use of said systems. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1103; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10D1, § I, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 2-326. - General authority to contract for expenditures and approve certain change orders. 
(a)  General authority to contract for expenditures. Pursuant to section 4.01(f) of the City Charter, the city manager is hereby authorized to execute contracts and/or to expend funds for budgeted items in the maximum amount of $50,000.00, provided that all such contracts and expenditures are in compliance with state laws requiring competitive bids. All contracts and/or expenditures in excess of $50,000.00 must be approved in advance by the city council. 
(b)  Authority to contract for prior approved expenditures. Pursuant to section 4.01(f) of the City Charter, the city manager is hereby authorized to execute contracts and/or to expend funds in the maximum amount of $200,000.00 for items specifically approved in advance by the council. The council may approve the aforesaid items in an exhibit attached to the annual budget or by resolution adopted by the council. 
(c)  Contract change order. The city manager or his designee may approve change orders under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any change involving a decrease or increase in cost of $50,000.00 or less; and 
(2)  Provided, however, that the original contract price may not be increased by more than 25 percent or decreased by more than 25 percent without the consent of the contractor to such decrease. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1104; Ord. No. 2229, 4-24-1986; Ord. No. G-95-12-14-12C, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. G-04-06-24-16E4, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. G-11-07-28-11C1, § I, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. O-2015-3110, § I, 12-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Competitive bidding, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.021 et seq.; exemptions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 252.022, 252.023. 
Sec. 2-327. - City employees' bonds. 
(a)  City manager. Pursuant to section 4.01 of the City Charter, the city manager shall be bonded at city expense in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(b)  Assistant city manager. The assistant city manager shall be bonded at city expense in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(c)  Director of finance. Pursuant to section 10.01 of the City Charter, the director of finance shall be bonded at city expense in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1105; Ord. No. G-04-06-24-16E2, 6-24-2004) 
Secs. 2-328-2-357. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Local government records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201; local government records management program to be established, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.026. 

Sec. 2-358. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electronic storage means the maintenance of city data in the form of digital electronic signals on a computer hard disk, magnetic tape, optical disk or similar machine-readable medium. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of government operations in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the government, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the city or state. 
    Microfilm means roll microfilm, microfiche, computer output microfilm (COM), and all other formats produced by any method of microphotography or other means of miniaturization on film. 
    Municipal record. 
(1)  The term "municipal record" means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business, are declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section or procedures authorized by it. 
(2)  The term "municipal record" does not include: 
a.  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience, reference, or research by officers or employees of the city; 
b.  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
c.  Blank forms; 
d.  Stocks of publications; 
e.  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; 
f.  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, or other state law; 
g.  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda, or documents, other than a final written agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of the city participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third party, or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a record control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Record control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record-keeping. The term includes the development of record control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics, electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
    Source document means the city record from which record data is obtained for transfer to another storage media. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3101) 
Sec. 2-359. - Municipal records declared public property. 
    All municipal records as defined in section 2-358 are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or complied them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3102) 
Sec. 2-360. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3103) 
Sec. 2-361. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee is established consisting of a representative from the following departments: city secretary; finance; information technology; city attorney; and city manager. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve record control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Establish records destruction policies and procedures; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3104) 
Sec. 2-362. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The city secretary and successive holders of said office shall serve as the records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive designated records management officer shall file his name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission within 30 days of the designation or of the taking of office, as applicable. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3105) 
Sec. 2-363. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this section, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  In coordination with department heads, plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Monitor record retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's record control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(5)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(6)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in the policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(7)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of record control schedules as required by state law and this chapter; 
(8)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(9)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved record control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; and 
(10)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (9) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3106) 
Sec. 2-364. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this section, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; and 
(2)  Maintain the records and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3107) 
Sec. 2-365. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
    Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3108) 
Sec. 2-366. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this section, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of record control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3109) 
Sec. 2-367. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the committee, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, division, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and all municipal records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed destroyed and/or disposed of in accordance with the records management plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it. Said law may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3110) 
Sec. 2-368. - Record control schedules; approval; filing with the state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare record control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. 
(b)  Each record control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it continues to reflect the record-keeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city and that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a record control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the division head and a majority vote of the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a record control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state and local government records management division as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the record control schedules to the director and librarian of the state and local government records management division. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3111) 
Sec. 2-369. - Implementation of record control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A record control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-368 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a record control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved record control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer in accordance with the policies and procedures established by the records management committee. 
(d)  The source document of a record whose retention period has not expired on a record control schedule, but which has been either microfilmed or stored electronically, must be reviewed for destruction authorization in accordance with the policies and procedures established in this section and requirements of state law. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3112) 
Sec. 2-370. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-367, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-367. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3113; Ord. No. G-02-05-09-15A1, 5-9-2002) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36, 109.31 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Permit and/or license fee required. 
(a)  The city shall levy and collect one-half of the state fee collected for each permit issued under the Alcoholic Beverage Code for premises located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The city shall levy and collect one-half of the state fee for each license, except a temporary or agent's beer license, issued under the Alcoholic Beverage Code for premises located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.801) 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36. 
Sec. 4-2. - Selling of alcoholic beverages restricted to certain hours. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation authorized to offer for sale alcoholic beverages within the city limits will do so only during the hours authorized under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 105. 
(b)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.03, extended hours for the sale of mixed beverages are adopted, so that the holder of a mixed beverages late hours permit may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(c)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05, extended hours for the sale of beer are adopted, so that the holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license may sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Code 1995, § 1.802; Ord. No. O-2018-6161, § I, 12-20-2018) 
State Law reference- Hours of sale and consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 105. 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a church, public school, or public hospital prohibited. 
(a)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public school shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in a direct line across intersections. 
(c)  For any permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of a church, public school, or public hospital as determined by measurements prescribed in this section is prohibited. 
(e)  Where the church, public school, or public hospital is located within a commercial zoning district, no separation from places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold shall be required. 
(Code 1995, § 1.803; Ord. No. 2073, 11-10-1983; Ord. No. 2492, 7-26-1990) 
Sec. 4-4. - Variances. 
    The city council may allow variances to the provisions of section 4-3 if the council determines that enforcement of that section is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of the land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(Code 1995, § 1.804; Ord. No. 2073, 11-10-1983) 
Sec. 4-5. - Unlawful to drink or possess intoxicating liquors within certain areas. 
(a)  Ball fields. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage in any city-owned or -operated baseball or softball field while a person or persons of non-drinking age are participating in organized league play. 
(b)  Swimming pool areas. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage in any city-owned and -operated swimming pool area. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to any swimming pool owned by the city, but operated or managed by a third party under contract with the city. 
(c)  Park areas. Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage in any city-owned or -operated park without first obtaining a permit therefor from the chief of police. The decision of the chief of police to grant or deny any such permit shall be appealable to the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 1.805; Ord. No. 592, 4-12-1979; Ord. No. 2494, 7-26-1990) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C6, § I, adopted July 14, 2011, deleted §§ 6-19-6-25, entitled "Carnivals, Circuses and Shows" which derived from: Code 1995, §§ 4.101-4.107; and Ord. No. 544, adopted June 22, 1978. 

Secs. 6-19-6-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243. 

Sec. 6-54. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted by the city council, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the city, to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.003. 
(Code 1995, § 4.501) 
Sec. 6-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child care facility means a building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child placing agency or other place for the care or custody of children under 15 years of age, licensed by the State of Texas pursuant to V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.041. 
    Church or place of religious worship means a building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, or for propagating a particular form of belief. 
    Director means the director of planning of the city, or his duly appointed successor. 
    Dwelling means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or any other building used for residential purposes. 
    Hospital means a building used to provide health services for human in-patient medical care for the sick or injured licensed pursuant to the Texas Hospital Licensing law, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 241, or operated by an agency of the federal government, or a convalescent facility licensed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 242.031. 
    Public building means a building used by federal, state, or local government and open to the general public. 
    Public park means a tract of land maintained by the federal, state, or local government for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
    Regulations means the regulations of the city of certain sexually oriented businesses contained in this article. 
    School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purposes of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, dormitories, stadiums, and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. 
    Sexually oriented business means a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, topless dancing bar, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
(Code 1995, § 4.502; Ord. No. G-95-08-10-12E, 8-10-1995) 
Sec. 6-56. - Exempt businesses. 
    The following are exempt from regulation under this article: 
(1)  A bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is a sexually oriented business as defined in section 6-55; 
(2)  A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held; or 
(3)  A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(Code 1995, § 4.503) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 243.004. 
Sec. 6-57. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a sexually oriented business at a location within the corporate limits of the city without a valid permit issued therefor by the director of planning in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant must certify that the proposed sexually oriented business will be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from the following restricted establishments which are located either within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction or within the city's corporate limits: 
(1)  A child care facility; 
(2)  A church or place of religious worship; 
(3)  A dwelling; 
(4)  A public park; 
(5)  A school; or 
(6)  Another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this section will apply to all sexually oriented businesses regardless of whether or not they exist on the effective date of these regulations. However, should any court determine that such requirement is unconstitutional or invalid insofar as it applies to sexually oriented businesses existing on or before the effective date of these regulations, then and in that event, the applicant may certify that the sexually oriented business was in existence on the effective date of these regulations in lieu of making the certification provided for in said subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property line of the property on which the sexually oriented business is located to the property line of the property on which the use described in subsection (b) of this section is located. 
(Code 1995, § 4.504; Ord. No. G-95-08-10-12E, 8-10-1995) 
Sec. 6-58. - Permit and aids warning displayed. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business permit issued under these regulations shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business for which it was issued, so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(b)  In addition to the permit described above, a sign shall be displayed which warns patrons of a sexually oriented business of the symptoms and causes of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Such sign shall conform to the guidelines for AIDS warning signs promulgated by the director of planning. 
(Code 1995, § 4.505) 
Sec. 6-59. - Permit application. 
    Any person desiring a sexually oriented business permit shall file a written application with the director of planning on a form to be prescribed by the director of planning. 
(1)  The application shall set forth the following: 
a.  The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other entity. 
1.  In the case of a partnership, limited partnership, or other entity, the application shall set forth the names and addresses of all persons or entities having a pecuniary interest in the partnership, limited partnership, or other entity. 
2.  In the case of a corporation, the application shall set forth the names and addresses of the incorporators, board of directors, officers, and all shareholders thereof. 
3.  In no case may an entity which is not a natural person hold a pecuniary interest in the applicant entity (whether natural or legal). 
b.  The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a specific description of the service to be provided. 
c.  The address and full legal description of the parcel of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located. 
d.  The name and address of the legal owner of the property. 
e.  The name, residence address and telephone number, if any, of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the sexually oriented business. 
f.  Written declaration that the information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed and sworn to by a partner thereof. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed and sworn to by an authorized officer of such corporation or entity. 
g.  Certification that the sexually oriented business is not located within 1,000 feet of one of the enumerated uses set out in subsection 6-57(b). 
h.  Certification that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude for the past ten years. 
i.  Any sexually oriented business existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived will have 30 days to apply for a sexually oriented business permit under these regulations. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A tender of correct permit fee as hereinafter provided. 
b.  A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 36, if the applicant is to operate the restricted establishment under an assumed name. 
c.  A certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, if applicant is a corporation. 
d.  A certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto, if applicant is a foreign corporation. 
e.  A certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of state under V.T.C.A., Business Organizations Code ch. 153, if the applicant is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Texas. 
f.  A certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of state, if the applicant is a foreign limited partnership. 
(Code 1995, § 4.506) 
Sec. 6-60. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts sexual activities, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit and the AIDS warning sign will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The director may waive the foregoing requirement for a diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the director. 
(3)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(4)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(4) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(6)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 30.0 footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(6) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1995, § 4.507) 
Sec. 6-61. - Investigation by director of planning. 
(a)  Upon receiving the application for a sexually oriented business permit, the director shall cause to be conducted an investigation for the purpose of determining whether or not such premises comply with the requirements set forth in these regulations. 
(b)  Once a permit has been issued, the director or his duly authorized representative, including but not limited to any peace officer certified by the state, may at any and all reasonable times inspect the premises in which the sexually oriented business is located with respect to requirements under these regulations. Any denial of this inspection is grounds for immediate revocation of applicant's permit to operate a sexually oriented business. 
(Code 1995, § 4.508) 
Sec. 6-62. - Issuance of sexually oriented business permit. 
(a)  Any permit required by these regulations shall be issued and signed by the director or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  The director shall issue a sexually oriented business permit within 30 days of receipt of the application unless he finds that: 
(1)  The application or the establishment location does not meet all requirements of these regulations; 
(2)  An applicant is under 18 years of age; 
(3)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
(4)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(5)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of these regulations, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application; 
(6)  The license fee required by these regulations has not been paid; 
(7)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented commercial enterprise in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minors; sexual performance by a child; or possession of child pornography; 
b.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: public lewdness; indecent exposure; or indecency with a child; 
c.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
d.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses, for which: 
1.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction was for a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction was for a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than ten years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions were for two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or the applicant's spouse. 
(d)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (b)(8) of this section, may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when the time period required has elapsed. 
(e)  The director shall notify each applicant of their eligibility for a sexually oriented business permit within 30 days of receipt of the completed application. If the applicant complies with the provisions of these regulations, then the director shall issue the permit. If the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of these regulations, then the applicant shall be so notified and shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to the provisions of section 6-63. 
(Code 1995, § 4.509) 
Sec. 6-63. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Upon issuance, denial or revocation by the director of an applicant's permit to operate a sexually oriented business, the applicant or any aggrieved party shall, within ten working days, submit to the city council a written request for a hearing on the action taken. An aggrieved party means any person who resides within 1,000 feet of an applied-for sexually oriented business, or who owns or operates one of the restricted establishments enumerated under subsection 6-57(b), within 1,000 feet of an applied-for sexually oriented business. 
(b)  If the city council denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the city shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of this notice, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal to a state district court. An appeal to state district court must occur within 30 days after receipt of notice from city council. 
(Code 1995, § 4.510) 
Sec. 6-64. - Fee. 
    To defray the actual cost of processing the sexually oriented business permit application, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee to be submitted with the application as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 4.511) 
Sec. 6-65. - Permit renewal. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business permit shall be valid for 12 months from its date of issuance, at which time the permit shall expire. 
(b)  On or before its date of expiration, applicant may file a written application for renewal of permit with the director on a form to be prescribed by him. If issued, each successive renewal permit shall be valid for 12 months from its date of issuance, at which time it shall expire. 
(c)  Should a permit expire before the filing of a written application for renewal, then applicant must file for a new permit in accordance with the provisions of sections 6-61 and 6-62. 
(Code 1995, § 4.512) 
Sec. 6-66. - Permit renewal fee. 
    To defray the actual cost of processing the sexually oriented business permit renewal application, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee to be submitted with the permit renewal application as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 4.513) 
Sec. 6-67. - Return of fees. 
    No portion of any fee collected under these regulations shall be returned after a permit, renewal or otherwise, has been issued or refused. 
(Code 1995, § 4.514) 
Sec. 6-68. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business permit is not transferable, assignable, or divisible. 
(b)  Each permit issued under these regulations shall be valid at the location therein specified, and not otherwise. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact, or to give or to use any assumed name or fictitious name other than one duly filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 36. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a sexually oriented business permit which has been issued to another person. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a sexually oriented business permit. 
(f)  Violation of any provision of these regulations is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(g)  The operation of a sexually oriented business without a sexually oriented business permit is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(h)  The city may sue in the district courts of Williamson County to enjoin the violation of any provision of these regulations. 
(i)  These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the Texas Penal Code or any other laws of the state. 
(j)  The hours of operation for a sexually oriented business licensed under these regulations is from 9:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. every day. 
(k)  If any provision of these regulations or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid for any reason, the invalidity does not affect any other provision or application of these regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this extent the provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable. 
(Code 1995, § 4.515; Ord. No. 2603, 11-24-1992) 
Secs. 6-69-6-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHOOTING AND ARCHERY RANGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Outdoor shooting ranges, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.041 et seq. 

Sec. 6-95. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Archery means the act, practice, or skill of shooting with bow and arrow. 
    Archery range means a facility for the practice of archery, but not including an archery range where only toy bows and soft rubber tip arrows are used. 
    Building official means the chief building official or his designee. The city manager may delegate duties and obligations of the building official pursuant to this section to the chief of police, the fire chief, or such other city official as the city manager may, in his sole discretion, determine to be capable of exercising some or all of the authority, duties, and obligations of the building official acting pursuant to this article. 
    Firearm means a weapon capable of discharging a projectile by means of an explosive charge, including without limitation a rifle, pistol, shotgun or any other type of gun; but not including an air pistol or air rifle incapable of discharging a projectile at a muzzle speed in excess of 300 feet per second. 
    Firing line means a designated area at an archery range or shooting facility designed and intended for use as the location from which persons may shoot arrows or discharge firearms in the direction of a target. 
    Shooting facility means an area, either enclosed or out of doors, at which firearms are discharged at targets and which is designed so that projectiles fired from firearms at targets are prevented, by means of backstops or other barriers, from going beyond the boundaries of the area. 
(Code 1995, § 4.601) 
Sec. 6-96. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate, or to allow to be conducted or operated, on property under his ownership or control, an archery range or shooting facility unless such archery range or shooting facility is conducted and operated in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 4.602) 
Sec. 6-97. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person wishing to operate or conduct an archery range or shooting facility shall file a written application for a permit to do so with the building official upon forms provided by the building official which shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant for the permit (including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners if the applicant is organized as a partnership and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all officers and directors of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation) and the business name, address, and telephone number of the proposed archery range or shooting facility; 
(2)  Plans drawn to scale and showing the location and dimensions of all improvements existing or to be constructed, specifically showing the location and dimensions of proposed firing lines and target areas and the location, design, and materials for the construction of backstops, baffles, and all other surfaces downrange from a firing line; 
(3)  Applications for all building permits required to construct any structures to be used in connection with the archery range or shooting facility; 
(4)  For any shooting facility not located entirely inside a building, a site plan showing the existing and proposed topography of the land and all existing structures and uses of property located within: 
a.  1,200 yards downrange and a 20-degree outward angle from either end of a firing line for any firearms other than shotguns, or 300 yards downrange and a 20-degree outward angle from either end of a firing line for firearms other than shotguns on a baffled range; 
b.  300 yards downrange and 180 degrees on either side of any skeet launching facility at a skeet range for the exclusive use of shotguns; and 
c.  300 yards downrange and 110 degrees on either side of any trap launching facility at a trap range for the exclusive use of shotguns; 
(5)  A complete and true copy of the proposed rules and regulations and operating procedures governing the use of such archery range or shooting facility and the proposed hours of operation; 
(6)  Evidence satisfactory to the building official of the applicant's ability to comply with the insurance requirement imposed by subsection 6-98(b)(6); 
(7)  The name and address of every property owner of land located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the tract of land on which the archery range or shooting facility will be operated; and 
(8)  Any other information reasonably required by the building official to determine the safety of the archery range or shooting facility. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of any application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the building official shall mail notice that such application has been filed by the applicant to the owners of all real property located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the tract of land on which the archery range or shooting facility will be operated. The applicant shall post notice in a form and at locations approved by the building official reasonably sufficient, in the discretion of the building official, to advise the public that an application has been filed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 4.603) 
Sec. 6-98. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  If the building official determines from the information provided in the application that the archery range or shooting facility will satisfy the specific requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the building official shall conditionally approve the permit for the archery range or shooting facility, subject to the completion of any improvements shown on the application in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After inspecting the completed improvement and certifying that the criteria of subsection (b) of this section have been satisfied, the building official shall issue the permit. Conditional approval of a permit under this section shall not be deemed or construed to constitute approval of any building or other permit required pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The application for a permit for an archery range or shooting facility shall demonstrate compliance with the following specific criteria: 
(1)  Any archery range or shooting facility shall be designed and operated in a manner to prevent any arrow, bullet, or other projectile from traveling beyond the boundaries of such archery range or shooting facility. In reviewing the design of a shooting facility, the building official may consider range development guidelines promulgated by the National Rifle Association. 
(2)  Any outdoor shooting facility at which firearms other than shotguns will be discharged shall be designed to prevent any projectile fired from the firing line from initially striking any surface not designed to completely stop the projectile or prevent the occurrence of potentially dangerous ricochets. 
(3)  The rules and regulations for the archery range or shooting facility shall be posted and maintained in a visible location at the archery range or shooting facility. 
(4)  The rules and regulations for the archery range or shooting facility shall prohibit the possession or use of alcoholic beverages by persons on the firing line or the discharge of firearms by any person under the influence of alcohol. 
(5)  The operating procedures for the archery range or shooting facility shall prohibit the use of any firing line at the facility except when the permit holder is present and supervising at such firing line to ensure compliance with the approved rules and regulations. 
(6)  The applicant for a permit issued pursuant to this article shall obtain and maintain in effect during the operation of the archery range or shooting facility liability insurance coverage in a minimum amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(c)  Permits which are issued under this article shall recite that the issuance thereof does not constitute any assurance by the city, its employees, officers, or agents, that injury may not result from the operation or use of the approved archery range or shooting facility. Permits shall be valid for a one-year period, and may contain such restrictions as to types of firearms and ammunition permitted to be discharged at a shooting facility, maintenance of improvements and safety equipment, rules and regulations governing the use of such facility, limitations on the times of operation, and other terms and conditions relating to the use and operation of the archery range or shooting facility as the building official may deem reasonably necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of the public, neighboring property owners, and persons using the archery range or shooting facility. 
(Code 1995, § 4.604) 
Sec. 6-99. - Right of appeal. 
    Any party aggrieved by a decision of the building official pursuant to this article may appeal that decision to the city council by filing a written notice of the appeal specifically alleging the error of the building official with the city secretary. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the action or determination of the building official which is appealed. The city council shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days following the date such appeal is filed and may uphold, reverse, or modify the decision of the building official at the conclusion of such public hearing. 
(Code 1995, § 4.605) 
Sec. 6-100. - Permits for government agencies. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, a permit to operate an archery range or shooting facility shall be issued to any federal, state or local governmental agency upon receipt of a certification from an authorized official of such agency that the archery range or shooting facility is under the control and management of the agency and is operated for the exclusive use of governmental employees. 
(Code 1995, § 4.606) 
Sec. 6-101. - Applicability to existing archery ranges and shooting facilities. 
    Any archery range or shooting facility otherwise in compliance with applicable ordinances as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any lawfully existing archery range or shooting facility annexed into the city subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may operate without the permit required by this section for a period of 45 days. If application for the permit required by this article is filed within such 45-day period, the archery range or shooting facility may continue operating without a permit for an additional 45-day period pending processing and conditional approval of a permit. If a permit is conditionally approved within such 45-day period and with the construction of improvements necessary to satisfy the requirements, the shooting facility may continue operating without the issuance of a permit for an additional 90 days. The building official may grant a single extension of up to 60 days if the applicant is unable, with diligent effort, to complete the improvements within the initial 90-day period. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code and without the issuance of a building, site development, or other permit which may otherwise be required, the building official may authorize the construction of improvements and site development on an existing archery range or shooting facility for the sole purpose of meeting the requirements imposed by subsection 6-98(b). 
(Code 1995, § 4.607; Ord. No. G-93-07-08-8B, 7-8-1993; Ord. No. G-95-03-09-9D, 3-9-1995) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 1 et seq.; health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to ensure the humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 2.200; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. The term "animal" includes fowl, fish, and reptiles. 
    Animal control means the animal control division of the city police department. 
    Animal control officer means an employee or agent of the city, designated by the chief of police to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection, and enforcement requirements contained within this chapter. 
    Animal hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of animal diseases and injuries. 
    Animal nuisance means any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal. 
    Animal shelter means the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter. 
    Apiary means a place where one or more bee hives are kept. 
    At large means that an animal is: 
(1)  On the premises of the owner and is not tied, staked, or restrained securely within an enclosure or fence capable of fully and totally securing the animal; or 
(2)  Off the premises of the owner, and is not on a leash under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal or is not restrained securely within an enclosure or fence capable of fully and totally securing the animal. 
    Bee means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species. 
    Bee colony means a hive and related equipment and appurtenances including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood. 
    Cat means any member of the family felis domestica. 
    Collar means any properly fitted collar constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used for a dog. 
    Cruelty means any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, adequate shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care, or nutritious food in sufficient quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as in medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available. 
    Dangerous animal means one that has made an unprovoked attack on a human being or another animal. A dangerous animal does not include guard or attack dogs as defined in this section, as long as such guard or attack dogs are restrained and confined in compliance with article IX of this chapter. 
    Disposition means adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. The term "disposition" includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public, or removal of animal from any pet shop to any other location. 
    Dog means any member of the family canis familiaris. 
    Domestic animal includes livestock, caged or penned fowl, pigeons, normal household pets, such as but not limited to, dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish, or small nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes. 
    Exotic or wild animal . 
(1)  The term "exotic or wild animal" means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, opossum, skunk, fox, wolf, hybrid wolf, sea mammal, bear, venomous snake, nonhuman primate, prairie dog, African Serval, member of the feline species other than domestic cat ( felis domesticus ), member of the canine species other than domestic dog ( canis familiarus ) or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or livestock. 
(2)  The term "exotic or wild animal" does not include domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), farm animals, rodents, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
    Feral cat means any member of the species felis catus that is undomesticated, wild, homeless, untamed, or otherwise unaccustomed to human interaction. Other common names include stray cat, barn cat, or community cat. 
    Feral cat colony means any population of two or more feral cats that have been released into an area as part of a trap, neuter, and return program. 
    Flyway barrier means a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination of these materials at least six feet high that extends at least ten feet beyond the hives on each end of the colony. 
    Fowl means any goose, pheasant, chicken, prairie chicken, peacock, guinea, duck, turkey, and other normally undomesticated fowl. 
    Guard or attack dog means a dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command. 
    Hive means a structure intended to house a bee colony. 
    Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any authorized representative thereof. 
    Livestock means any horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jenney, all species of swine, sheep, goat, llama, all species of cattle, or an emu, ostrich, or rhea. 
    Microchip means an identifying integrated circuit placed under the skin of an animal, which uses passive RFID (radio frequency identification) technology to identify the animal. 
    Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
    Owner means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation, having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by this chapter, including the caretaker of a feral cat colony. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days. 
    Properly fitted means, with respect to a collar used for a dog, a collar that: (a) is the appropriate size for the dog based on the dog's size and body weight, (b) does not choke the dog or impede the dog's normal breathing or swallowing, and (c) is attached to the dog in a manner that does not allow for escape and does not cause pain or injury to the dog. 
    Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any animal that is found running at large more than three times in a 12-month period; 
(2)  Any dog in a park or public recreation area unless the dog is controlled by a leash or similar physical restraint; 
(3)  Any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any property other than that of its owner; 
(4)  Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5)  Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)  Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals; 
(7)  Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way; 
(8)  Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way; 
(9)  Any animal that attacks a domestic animal; 
(10)  Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where that animal is kept or harbored; 
(11)  Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single residence or the inadequacy of the facility. 
    Riding stable/school or academy means a camp or school where horseback riding is taught on a regular basis for financial gain. 
    Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
    Shelter means a clean and sturdy structure that provides the animal with protection from rain, hail, sleet, snow, subfreezing temperatures, sun and excessive heat and is large enough to allow the animal to stand erect, sit, turn around, and lie down in a normal manner. 
    Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
    Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Code 1995, § 2.300; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-3. - Nuisances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the corporate limits of the city when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health or safety. 
(Code 1995, § 2.400; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-4. - Keeping of exotic or wild animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, maintain, have in their possession, have on their premises or under their control, or permit at large any exotic or wild animal without the written permission of the chief of police. Such permission shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. If evidence is presented to the chief of police that an exotic or wild animal is constituting a threat to public health or safety, the chief shall have the discretion to revoke previously granted permission to own or keep said animal. The owner of a dangerous wild animal as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101, shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 822, Subchapter E of the said Code. 
(Code 1995, § 2.500; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-5. - Limit on number of animals permitted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep animals within the city of such a number that the animals constitute a public nuisance or menace to public health or safety. 
(Code 1995, § 2.601; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-6. - Limitations on number of fowl. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to property zoned AG or SF-R. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to own or keep fowl within the corporate limits of the city unless the number is limited and they are kept in enclosed pens as set forth below: 
(1)  If fowl are confined within an enclosed pen which is located 50 feet or more from any building or dwelling occupied by any person other than the owner of the fowl, the number of fowl is limited to no more than ten. 
(2)  If fowl are confined within an enclosed pen which is located less than 50 feet, but more than 25 feet from any building or dwelling occupied by any person other than the owner of the fowl, the number of fowl is limited to no more than five. 
(Code 1995, § 2.801; Ord. No. Z-06-06-08-9B5, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-7-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 8-31. - Keeping of livestock. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to property zoned AG or SF-R. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock within the corporate limits of the city unless the livestock is being kept in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Livestock shall be kept on a parcel of land that is at least one acre in size. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one unit (as defined below) of livestock for the first acre of land. There shall be no more than one additional unit of livestock for each additional one-half acre of land in the same parcel. For the purpose of this section, units of livestock shall be defined as follows: 
a.  The following types of livestock shall be counted as one head equals one unit: horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jenny, llama, and all species of cattle; 
b.  The following types of livestock shall be counted as one head equals one-half of a unit: all species of swine; and 
c.  The following types of livestock shall be counted as one head equals one-fifth of a unit: sheep, goat, emu, ostrich and rhea. 
(3)  No livestock shall be permitted to graze, forage, or otherwise roam within 50 feet of any dwelling, residence, or structure used for human occupancy (other than the livestock owner's dwelling or residence). 
(4)  Barns, stables, corrals, sheds, pens or other similar structure where livestock may be housed, fed, or confined, or where food for livestock is stored shall not be located within 150 feet of any residence, business or commercial establishment or office (other than the livestock owner's residence, business or commercial establishment or office), grocery store, school building, church, hospital, nursing home, or restaurant or other food service establishment. 
(5)  Livestock shall be enclosed with adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from damaging shrubbery or other property situated on adjacent property. Such fences or barriers shall be sufficient to prevent the livestock from escaping the enclosure. 
(6)  The owner keeping any livestock shall keep all yards, barns, pens, stables, sheds or other enclosures in which such animals are confined in such a manner so as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity, or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or rodents, or in any manner to endanger the public health, safety, or welfare, or to create a public nuisance. All yards, barns, pens, stables, sheds or other enclosures in which livestock is confined shall be of a size to allow said animals sufficient space to move freely and not endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the animal or animals. 
(7)  Subsections (b)(1) through (4) of this section shall not apply to a licensed veterinarian at the veterinarian's place of business or a riding stable/school or academy. 
(Code 1995, § 2.701; Ord. No. Z-06-06-08-9B5, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-32. - Unlawful for livestock to be at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any livestock to be at large off the property of the owner of the livestock. The owner of the livestock found to be at large shall be responsible for the offense and no culpable mental state is required. 
(Code 1995, § 2.702; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
State Law reference- Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 142; fence restrictions, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 143. 
Sec. 8-33. - Impoundment of livestock. 
    Animal control officers are authorized to impound all livestock in violation of sections 8-31 and 8-32, subject to terms and conditions established throughout this chapter. Livestock will be held by a private contractor with the owner being responsible for all impound, transportation, boarding, feeding and any other expenses incurred in impounding the livestock. All fees and charges must be paid prior to release of the livestock. 
(Code 1995, § 2.703; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
State Law reference- Impoundment of estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 142.009. 
Sec. 8-34. - Liability. 
    To ensure the public safety and to avoid serious accidents, any livestock that is in danger of getting on a public roadway will be tranquilized if possible or in extreme cases destroyed by police officers or animal control officers. If it is necessary to tranquilize or destroy livestock to prevent property damage or injuries, the city will not be liable for damages to the owners of said livestock. 
(Code 1995, § 2.704; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-35-8-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EDUCATIONAL EXEMPTION PERMIT 

Sec. 8-57. - Exemption for educational purposes. 
    Subsections 8-31(b)(1) through (4) and section 8-6 shall not apply to school-age children enrolled in a public or private school which offers Future Farmers of America (FFA) and/or 4-H Club programs in which the class participants are required or allowed to raise project animals for education, show or profit purposes as long as said children have a valid permit issued pursuant to section 8-58 and in effect at the time. 
(Code 1995, § 2.901; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-58. - Permit. 
(a)  In order to qualify for the above exemption, the students are required to: 
(1)  Apply for an annual FFA/4-H project permit. Said application shall be signed by the student, the student's parent or guardian, and the student's FFA/4-H teacher/instructor. 
(2)  Provide proof of enrollment in one of the listed school programs. 
(3)  Provide proof that the animals being kept are an integral part of the student's participation in one of the listed school programs. 
(4)  Allow inspection by an animal control officer of the pens, cages, or other facilities and property on which the animals are to be kept before issuance of the permit and at any reasonable time requested thereafter. 
(b)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid only upon the premises identified on the permit and is nontransferable to any other location or person. 
(c)  A permit issued under this section shall expire no later than 12 months from the date of issuance, no later than the day the qualifying person ceases to be an active member in good standing with the listed school program or no later than the day said permit is revoked as provided below, whichever should occur first. 
(d)  An animal control officer may deny the issuance of a permit or revoke a permit previously issued based on any one of the following: 
(1)  False information is provided on the application for the permit. 
(2)  Two or more convictions for violations of this article by the student or the student's parent or guardian. 
(3)  If the animal control officer determines, in the officer's sole judgment, that the animals cannot be or are not being kept at the location in a manner which does not create a nuisance, public health hazard or otherwise violate any other provision of this article. 
(4)  Graduation of the student from high school or the student otherwise not being enrolled in good standing in the listed school program. 
(Code 1995, § 2.902; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-59-8-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARING FOR ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 42.09. 

Sec. 8-90. - Basic care for animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, potable water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and treatment, and adequate shelter to protect such animal from hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1001; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-91. - Safety of animals in parked vehicles; removal if necessary. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health or safety. Any animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force, including the breaking of a side window, to remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it appears the animal's health or safety is or soon will be endangered, and said neglected or endangered animal shall be impounded. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle; and if the animal is in a standing or parked unenclosed vehicle, including but not limited to, convertibles, pickup trucks, jeeps, and flatbed trucks, the animal shall be confined by a vented container or cage, or rope, or other devise cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on a single leash. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1002; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-92. - Abandonment of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1003; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-93. - Unsupervised animals. 
    If an animal control officer determines that an animal is or will be without proper care because of the owner's injury, illness, incarceration, or other involuntary absence, the animal control officer may impound such animal until reclaimed by its owner. The owner is responsible for all costs associated with the impoundment and must pay all costs before the animal is released. If the animal is not reclaimed by the owner within 72 hours from the date of impoundment, the animal shall become the property of the animal shelter. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1004; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-94. - Cages, pens and enclosures. 
    Cages, pens and enclosures used to confine animals shall be of sufficient size to maintain all of the animals within such enclosure comfortably and in good health. Said cages, pens and enclosures shall be of a proper material to securely contain all of the animals within such enclosures at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1005; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-95. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat, or caretaker of a feral cat colony to fail to inoculate the dog or cat from rabies. 
    (b) It shall be unlawful for a dog or cat to be present in the city and not be vaccinated against rabies. Every owner of a dog or cat shall furnish proof of rabies vaccination upon request by an animal control officer. Failure to furnish proof upon request shall create a presumption that the animal has not been vaccinated for rabies. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the offense and no culpable mental state is required 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-96. - Ill or injured animals. 
    If in the reasonable opinion of an animal control officer or police officer an animal's life is endangered due to illness or injury, the animal may be humanely euthanized after a reasonable attempt is made to contact the animal's owner. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-97-8-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 42.09. 

Sec. 8-117. - Unlawful actions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering, or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or trespassing animals. It shall be unlawful to tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate any animal that is on a leash or confined to the owner's premises. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1101; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-118. - Poisonous substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, to administer poison to any animal, or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1102; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-119. - Violation. 
    If any person is found guilty of having violated any part of this article, any license or permit held by such person under this chapter shall be automatically revoked. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1103; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-120-8-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SANITATION 

Sec. 8-137. - Maintaining sanitary conditions on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners or condominium association, or upon private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods: 
(1)  Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
(2)  Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner or custodian and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be permitted by law. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1201; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-138. - Maintaining sanitary conditions of private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city to permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, to abutting property of others, or to the animal. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1202; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-139. - Maintaining sanitary conditions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any animal to cause unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1203; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-140-8-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MICROCHIPPING OF DOGS AND CATS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, adopted Dec. 20, 2018, amended art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VII, §§ 8-162-8-173 was entitled "Licensing of Dogs and Cats," and derived from: Code 1995, §§ 2.1301-2.1312; and Ord. No. G-05-10-27-12A1, adopted Oct. 27, 2005. 

Sec. 8-162. - Microchip required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four months within the city unless such dog or cat has been microchipped. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the animal was a feral cat participating in a trap, neuter, and return program approved by the city. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the animal has been in the city for less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-163. - Deadlines for microchipping. 
    The owner of a dog or cat over the age of four months shall microchip said animal within 30 days of the animal attaining the age of four months. The owner of a dog or cat that has moved into or been annexed by the city shall microchip said animal within 30 days of moving to or being annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-164. - Updating microchip ownership information. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to fail to keep the microchip ownership information updated. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-165-8-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-200. - Restraint of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal to be at large. An owner of an animal found to be at large shall be responsible for the offense and no culpable mental state is required. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the animal was a feral cat participating in a trap, neuter, and return program approved by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1401; Ord. No. G-07-11-20-10C1, § I, 11-20-2007; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-201. - Cats exempt from leash. 
    Although cats shall be exempt from any leash requirements, it shall be unlawful for any owner of a cat to allow said cat to stray onto the property of anyone except the owner. Any cat found straying onto the property of anyone except the owner shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to impoundment. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1402; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-202. - Tying or staking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal to be tied or staked upon any open or unfenced lot or land in a manner which allows the animal to come within ten feet of any street, park or other public land or within ten feet of any sidewalk, public passageway or building. An animal tied or staked in violation of this subsection shall be considered at large in violation of section 8-200. 
(b)  If an animal is tied or staked, regardless of location, it shall be unlawful for the tie, or tether securing the animal to be less than ten feet in length or less than five times the length of the animal, whichever is longer. It shall be unlawful to tie, tether, stake or fasten an animal in such a manner as to cause it injury or pain or not permit it to reach shelter, food or water. The owner of the animal or the person actually tying or staking the animal shall be responsible for the offense. 
(c)  Any collar used on a dog shall be a properly fitted collar. It shall be unlawful to use a collar that is a pinch-type, prong-type, a choke-type collar. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a metal chain to tie or stake an animal. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1403; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-203. - Invisible and electronic fences. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use an invisible or electronic fence as the sole method to restrain an animal in accordance with this article unless the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  A sign must be posted within restraint area that indicates an animal is being restrained by an invisible or electronic fence and the type of animal being restrained. This sign must be clearly visible from the street or other public place outside of the restraint area. 
(2)  The invisible or electronic fence must be aligned in a manner which does not allow the animal to come within ten feet of any street, park or other public land or within ten feet of any sidewalk, public passageway or building. 
(b)  An animal restrained in violation of this article shall be considered at large in violation of section 8-200. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1404; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-204. - Restraint of dogs. 
    Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way in any park, public square, or other public space shall be restrained and secured by a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the particular dog. Said leash or chain shall not be longer than 25 feet in a public park and shall not be longer than six feet on or in any other place. An animal that is not restrained in compliance with this section shall be considered at large in violation of section 8-200. This section shall not apply to a dog that is within the fenced area of a designated leash-free dog park. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1405; Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11E1, § II, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-205. - Preventing an animal from becoming a public nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1406; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-206. - Restraint when animal in heat. 
    Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the dog or cat has been spayed. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1407; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-207. - Quarantining of animals exposed to rabies. 
    Any dog or cat that has rabies, or symptoms thereof, or that is suspected of having rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies, shall be handled in a manner consistent with state law regarding the disposition of animals exposed to rabies. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to comply with a quarantine requirement or condition, including a home quarantine authorized by an animal control officer. If an owner fails to comply, in addition to any criminal penalties, the animal shall be immediately seized and impounded. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1408; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-208. - Dogs permitted in outdoor dining areas. 
    A food establishment, as defined in chapter 18, may permit a customer to be accompanied by a dog in an outdoor dining area if: 
(1)  The food establishment posts a sign in a conspicuous location stating that dogs are allowed in the outdoor dining area; 
(2)  The customer and the dog access the outdoor dining area directly from the exterior of the food establishment; 
(3)  The dog does not enter the interior of the food establishment; 
(4)  The customer keeps the dog on a leash and controls the dog; 
(5)  The customer does not allow the dog on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface; and 
(6)  In the outdoor dining area, the food establishment does not: 
a.  Prepare food; or 
b.  Permit open food, except for food that is being served to a customer. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1409; Ord. No. O-2016-3762, § I, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, adopted Dec. 20, 2018, deleted § 8-209, entitled "Prohibiting dogs at sporting and recreational events," which derived from Code 1995, § 2.1410. 
Secs. 8-210-8-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESTRAINT OF GUARD DOGS 

Sec. 8-227. - Confinement of guard dogs. 
    Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height and shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1501; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-228. - Areas of confinement. 
    All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less than 45 degrees nor more than 90 degrees when measured from the perpendicular. The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape-proof. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1502; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-229. - Warning sign required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any guard or attack dog unattended in any place inside any building unless a warning sign has been placed in a clearly visible location at the premises, located so that it can be seen by any person before entering the premises, warning that a guard or attack dog is present. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any guard or attack dog unattended in any place outside a building without a warning sign placed in a clearly visible location at the premises, located so that it can be seen by any person before entering the place to which the dog has access, warning that a guard dog or attack dog is present. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1503; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-230. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1504; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-231-8-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-254. - Nuisance declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for an owner or other person to harbor, keep, or maintain a dangerous animal in the city unless the owner complies with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1601; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-255. - Offense. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dangerous animal within the city. For purposes of this article, a person is the owner of a dangerous animal when the owner knows of an unprovoked attack committed by the animal against a person or another animal, or when the animal has been determined to be dangerous by the court under this article or any other court or determining body. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1602; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-256. - Defenses. 
    In response to the determination that an animal is a dangerous animal, it is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  The threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal; 
(2)  The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has in the past been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal; 
(3)  The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime; 
(4)  The animal attacked or killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or attacking the alleged dangerous animal; 
(5)  The animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault; 
(6)  The animal was injured and responding to pain; or 
(7)  The animal was protecting its offspring, itself, or its kennelmates. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1603; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-257. - Complaints. 
    Should any person desire to file a complaint concerning an animal which is believed to be a dangerous animal, a sworn, written complaint must first be filed with an animal control officer containing the following information or as much information as is known to the complainant: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of complainant and other witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time and location of any incident involving the animal; 
(3)  Description of the animal; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known; 
(5)  A statement describing the facts upon which such complaint is based; and 
(6)  A statement describing any incidents where the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in past conduct, if known. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1604; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-258. - Investigation. 
    After a sworn complaint is filed with the animal control officer, the animal control officer shall investigate the complaint and if there be sufficient evidence to believe the animal is dangerous, the animal control officer may file a complaint with the Municipal Court of the City of Round Rock and request the judge of the municipal court to set a time and place for a hearing for a determination. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1605; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-259. - Hearing. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction for the determination of a dangerous animal in a proceeding brought under this article shall be vested in the Round Rock Municipal Court. 
(b)  Notice. If a complaint or application for a hearing or warrant is filed by an animal control officer with the municipal court, the clerk of the court shall set the case for a hearing and shall give notice of the hearing to the owner of the animal in the complaint by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, a least ten days prior to the hearing date. Personal service may be completed by the animal control officer. 
(c)  Impoundment pending hearing. If the animal has not already been impounded, the animal control officer shall seize and impound the animal upon personal service of the notice of hearing on the owner, or three days after the notice of hearing is mailed to the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess and fail to release to an animal control officer an animal that has been made the subject of a hearing under this article. No person shall be allowed to reclaim the animal while a hearing under this article is pending. 
(d)  Purpose of hearing. The purpose of the hearing is for the court to determine if the animal specified in the complaint is a dangerous animal. 
(e)  Result of hearing. 
(1)  If the court finds that the animal is a dangerous animal: 
a.  The court shall order that the animal be destroyed or permanently removed from the city, based on the least restrictive means necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community according to all of the evidence presented. 
b.  If the owner is not present at the hearing, the clerk shall notify the owner of that decision as well as the ordered disposition of the animal, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. Personal service may be completed by the animal control officer. 
c.  The court shall order that the owner of the animal pay any fees due for the impoundment of the animal prior to the release of the animal. 
d.  If the court orders the removal of the animal from the city, the owner shall have five days from the date of the order to remove the animal. The owner must provide proof of the removal to both the court and animal control within five days after the deadline to remove. Proof of removal shall be considered adequate if and only if it includes both the address of the animal's new permanent location, as well as the new owner's information if applicable. If adequate proof is not provided to the court within the required time, an animal control officer shall investigate and if the animal is found within the city, the animal control officer shall be authorized to immediately seize and impound the animal. Upon impoundment of such animal, the animal becomes the property of the city and it shall be humanely destroyed. If the animal has been previously removed from the city or is not present in the city on the date of the hearing, not including the placement of the animal in the animal shelter, the court shall order that the animal shall be permanently banned from the city and not be allowed to return. Failure to comply with these provisions in a timely manner will result in immediate forfeiture of ownership of the animal and the animal becomes the property of the animal shelter. 
e.  If the court orders the destruction of the animal, the clerk or the animal control officer shall notify the facility where the animal is kept. 
(2)  If the court finds that the animal is not a dangerous animal, the animal shall be released to the owner upon payment by the owner of any fees due. 
(f)  Unlawful to disobey court order. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess and fail to release an animal that has been ordered destroyed or removed by the court to an animal control officer. If a removed animal is found within the city, it shall be impounded and become the property of the animal shelter. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1606; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-260. - Law enforcement defense. 
    It is a defense to enforcement under this article that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or of a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; provided, however, that for any person to qualify for this defense, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his official duties in regard to the dangerous animal. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1607; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-261. - Other defenses. 
    It is a defense to enforcement under this article that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal; provided, however, that for any person to qualify for this defense, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his official duties in regard to the dangerous animal. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1608; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-262-8-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SALE OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-286. - Commerce in live animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away or display for commercial purposes a live animal on a roadside, public right-of-way, sidewalk, street, parkway or any other public property or any property dedicated to public use, a commercial parking lot, or at an outdoor special sale, swap meet, flea market, parking lot sale or similar event. This article does not apply to a sale held on privately owned property with the written permission of the owner of the property or a parking lot where the seller has the parking lot owner's written permission. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1701; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-287. - Condition of sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away or display for commercial purposes any animal unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All animals sold or transferred shall be a minimum of eight weeks of age, unless sold with the mother. 
(2)  Each animal transferred shall be born and raised until at least eight weeks of age in Williamson or Travis Counties at a facility operating and licensed pursuant to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(3)  If the animal is kept in a cage or pen, the cage or pen must be large enough for the animal to stand on all of its legs and hold its head in a natural position and not be in a crouched position. The cage or pen must also have enough room for the animal to turn around or move naturally without stepping on another animal, animal feces, or food or water provided for the animal. 
(4)  The cage or pen must have water and food contained therein or have water and food situated so that the animal has access to it through the cage or pen. 
(5)  The cage or pen must be situated so that air may circulate through it, so that any animal kept therein is not exposed to extreme heat. During cold or inclement weather, cages or pens shall be situated so that animals contained therein shall stay warm and dry. 
(6)  The flooring of the cage or pen must be made of a solid, non-permeable material. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1702; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-288. - Sale of dyed animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, raffle, offer or give as a prize, premium or advertising device, give away or display any animal that has been dyed or otherwise artificially colored. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1703; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-289-8-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-310. - Property owners may impound. 
    Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may remove the same to any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. If no such shelter is available, the property owner may hold the animal in his own possession and, as soon as possible, notify animal control. The property owner shall provide a description of the animal and the name of the owner, if known. Animal control shall dispatch an animal control officer to take possession of the animal. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1800; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-311. - Reasons for impoundment. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, an animal control officer or a police officer may seize, impound, and humanely confine to the animal shelter any of the following animals: 
(1)  Any dog or cat without a valid, microchip; 
(2)  Any animal at large; 
(3)  Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public; 
(4)  Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of the local rabies control authority; 
(5)  Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of care; 
(6)  Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected; 
(7)  Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies; 
(8)  Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or dangerous where an animal control officer determines that there is a threat to public health and safety; 
(9)  Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; 
(10)  Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his regular place of residence; 
(11)  Any exotic or wild animal that is kept illegally; 
(12)  Any animal that is in violation of this article or whose owner is in violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1901; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-312. - Issuance of notice or citation. 
    In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, an animal control officer or a police officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a citation for a violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 2.1902; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-313. - Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter. 
    The animal shelter board of directors shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations regarding the operation of the shelter, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The length of impoundment of animals, 
(2)  When impounded animals become the property of the animal shelter, 
(3)  Dealing with sick or injured animals, 
(4)  Procedures for reclaiming impounded animals, 
(5)  Impoundment fees, 
(6)  Voluntary release by owner to the animal shelter, and 
(7)  Release in lieu of impoundment. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, adopted Dec. 20, 2018, deleted §§ 8-313-8-319, and added new provisions as § 8-313 as set out herein above. Former §§ 8-313-8-319 derived from: Code 1995, §§ 2.1901.1, 2.1902.1 and 2.1903-2.1907; Ord. No. G-05-10-27-12A1, adopted Oct. 27, 2005; and Ord. No. G-06-08-24-13D1, adopted Aug. 24, 2006. 
Secs. 8-314-8-341. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-342. - Establishment. 
    The chief of police shall appoint an animal control officer and such assistants as may be required to enforce this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2001; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-343. - Supervisor. 
    The supervisor of animal control is hereby designated as the local health authority for the purposes of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826 (Rabies Control Act of 1981) and shall be responsible for performing duties and responsibilities provided herein. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2002; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-344. - Enforcement duties. 
(a)  Animal control officers or other designees of the chief of police shall be the enforcement officials for this chapter as well as all other applicable animal related ordinances contained within the city Code and state laws. These officials, along with police officers, shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city and animal control in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter and other animal related ordinances within the city Code including the rules established in section 26-26. 
(b)  An animal control officer or peace officer may apply for and obtain a warrant or other legal writ from the municipal judge or justice court to seize any animal alleged to be in violation of this chapter. The municipal judge or justice of the peace shall have the authority to issue such warrant. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2101; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-345. - Interference with animal control officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal control officer or other enforcement official in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2102; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-346. - Self defense. 
    Upon attack by an animal, an animal control officer can defend himself or a complainant, at his discretion, taking such means as he deems necessary in that situation. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2103; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-347. - Private property. 
    For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter, and to enforce the same, an animal control officer or other authorized representative may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law, which shall include, but not be limited to, entry upon private property when in pursuit of any animal which he or she has reason to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws. An animal control officer shall have the right to pursue and apprehend an animal which is at large or a free-roaming cat onto private property without first requesting permission from the owner of the property before entering the property or without obtaining a search warrant. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2104; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-348. - Entry and inspection. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter or other applicable law regarding animals, or whenever an animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building, structure or upon any premises any violations of this chapter or other applicable law, the officer is hereby authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter or other applicable law, provided that if such property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request to enter, explaining the reason therefor and obtaining permission from said occupant. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or the maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall have the right to immediately enter and make such inspection, whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of inspection. 
(c)  Whenever an animal control officer is denied admission to inspect any premises under this chapter and the officer cannot determine whether violations exist on the premises, the animal control officer is authorized to request a warrant for the inspection of the premises from the municipal judge, a magistrate, or justice court to enter and inspect the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2105; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-349. - Violations. 
    It shall be a violation of the chapter to: 
(1)  Fail to comply with any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Fail to comply with any lawful order of animal control, an animal control officer, or police officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed. 
(Code 1995, § 2.2200; Ord. No. G-03-12-04-7B1, 12-4-2003; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - BEEKEEPING 

Sec. 8-351. - Apiary maintenance. 
(a)  A person shall keep a bee colony in a Langstroth-type hive with removable frames that is maintained in sound and usable condition. 
(b)  A person shall provide a source of water to a bee colony to prevent the bees from congregating at a water source used by a human, bird, or domestic pet. 
(c)  A person shall store or dispose of bee comb or other material removed from a hive in a sealed container, building, or other bee-proof enclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-352. - Hive location. 
(a)  A person may not locate a hive within ten feet of the property line of a tract, as measured from the nearest point of the hive to the property line. 
(b)  A person who keeps a bee colony within 25 feet of the property line of a tract, as measured from the nearest point of a hive to the property line, shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier parallel to the property line. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-353. - Control of aggressive bee colony. 
(a)  A person shall immediately replace the queen in a bee colony that exhibits aggressive characteristics, including stinging or attempting to sting without provocation, or a disposition towards swarming. A person required to replace a queen under this subsection shall select the replacement from bee stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics. 
(b)  As required for swarm management, a person may maintain a nucleus bee colony for each two bee colonies allowed under this chapter. A person may house a nucleus bee colony in a structure not exceeding a standard 9-5/8 inch depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached. A person shall dispose of or combine a nucleus bee colony with an authorized bee colony not later than the 30th day after the date the nucleus bee colony is acquired. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-354. - Bee colony density. 
    A person may not keep more than: 
(1)  Two bee colonies on a tract one-quarter acre or smaller; 
(2)  Four bee colonies on a tract larger than one-quarter acre but smaller than one-half acre; 
(3)  Six bee colonies on a tract one-half acre or more but smaller than one acre; 
(4)  Eight bee colonies on a tract one acre or more; 
(5)  A person may keep an unlimited number of bee colonies on a tract in which all hives are located at least 200 feet from each property line of the tract; or adjacent to vacant property for at least 200 feet from any hive. Vacant property means property that is not improved for human use or occupancy, including property used as a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-355. - Hive identification. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), a person shall post a conspicuous sign displaying the apiary owner's name and telephone number at the entrance to the apiary tract. 
(b)  A person is not required to place owner identification on or near a bee colony located on a tract on which the owner resides. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-356. - Enforcement. 
    An owner found to be in violation of any provision contained herein article XIV shall have their bees declared a public nuisance and will be subject to all penalties under section 8-3. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-357-8-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FERAL CATS 

Sec. 8-361. - Establishment of a feral cat colony. 
(a)  A feral cat colony may be established within the city limits of Round Rock, provided, that the citizen wishing to establish the feral cat colony agrees to become the feral cat colony caretaker and obtains written permission from the animal control supervisor to be renewed on a yearly basis. 
(b)  Feral cat colonies within the city limits of Round Rock must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  No feral cat colony shall be established on public or private property without first obtaining written permission from the property owner; and 
(2)  No feral cats shall be brought into a feral cat colony from outside the city limits of Round Rock. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-362. - Requirements for feral cats. 
    The feral cat colony caretaker shall be responsible to ensure that every cat within the feral cat colony has met each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Sterilization by a licensed veterinarian resulting in a tipped ear for recognition purposes; and 
(2)  Vaccination against communicable diseases, particularly rabies, in accordance with best practices for feral cats by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-363. - Record keeping. 
(a)  The feral cat colony caretaker must maintain accurate records of the feral cat colonies in their trap, neuter, and return program. The records must include: 
(1)  The location and size of each feral cat colony; and 
(2)  The date and veterinary clinic location for each feral cat's spay/neuter; and 
(3)  The date of vaccination against the rabies virus in accordance with section 8-164. 
(b)  The animal control unit may request copies of these records at any time. Failure to provide such records may result in the revocation of the permit to operate a feral cat colony by the animal control supervisor under section 8-361. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Sec. 8-364. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any feral cat impounded by animal control shall be identified by its left ear tip and immediately released to the appropriate feral cat colony unless one of the following exceptions is made: 
(1)  A feral cat has been impounded multiple times on the same property, and the property owner wishes to have the feral cat declared a public nuisance under section 8-3. If a feral cat is declared a public nuisance, the feral cat colony caretaker shall be given seven days to relocate the cat outside of the city limits of Round Rock. 
(2)  A feral cat that has been determined by an animal control to require immediate veterinary care shall be impounded and taken to the Williamson County Regional Animal Shelter or a licensed veterinarian for any necessary treatment. If the feral cat is to be reclaimed, the feral cat colony caretaker shall be responsible for paying all accrued medical expenses prior to the release of the cat back into their custody. 
(3)  A feral cat has bitten any human that requires the animal to be immediately quarantined for rabies observation in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826, subch. E. If the feral cat is to be reclaimed, the feral cat colony caretaker shall be responsible for paying all accrued quarantine expenses prior to the release of the cat back into their custody. 
(b)  Any feral cat impounded at the animal shelter under article XV may be immediately returned by any citizen to the location where it was initially trapped provided: 
(1)  The feral cat has met all requirements outlined by section 8-362; and 
(2)  The feral cat has not been declared a public nuisance under section 8-3. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to immediately seize and remove any and all feral cats from a feral cat colony if: 
(1)  A feral cat colony violates any section contained herein article XV; or 
(2)  The feral cat colony poses a risk to public health or safety due to a suspected exposure to the rabies virus or any other zoonotic or epizootic diseases; or 
(3)  Any feral cat is declared a public nuisance under section 8-3, and the colony caretaker fails to remove the feral cat from the city limits of Round Rock within the seven-day enforcement period; or 
(4)  Any other reason not listed in section 8-364 if the animal control supervisor determines continuation of the feral cat's residency is not in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § I, 12-20-2018) 
Secs. 8-365-8-390. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418. 

Sec. 12-1. - Director of emergency management-Established. 
    There is hereby established the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 12-4. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2001) 
Sec. 12-2. - Same-Duties, generally. 
    The powers and duties of the director shall include the causing of an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council, along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2002) 
Sec. 12-3. - Same-Duties, specifically. 
    The duties and responsibilities of thE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTor shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization, as well as the training of the emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations, or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2004) 
Sec. 12-4. - Participation with county and other cities. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Williamson and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Williamson and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2003) 
State Law reference- Local and interjurisdictional emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 
Sec. 12-5. - Members of the emergency management organization. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2005) 
Sec. 12-6. - Unauthorized warning signals. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2006) 
Sec. 12-7. - These orders, rules, and regulations to supersede others. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2007) 
Sec. 12-8. - Chapter not to conflict with state or federal law. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2008) 
Sec. 12-9. - City not liable. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2009) 
Sec. 12-10. - City council approval required to expend funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2010) 
Sec. 12-11. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine as provided for in section 1-9. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2011) 
Sec. 12-12. - Loyalty oath. 
    Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility under the authority of this chapter shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of the State of Texas, and the ordinances of the City of Round Rock. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2012; Ord. No. 929, 12-22-1981) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-03-08-8B4, § I, adopted Mar. 8, 2012, repealed art. II, §§ 14-19-14-33, entitled "Tree Protection and Preservation", which derived from: Code 1995, §§ 3.1102-3.1116; Ord. No. G-05-01-13-9B1, adopted Jan. 13, 2005; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9C4, arts. 1-11, adopted Aug. 26, 2010; and Ord. No. G-11-08-25-8A5, arts. 1-11, adopted Aug. 25, 2011. 

Secs. 14-19-14-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC AND PRIVATE WATER WELLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private water well means any artificial excavation constructed for the purpose of exploring for and producing groundwater for any use by a private individual or entity, and the system for provision of the groundwater does not meet the federal and state definitions of a public water system. 
    Public water well means any artificial excavation constructed for the purpose of exploring for and producing groundwater for human consumption by a private individual or entity which is part of a system for the provision of groundwater, and said system meets the state definition of a public water system. 
    Water well means a public water well or private water well and means and refers to both. 
    Well means a water well. 
(Code 1995, § 6.301) 
Sec. 14-56. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drill or attempt to drill any water well within the corporate limits of this city except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect in any manner a private water well system to the city's water supply or distribution system. 
(Code 1995, § 6.302) 
Sec. 14-57. - Permits. 
(a)  No water well may be drilled without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city engineer. 
(b)  The application for a water well permit shall include the location of the well; name, address and telephone number of the owner; and name, address and telephone number of the well driller. 
(c)  The fee for a water well permit shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 6.303) 
Sec. 14-58. - Location of public and private well sites. 
(a)  Water wells shall be so located to protect the water supply of the well by means of sanitary control and shall be so located that there will be no danger of pollution from flooding or from unsanitary surroundings, such as cesspools, privies, sewage, livestock and animal pens, solid waste disposal sites, or abandoned and improperly sealed wells. 
(b)  The construction and operation of underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, stock pens, feedlots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tank or sewage treatment drainfields, improperly constructed water wells of any depth, and all other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition is prohibited within a 150-foot radius of a public water well. For the purpose of this subsection, improperly constructed public water wells are those wells which do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water well. 
(c)  The construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries is prohibited within a 50-foot radius of a public water well. 
(d)  No well site shall be located or selected which is within 500 feet of a sewage treatment plant or within 300 feet of a sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, or a drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems. 
(e)  No water wells shall be located within 500 feet of animal feed lots, solid waste disposal sites, lands on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is applied, or lands irrigated by sewage plant effluent. 
(f)  Livestock in pastures shall not be allowed within 50 feet of a water well. 
(g)  All known abandoned or inoperative wells (unused wells that have not been plugged) within one-quarter mile of a proposed well site shall be reported to the city and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality along with existing or potential pollution hazards. This information must be submitted prior to construction. 
(Code 1995, § 6.304; Ord. No. G-03-11-25-11E1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 14-59. - Premises, materials, tools, and drilling equipment. 
    The premises, materials, tools and drilling equipment shall be maintained so as to minimize contamination of the underground water during the drilling operation. 
(1)  Water used in any drilling operation shall be of safe, sanitary quality. 
(2)  The slush pit shall be constructed and maintained so as to minimize contamination of the drilling mud. 
(3)  No temporary toilet facilities shall be maintained within 150 feet of a well being constructed unless they are of a sealed, leakproof type. 
(Code 1995, § 6.305) 
Sec. 14-60. - Right of entry. 
    The city engineer or his authorized representative may enter any premises at all reasonable times to make an inspection or enforce any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.306) 
Sec. 14-61. - Conditions for the construction, disinfection, protection and testing of a public water well. 
    The construction, disinfection, protection, and testing of a well to be used as a water supply source must meet the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) under the Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, chapter 290, subchapter D, as amended, and the following conditions. In case of conflict between the TCEQ rules and regulations and the conditions set forth in this section, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  Drilling records and well completion data shall be maintained accurately and copies made available to the owner, as well as the city engineer or other city departments. Before placing the well into service, the city engineer shall be furnished a copy of the well completion data, which includes the following items: 
a.  The driller's log (geological log and material setting report); 
b.  A cementing certificate; 
c.  The results of a 36-hour pump test; 
d.  The results of the microbiological and chemical analyses required by subsections (7) and (12) of this section; and 
e.  An original or legible copy of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 Minute Topographic Quadrangle showing the accurate well location to the city engineer. 
All the documents listed in this section must be approved by the city engineer before final approval is granted. 
(2)  The casing material used in the construction of wells shall be new carbon steel, high-strength, low-alloy steel, stainless steel or plastic and the material shall conform to the American Waterworks Association Standards. The casing shall extend a minimum of 18 inches above the elevation of the finished floor of the pump room or natural ground surface and a minimum of one inch above the sealing block or pump motor foundation block, when provided. The casing shall extend at least to the depth of the shallowest water formation to be developed and deeper, if necessary, in order to eliminate all undesirable water-bearing strata. Well construction materials containing more than eight percent lead are prohibited. 
(3)  The space between the casing and drill hole shall be sealed by using sufficient cement under pressure to provide for completely filling and sealing of the annular space between the casing and the drill hole. The well casing shall be cemented in this manner from the top of the shallowest formation to be developed to the earth's surface. The driller shall utilize a pressure cementation method in accordance with the American Waterworks Association Standard for Water Wells (A100-97), appendix C; section C.3 (positive displacement exterior method); section C.4 (interior method without plug); section C.5 (positive placement, interior method, drillable plug); section C.6 (placement through float attached to bottom of casing). Cementation methods other than those listed in this subsection may be used on a site-specific basis with the prior written approval of the city engineer. A cement bonding log, as well as any other documentation deemed necessary, may be required by the city engineer to assure complete sealing of the annular space. 
(4)  In all cases, a concrete sealing block extending at least three feet from the well casing in all directions, with a minimum thickness of six inches, and sloped to drain away at not less than one-fourth or three inches per foot, shall be provided around the well head. 
(5)  Well heads and pump bases shall be sealed by gaskets or sealing compounds and properly vented to prevent the possibility of contaminating the well water. A well casing vent shall be provided with an opening that is covered with 16-mesh or finer corrosion-resistant screen, and facing downward, elevated and located so as to minimize the drawing of contaminants into the well. Wellheads and well vents shall be at least two feet above the highest known watermark or 100-year flood elevation, if available, or adequately protected from possible flood damage by levees. 
(6)  Safeguards shall be taken to prevent possible contamination of the water or damage by trespassers following the completion of the well and prior to installation of permanent pumping equipment. 
(7)  Upon well completion, or after an existing well has been reworked, the well shall be disinfected in accordance with current American Waterworks Association Standards for well disinfection except that the disinfectant shall remain in the well for at least six hours. 
a.  Before placing the well in service, the water containing the disinfectant shall be flushed from the well, and the samples of water shall be collected and submitted for microbiological analysis until three successive daily raw water samples are free of coliform organisms. The analysis of these samples must be conducted by a laboratory approved by the state department of health. 
b.  Appropriate facilities for treatment of the water shall be provided where a satisfactory microbiological record cannot be established after repeated disinfection. The extent of water treatment required will be determined on the basis of geological data, well construction features, nearby sources of contamination and, if necessary, on the basis of quantitative microbiological analyses. 
(8)  A suitable sampling cock shall be provided on the discharge pipe of each well pump prior to any treatment. 
(9)  If a well blowoff line is provided, its discharge shall terminate in a downward direction and at a point which will not be submerged by floodwaters. 
(10)  The well site shall be fine graded so that the site is free from depressions, reverse grades, or areas too rough for proper ground maintenance so as to ensure that surface water will drain away from the well. In all cases, arrangements shall be made to convey well pump drainage, packing gland leakage, and floor drainage away from the wellhead. Suitable drain pipes located at the outer edge of the concrete floor shall be provided to collect this water and prevent its ponding or collecting around the wellhead. This wastewater shall be disposed of in a manner that will not cause any mosquito breeding or stagnation. Drains shall not be directly connected to storm or sanitary sewers. 
(11)  When a gravel packed well is constructed, all gravel shall be of selected and graded quality and shall be thoroughly disinfected with a 50 mg/l chlorine solution as it is added to the well cavity. 
(12)  A complete physical and chemical analysis of the water produced from a new well shall be made after 36 hours of continuous pumping at the design withdrawal rate. Shorter pump test periods can be accepted for large capacity wells producing from areas of known groundwater production and quality so as to prevent wasting of water. Samples must be submitted to a certified laboratory for chemical analyses. Tentative approval may be given on the basis of tests performed by in-plant or private laboratories but final acceptance by the city engineer shall be on the basis of results from the certified laboratory. Appropriate treatment shall be provided if the analyses reveal that the water from the well fails to meet the water quality criteria as prescribed by the drinking water standards. These criteria include turbidity, color and threshold odor limitations, and excessive hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide or other constituents or mineral which make the water undesirable or unsuited for domestic use. Additional chemical and microbiological tests may be required after the city engineer conducts a vulnerability assessment of the well. 
(13)  Below ground level pump rooms and pump pits will not be allowed in connection with water supply installations. 
(14)  Flow measuring devices shall be provided for each well to measure production yields and provide for the accumulation of water production data. These devices shall be located to facilitate daily readings. 
(15)  All completed well units shall be protected by intruder-resistant fences, the gates of which are provided with locks or shall be enclosed in locked, ventilated well houses to exclude possible contamination or damage to the facilities by trespassers. The gates or wellhouses shall be locked during periods of darkness and when the plant is unattended. 
(16)  An all-weather access road shall be provided to each well site. 
(17)  If an air release device is provided on the discharge piping, it shall be installed in such a manner as to preclude the possibility of submergence or possible entrance of contaminants. In this respect, all openings to the atmosphere shall be covered with 16-mesh or finer, corrosion-resistant screening material or an acceptable equivalent. 
(18)  Upon completion of the water well, the following reports shall be required: 
a.  The water well driller shall submit a copy of the drilling log, the size of the pump, and the pump setting. 
b.  The casing contractor shall submit a report detailing the size, depth, material used, and wall thickness of the casing. 
c.  The cementing contractor shall submit a report of the specification of the cementing. 
(Code 1995, § 6.307; Ord. No. G-03-11-25-11E1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 14-62. - Abandoned or inoperative wells. 
    All abandoned wells or inoperative wells shall be plugged in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the state department of licensing and regulation under the 16 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 76, as amended. 
(Code 1995, § 6.308; Ord. No. 754, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. G-03-04-24-13F1, 4-24-2003; Ord. No. G-03-11-25-11E1, 11-25-2003) 
Sec. 14-63. - Construction and completion of private water wells. 
    Construction and completion of private water wells shall be performed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of licensing and regulation under the 16 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 76, as amended. 
(Code 1995, § 6.309; Ord. No. G-03-11-25-11E1, 11-25-2003) 
Secs. 14-64-14-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14-85-14-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14-113-14-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES OF POLLUTANTS INTO THE MS4 OR CONVEYANCES 

Sec. 14-139. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to any and all dischargers (as herein defined) within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1101), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-140. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this definitions section, except when the context otherwise requires. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the federal and state laws regulating illicit discharge, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires. 
    Calendar day. When the term "day" is used herein, unless specifically defined otherwise, the term shall mean any day of the week, including Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, with no days being excepted. 
    Chief means the city employee fulfilling the duties of and holding the title of chief of public works operations, or similar subsequent title designation, or his designee. 
    City staff means employees of any of the city's public works departments, authorized to act on the department's behalf by the chief of public works operations. 
    Construction activity means the disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, grubbing, demolition or excavating activities or other construction activities. 
    Conveyance means any of the following, by way of illustration and not limitation: Stream, channel, drainage way, drainage/dry well, ephemeral stream, floodplain, karst feature, storm drainage system, drainage system appurtenance, waterbody, watercourse or waterway. 
    Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or conveyances. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency. 
    Extremely hazardous substance means any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR 355, emergency planning and notification. 
    Facility means any building, structure, installation, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Fire department means the Fire Department of the City of Round Rock, Texas, and any other fire departments with which the City of Round Rock has mutual assistance or mutual aid agreements. 
    Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance due to volume or concentration that will cause pollution. 
    Hazardous material means any material (including any substance, waste, or combination thereof) which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. This term shall include household hazardous wastes as classified under 40 CFR 261, hazardous substances as listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302, and hazardous wastes identified or listed by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261. 
    Illicit connection means any connection to the MS4 or conveyances that allows for an illicit discharge. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect discharge of pollutant to the MS4 or conveyances, except as specifically exempted in this article. 
    Industrial activity means any activity at an industrial facility described by the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit, TXR050000, or by any other TCEQ or TPDES permit including any of the following, by way of illustration and not of limitation: manufacturing, processing, materials storage, and waste materials disposal. 
    Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business. 
    Motor vehicle fluids means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle. 
    Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means the storm drainage system operated and maintained by the city which is comprised of the following: the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff. 
    Notice of intent (NOI) means the notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. This term shall include used oil that has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
    Operator means the person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two criteria: 
(1)  He has operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and 
(2)  He has the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, lessees, or assigns. This term shall also include all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    Petroleum storage tank (PST) means any one or a combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks or connecting underground pipes that contain petroleum products that are obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that are capable of being used as a fuel. 
    Pollutant means a substance, the entrance of which causes or contributes to a violation of applicable water quality standards as defined by the Clean Water Act. This term includes but is not limited to paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and other automotive fluids, yard wastes, trash, sediments, household chemicals, detergents, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, hazardous materials, sewage, animal wastes, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water, and other materials exposed to stormwater as a result of construction activity. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or conveyances. 
    Sanitary sewer or sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, trash, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities. 
    Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by either the construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the facility. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, or any duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) means the program delegated to the State of Texas by EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b). 
    Trash means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and 
(2)  Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal objects, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Washwater means any water containing pollutants from the act of cleaning parking lots, vehicles, or building exteriors. 
    Wastewater means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showering, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater that is free from industrial waste including from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions. 
    Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in 31 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 307. 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1102), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-141. - Minimum standards. 
    The standards set forth in this article are minimum standards; therefore, no inference is intended that compliance with this article will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. Additionally, no inference is intended that compliance with this article will serve to extend any deadline established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor is any inference intended that compliance with this article will relieve a discharger of liability for any violation or continuing violation. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1103), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-142. - Compliance obligations. 
(a)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit or any other state or federal regulations. Prior to the city allowing discharges to the MS4 or conveyances, the city may require proof of such compliance in a form acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Every person owning property through which a conveyance passes shall have the obligation to keep and maintain that part of the conveyance within that property free of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1104), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-143. - General prohibition; affirmative defenses. 
(a)  General prohibition. No person within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall introduce, cause to be introduced, discharge, or cause to be discharged into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or any conveyances any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. Such prohibition includes commencement of any illicit discharge into the MS4 or any conveyances, and continuation of any illicit discharge into the MS4 or any conveyances. 
(b)  Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(2)  A discharge authorized by a TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under authority of the TCEQ or USEPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, order, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(3)  A discharge resulting from fire fighting/fire suppression activities. 
(4)  A discharge of fire protection water from standard municipal operations and training that does not contain oil or hazardous substances or materials that are required to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge. 
(5)  A discharge resulting from the standard municipal operations of street sweeping and street washing activities, which discharge is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance. 
(6)  A discharge from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means unless the total residual chlorine (TRC) has been reduced to less than one ppm (part per million) and it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection. 
(7)  A discharge from a potable water source not containing any harmful quantity of a substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container. 
(8)  A discharge from lawn watering or landscape irrigation. 
(9)  A discharge from individual residential car washing. 
(10)  A discharge from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant. 
(11)  Swimming pool water that has been dechlorinated so that total residual chlorine (TRC) is less than one ppm (part per million) and that contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning. 
(12)  Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant. 
(13)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring. 
(14)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater, rising groundwater, or groundwater infiltration to storm drains. 
(15)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, as defined by 40 CFR 35.2005(20), to the MS4. 
(16)  Uncontaminated discharge from a foundation or footing drain (excluding active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pump, or sump pump. 
(c)  No affirmative defense shall be available under this article if the discharge in question has been previously determined by the city to be a source of a pollutant to the MS4 or any conveyances, and written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger. The city's determination that a discharge is a source of a pollutant may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1105), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-144. - Specific prohibitions. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in section 14-143(a). 
(b)  No person shall introduce, cause to be introduced, discharge, or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or conveyances any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(c)  No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4 or conveyances: 
(1)  Any motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid. 
(2)  Any industrial waste. 
(3)  Any hazardous material, including household hazardous waste, hazardous substances, and hazardous waste. 
(4)  Any wastewater or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste. 
(5)  Any garbage, trash, or yard waste, specifically including but not limited to pressure-treated wood, painted wood, painted wood pallets, laminated wood, insulation, and particle board. 
(6)  Any discharge from a carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates more than four such vehicles. 
(7)  Any discharge from a mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance. 
(8)  Any discharge from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning. 
(9)  Any discharge from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any discharge from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed. 
(10)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blowdown from a boiler. 
(11)  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or material from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such materials. 
(12)  Any runoff or washdown water from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24. 
(13)  Any swimming pool, fountain, or spa water, including backwash water, containing total residual chlorine (TRC) of one ppm (part per million) or more or containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning. 
(14)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if the total residual chlorine (TRC) is at one ppm (part per million) or more or if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection. 
(15)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous materials that are required to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. This prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from fire fighting/fire suppression activities. 
(16)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or storage yard. 
(17)  Any substance or material that will damage the MS4. 
(18)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
a.  Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; and 
b.  No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant. 
(19)  Any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material which is associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other such construction activities, or which is associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials. 
(20)  Any pavement washwater from a service station unless such washwater has passed through a properly functioning and maintained grease, oil, and sand separator before discharge into the MS4 or conveyances. 
(21)  Any introduction of oil into the environment, specifically including but not limited to oil applied to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use; any introduction of oil commingled or mixed with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill; any introduction of oil by direct disposal on land or in a landfill; or any introduction of oil into the MS4 or conveyances, or into any septic tank. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1106), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-145. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
    The construction of, use of, maintenance of, or continued use of a new or existing illicit connection to the MS4 or any conveyances is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes any illicit connection made before passage of the ordinance codified in this article, regardless of whether such connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is deemed to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying wastewater or industrial waste to the MS4 or any conveyances, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1107), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-146. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. City staff shall have the right to enter any facility or site, including industrial and construction facilities or sites, which are discharging to the MS4 or any conveyances to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. Dischargers shall allow city staff immediate access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, and copying, and for the performance of any additional inspections or duties. Dischargers shall make available to city staff, upon request, any SWPPPs (storm water pollution prevention plans), modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
(1)  Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, city staff will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing the city's responsibilities. 
(2)  City staff shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation on the discharger's property, of such devices as city staff deem necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations. 
(3)  City staff may require any discharger to the MS4 or any conveyances to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges at the discharger's expense, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
(4)  City staff may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of city staff and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing city staff access to the discharger's premises shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrant. If city staff has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1108), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-147. - Requirement for notification of spills. 
(a)  Discovery, containment and cleanup procedure. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any discharger or operator of a facility or operation, or person responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in an illicit discharge, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such discharge. 
(1)  Hazardous materials spill. In the event of discharge of hazardous materials, the discharger shall immediately notify emergency response agencies. Once the immediate threat has been properly contained, the discharger shall notify the city via its chief of public works operations. 
(2)  Nonhazardous materials spill. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the discharger shall notify the city, via its chief of public works operations, in person or by telephone no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the chief within three business days of the telephone notice. 
(b)  Record of discharge from commercial or industrial establishment. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain on site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1109), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-148. - Enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Notice of violation. When city staff believes that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the chief, or his designee, may serve upon the alleged violator a written notice of violation. Within ten days of mailing of such notice of violation, the alleged violator shall submit to the chief a written explanation of the violation and a written plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of recurrence thereof, including specific required actions. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, a written explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the chief within seven days of receipt of the notice of violation. Submission of an explanation and/or plan shall in no way relieve the alleged violator of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing herein shall limit the authority of the city and the chief to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, in the absence of issuance of a notice of violation. 
(b)  Voluntary consent order. The city, via its chief of public works operations, may enter into a voluntary consent order, an assurance of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreement with any violator non-compliant with any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder. Such document may include specific action to be taken by the violator to correct non-compliance within a time period specified by the chief. Such agreement shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to this article, and same shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Mandatory compliance order. When city staff finds that any discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the chief may issue a mandatory compliance order to the violator ordering any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Compliance within time limit. Directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit. Such an order also may contain other requirements to address noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 or conveyances. 
(2)  Remediation, abatement, and/or restoration. Directing that the violator (if the violation has adversely affected the MS4 or conveyances or any other aspect of the environment) undertake and implement any appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4 or conveyances or any other aspect of the environment, and/or to restore any part of the MS4 or conveyances or any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may include but shall not be limited to: monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollutant or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, safety, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. Such an order may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. Any expenses related to the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration incurred by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the person deemed responsible by the chief. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner, as determined by decision of the city, then the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(3)  Emergency cease and desist. Directing that the violator immediately cease and desist from all violations (if the violations have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or any conveyances which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety, or welfare of persons or to the environment; or if past violations are likely to recur). The emergency cease and desist order may also direct the violator to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all chapter requirements; and 
b.  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Any violator notified of an emergency cease and desist order shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate the endangering discharge. In the event of a violator's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency cease and desist order, the city and city staff may take such steps as it/they deem necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or conveyances, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment. Any expenses related to the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration incurred by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the person deemed by the chief to be responsible. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner, as determined by decision of the city, then the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
The city may allow the violator to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of city staff that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the violator under this article. A violator that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit the following to the chief within five days of receipt of the emergency cease and desist order, a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(4)  Construction stop work order regarding illicit discharge. Whenever city staff finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the chief may order that a construction stop work order regarding illicit discharge be issued to the operator or person responsible, posted at the construction site, and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at such site. Unless express written exception is made by the city, the construction stop work order regarding illicit discharge shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, or any other city authorization necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a construction stop work order regarding illicit discharge shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
A mandatory compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor shall a mandatory compliance order relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
Issuance of a mandatory compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator or any responsible party. 
(d)  Disconnection from MS4. 
(1)  Any discharger in violation of this article may have its/their MS4 connection terminated by city staff, if such disconnection would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city has the right to require the violator to disconnect from the MS4 at the violator's expense, or require the discharger to take corrective action to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge. A discharger commits an offense if it reinstates an MS4 connection previously terminated pursuant to this article, without the prior written approval of the city. 
(2)  Without any prior notice, city staff may terminate a discharger's MS4 connection when such action is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or any conveyances. If the discharger fails to comply with any order issued in such an emergency, the city may take such steps as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or any conveyances, and to minimize danger to persons. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1110), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-149. - Right to reconsideration of enforcement provision. 
(a)  Any discharger subject to an order under section 14-148 may petition the city's chief of public works operations to reconsider the basis for the order within seven days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order. 
(b)  After the chief has reviewed relevant documents and evidence, he shall: 
(1)  Grant the petition; 
(2)  Deny the petition; or 
(3)  Grant the petition in part and deny it in part. 
The chief may modify the order as is appropriate based upon all the documents and evidence. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. The decision of the chief shall be final and shall be non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1111), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-150. - Civil remedies; injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a discharger has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city may avail itself of any and all civil remedies available to it, including petitioning the courts for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the discharger from activities which would create further violations or compelling the discharger to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1112), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-151. - Violation deemed public nuisance. 
    Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is therefore declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1113), 3-11-2010) 
Sec. 14-152. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  A discharger that violates any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, commits an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute. Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of an offense under this subsection. 
(b)  A discharger that violates any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence commits an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute. 
(c)  Any discharger who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute. 
(d)  In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(e)  The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator, and these actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9A1, § I(10.1114), 3-11-2010) 
Secs. 14-153-14-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STAGNANT WATER, FILTH, WEEDS AND RUBBISH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for this article, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342. 

Sec. 14-173. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abate means to eliminate or remedy by removal, repair, rehabilitation, demolition, remediation, storage, transportation, disposal or other means of waste management. 
    Building means a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of a person, animal, chattel, machine, equipment, or other moveable property. 
    Brush means scrub vegetation, dense undergrowth or piles of such scrub vegetation, dense undergrowth or tree limbs that have been cut. 
    Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal. 
    Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
    Garbage means all decayable wastes. 
    Impure or unwholesome matter means any matter which tends to, may, or could produce injury, death, or disease in human beings. 
    Non-platted vacant property means property that contains no buildings and for which there is not a final plat on file with the city. 
    Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition, or object which could attract rodents, reptiles or insects, or which causes material distress or discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
    Occupied means that there is a building on the property for which a temporary or final certificate of occupancy has been issued or that there is a residential building that has passed a final inspection. 
    Owner means a person having title to, or claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of real property. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation or other entity. 
    Platted vacant property means property that contains no structures and for which there is a final plat on file with the city. 
    Premises means all privately owned property, including vacant land or a building designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term includes a yard, ground, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, or other structure appurtenant to the property, any easements on the property, and the area from the boundary line of the property to the paved surface of the street or curb line adjacent to the property. 
    Refuse means an accumulation of worn out, used up, broken, rejected, or worthless materials, and includes discarded household appliances, garbage, rubbish, paper, or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable waste, including vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses. 
    Rubbish means nondecayable waste from a public or private establishment or residence. 
    Weeds means all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter that may create an unsanitary condition or become a harborage for rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests regardless of the height of the weeds. 
(Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.101), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-174. - Places where water may accumulate prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city to permit or allow holes or places on such premises where water may accumulate and become stagnant or to permit same to remain. 
(Code 1995, § 6.100; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.102), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-175. - Accumulation of stagnant water prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on such premises, to permit same to remain, or to cause the accumulation of stagnant water on adjacent property. 
(Code 1995, § 6.102; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.103), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-176. - Accumulation of any carrion, filth or other unwholesome matter prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth, garbage, refuse, trash, discarded household items, or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain on such premises. 
(Code 1995, § 6.103; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.104), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-177. - Accumulation of rubbish, brush, etc., prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city to permit rubbish, brush or any objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter to accumulate upon any such premises. 
(Code 1995, § 6.104; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.105), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-178. - Additional nuisances prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Maintain a building in a manner that is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, unsanitary conditions, dilapidation, obsolescence, disaster, damage, or abandonment or because it constitutes a fire hazard; 
(2)  Maintain a flea market in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard; 
(3)  Maintain premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin or disease-carrying pests; 
(4)  Discard refuse or create a hazardous visual obstruction on city-owned land or easements; 
(5)  Fill or block a drainage easement, fail to maintain a drainage easement, maintain a drainage easement in a manner that allows the easement to be clogged with debris, sediment or vegetation, or violate an agreement with the city to improve or maintain a drainage easement; or 
(6)  Discard refuse on property that is not authorized for that activity. 
(Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.106), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-179. - Accumulation of weeds. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the city, other than real property zoned for agricultural use, to permit weeds, brush or other vegetation on such premises to exceed the heights set forth below: 
(1)  12 inches on property zoned and occupied for any use other than agricultural; 
(2)  12 inches on all property located within 150 feet of property zoned and occupied for any use other than agricultural; 
(3)  24 inches on platted vacant property located more than 150 feet from property zoned and occupied for any use other than agricultural; and 
(4)  36 inches on non-platted vacant property located more than 150 feet from property zoned and occupied for any use other than agricultural. 
(b)  During the period beginning on March 1 and ending June 15 of each year, property containing concentrated wildflowers in areas where grasses and weeds do not exceed 24 inches in height is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.107), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-180. - Owner to abate nuisances after notification. 
(a)  Any owner of real property in the city that permits or allows any condition declared a nuisance in this article on such premises shall abate said nuisance within seven days after the city serves the owner with notice as set forth below. 
(b)  If the owner of property in the city does not abate the nuisance by the seventh day after notice is served, the city may: 
(1)  Do the work or make the required improvements; and 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(c)  A notice under this section is served on the date that the notice is: 
(1)  Personally delivered to the owner in writing; 
(2)  Mailed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  Published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
b.  Posted on or near the front door of a building on the property; or 
c.  Posted on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property, if the property contains no structures. 
(d)  If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (3) of this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as served on the date that such notice was mailed. 
(e)  In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by this section and assess its expenses as provided below. 
(Code 1995, § 6.105; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.108), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-181. - Charges for removal by city to be assessed to owner. 
    The charges and expenses incurred by the city under section 14-180 shall be assessed against the real property on which the work is done or improvements made. The charges to be collected by the city shall include, in addition to the aforesaid costs, the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, which sum is hereby found to be the cost to the city of administering the terms of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.106; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.109), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-182. - City to have privileged lien. 
(a)  The mayor, municipal health authority, or municipal official designated by the mayor shall cause a statement of such expenses incurred under section 14-181 to be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the real property upon which said work was done or improvements made is located. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The city shall have a privileged lien on such real property upon which said work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. The lien shall be inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The statement of expenses, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(b)  It is further provided that the city may bring suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. 
(Code 1995, § 6.107; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.110), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-183. - Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds. 
(a)  The city may abate, without notice, weeds that: 
(1)  Have grown higher than 48 inches; and 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 14-180. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the weeds; and 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's abatement of the weeds. 
(d)  The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the owner of the real property files with the city secretary a written request for a hearing. 
(e)  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. 
(f)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 14-181. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 14-182. 
(Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.111), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-184. - Additional authority to abate dangerous nuisances. 
(a)  The city may abate, without notice, any nuisance that is an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates any nuisance under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 14-180. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the city abated the nuisance; and 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's abatement of the nuisance. 
(d)  The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of a nuisance under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the nuisance, the owner of the real property files with the city secretary a written request for a hearing. 
(e)  An administrative hearing conducted under this subsection shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. 
(f)  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this subsection as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 14-181. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 14-182. 
(Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.112), 6-11-2009) 
Sec. 14-185. - Liability of officers of corporation. 
    In case the owner or occupant of any real property, lot, lots or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation or other entity, and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, or other officers of such corporation or entity shall be also severally liable for the penalties provided in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 6.108; Ord. No. 559, 9-14-1978; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9A1, § I(6.113), 6-11-2009) 
Secs. 14-186-14-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Presumption of unlawful noise, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01(c). 

Sec. 14-209. - General. 
(a)  This article is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the state, particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 217, subchapter C, and by virtue of the authority of the city, as granted to it by the citizens of the city and contained in article 2, section 2.01 of the city Charter. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to provide an objective framework whereby the officers of the city may act to ensure the safety and welfare of the citizens by adopting quantitatively defined measures to protect against the deleterious effects of excessive, prolonged, or otherwise undesirable noise. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.201), 11-8-2007; Ord. No. O-2019-0129, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 14-210. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings unless otherwise clearly indicated. All technical definitions not defined in this section will be interpreted in accordance with applicable publications and standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
    A-weighting means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
    Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Round Rock or his designated representative. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
    Daytime means 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. the same day. 
    dB(A) means the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
    Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specific location. 
    Domestic power tool means any mechanically, electrically, or gasoline motor-driven tool, including: 
(1)  Chainsaws; 
(2)  Lawn equipment; 
(3)  Drills; and 
(4)  Power sprayers. 
    Emergency work means any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees from rights-of-way, or abating life threatening conditions. 
    Impulsive sound means a sound having duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
    Measuring instrument means an instrument such as a sound level meter, integrating sound level meter, or dosimeter used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of ANSI standard S1.4-1983. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor. 
    Muffler means a sound dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Nighttime means 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
    Noise means any sound of a level and duration that is or can be harmful to human health, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property in the city. 
    Noise control ordinance means the Round Rock Noise Control Ordinance. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(2)  Exceeds the sound level limits set forth in this article; or 
(3)  Is plainly audible as defined in this section. 
    Outdoor music venue means a commercial property where sound equipment is used to amplify sound that is: 
(1)  Not fully enclosed by permanent, solid walls and a roof; or 
(2)  Allowed to project out of an exterior doorway that is routinely opened. 
    Plainly audible means any sound or noise from any source that can be clearly heard by a person with normal hearing faculties at a distance of 200 feet or more from the real property line of the source of the sound or noise. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property or structure thereon that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Real property line means either: 
(1)  The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another; or 
(2)  The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit in a multi-dwelling unit building. 
    Sound equipment means a loud speaker, public address system, amplification system, or other sound-producing device. 
    Sound level means the instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed. 
    Sound pressure level means 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base 10, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
    Zoning districts. For purposes of this article, the zoning districts established in subsection 46-132(a) are divided into two separate groups as follows: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  MH (Manufactured housing). 
b.  SF-1 (Single-family-large lot). 
c.  SF-2 (Single-family-standard lot). 
d.  SF-R (Single-family-rural). 
e.  SR (Senior). 
f.  TF (Two-family). 
g.  TH (Townhouse). 
h.  MU-L (Mixed-use limited) district. 
i.  Areas that are zoned PUD (planned unit development) that are exclusively residential in character. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial districts. 
a.  AG (Agricultural). 
b.  BP (Business park). 
c.  C-1 (General commercial). 
d.  C-1a (General commercial-limited). 
e.  C-2 (Local commercial). 
f.  LI (Light industrial). 
g.  MI (Mining). 
h.  I (Industrial). 
i.  OF (Office). 
j.  OS (Open space). 
k.  PF (Public facilities). 
l.  MU-1 (Mixed-use historic commercial core) district. 
m.  MU-2 (Mixed-use downtown medium density) district. 
n.  Areas that are zoned PUD and exhibit mixed-use land development characteristics. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.202), 11-8-2007; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C5, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. G-13-07-11-H2, § XIV, 7-11-2013; Ord. No. O-2019-0129, § II, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 14-211. - Noise measurement procedures. 
(a)  Measurement with sound level meter. 
(1)  Whenever portions of this article prohibit sound over a certain decibel limit, measurement of the sound will be made with a Type 1 or Type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as specified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1984/85A). 
(2)  Noise levels will be measured in decibels and A-weighted. The unit of measurement will be designated "dB(A)." 
(3)  Meters must be maintained in calibration and in good working order. Calibrations will be employed that meet ANSI S1.40-1984 prior to and immediately after every sampling of sound. 
(4)  Measurements recorded must be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. 
(5)  The microphone of the meter should be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone must be used. 
(6)  Except as otherwise provided, measurements will be taken at or near the nearest property line of the property where the sound is being received. 
(b)  Measurement without sound level meter. Any city official with enforcement authority under this article who hears a noise that is plainly audible will assess the noise according to the following standards: 
(1)  The primary means of detection are the official's normal hearing faculties, so long as the official's hearing is not enhanced by any mechanical device, such as a hearing aid. 
(2)  The official must have a direct line of sight and hearing to the real property of the source of the noise so the official can readily identify the offending source of the noise and the distance involved. If the official is unable to have a direct line of sight and hearing to the real property of the source of the noise, then the official must confirm the source of the noise by approaching the suspected real property source of the noise until the official can obtain a direct line of sight and hearing, and identify the same noise that was heard at the place of original assessment. 
(3)  The official need not determine the particular words or phrases being said or produced, or the name of the song or artist producing the noise. The detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating type of noise is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible noise. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.203), 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 14-212. - General noise prohibitions and sound level limitations. 
(a)  Any noise that is measured in excess of the parameters set forth in tables I through III is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Sound causing permanent hearing loss. 
(1)  Tables I and II specify sound level limits which, if exceeded, will have a high probability of producing permanent hearing loss in anyone in the area where the sound levels are being exceeded. 
(2)  No sound is permitted within the city that exceeds the parameters set forth in tables I and II. 
Table I-Maximum Continuous Sound Levels 
Duration per Day 
(in continuous hours) Sound Level 
(dB(A)) 8 90 6 92 4 95 3 97 2 100 11/2 102 1 105 1/2 110 1/4 115  
Table II-Maximum Impulsive Sound Levels 
Number of Repetitions 
per 24-Hour Period Sound Level 
(dB(A)) 1 145 10 135 100 125  
(c)  No person will create, operate, or cause to be operated on private property any source of sound in such a manner as to create a noise which exceeds the limits set forth for the land use district as defined in section 14-210 and in table III when measured at a minimum distance of 200 lineal feet from the real property line of the source. 
(d)  When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one zoning district, the limits of the most restrictive use will apply at the boundaries between different zoning districts. 
Table III-Maximum Sound Levels (in dB(A)) for Zoning Districts 
Daytime Nighttime Residential 55 50 Commercial and Industrial 80 75  
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.204), 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 14-213. - Specific noise prohibitions. 
(a)  No person may cause or allow any sound that constitutes a noise disturbance as defined in section 14-210. Any person who causes or allows a noise disturbance to occur creates a nuisance. 
(b)  The following acts are declared to be in violation of this article and are hereby defined as nuisances: 
(1)  Motor vehicles. 
a.  The operation of a motor vehicle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device in good working order and in constant operation. 
b.  Operating a motor vehicle with a muffler cut out, bypass, or similar device. 
c.  Operating or permitting to be operated any vehicle which, by virtue of disrepair, or manner of operation, or so loaded, alone or in combination with other motor vehicles, creates a grating, grinding, rattling, or any other loud noise that violates use district noise level restrictions. 
d.  Operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device (commonly known as an engine brake, Jacobs Brake, or Jake Brake) engaged, except for the aversion of imminent danger. 
e.  Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment operated in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
f.  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any motor vehicle, except as a danger signal. 
(2)  Construction work. 
a.  Construction work during nighttime hours in or adjacent to residential land use districts. 
b.  Construction work in any land use district that results in noise above the limits set for industrial land use districts in subsection 14-212(d). 
(3)  Garbage collection during nighttime hours in a residential use district. 
(4)  The operation of domestic power tools during nighttime hours so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(5)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(6)  Keeping an animal that makes any sound that: 
a.  Creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line; 
b.  Is frequent or of continued duration for ten or more consecutive minutes; or 
c.  Is intermittent for a period of 30 or more minutes. 
(7)  The production of any noise in a public right-of-way or other public space which is plainly audible across the real property line of the source. 
(8)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. 
a.  Operating or playing, or allowing the operation or playing of a radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, or similar device that reproduces or amplifies sound so it creates a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator of the device. 
b.  Operating or playing any such device so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
c.  Operating or playing any self-contained, portable, handheld music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment in a public space or public right-of-way so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(9)  Operation of any public loudspeaker in a fixed position, moveable position, or mounted on a sound vehicle in a public space or public right-of-way for the purpose of communication or sound reproduction so it violates section 14-212 or causes a noise disturbance, unless a permit has been approved by the chief of police in accordance with section 14-215. 
(10)  An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle activated so it continues its operation for more than five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15 minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. 
(c)  Violation of plainly audible standard on posted property. 
(1)  When a city official with enforcement authority under this article determines a person or persons are responsible for a sound that is in violation of the plainly audible standard on property posted as described below, the official will issue a citation for violation of this article to the responsible person or persons. 
(2)  Property will be considered posted for the purposes of this subsection if at least one warning sign is posted in a conspicuous place on the property, clearly visible and readable to all persons entering the property, warning persons that noise that is plainly audible is prohibited. The sign must read as follows: 
WARNING 
Playing a stereo, radio, or amplifier that can be heard 200 feet away is prohibited. City Ord. Sec. 14-213(c). 
Letters in the word "WARNING" must be at least two inches high in bold type. Letters for the remaining text must be at least one inch high in normal type, and the words "City Ord. Sec. 14-213(c)" must be at least one-half inch in normal type. All letters must be light-reflective on a contrasting background. The sign structure containing the required warning must be permanently installed with the word "WARNING" not less than three feet and no more than six above ground level. 
(3)  The city manager or designee may require a property to be posted if it is used for commercial purposes, including as a parking lot of an adjacent business, and: 
a.  The business is generally unattended by the owner or an agent of the owner during normal operating hours; or 
b.  Two or more citations for violation of this article resulting in payment of a fine or adjudication of guilt by a judge are issued due to acts of patrons or visitors during any 90-day period. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.205), 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 14-213.1. - Specific noise regulations. 
(a)  Certain uses as described in this section shall be subject to the specific noise regulations as set forth below. 
(b)  Subsections (b) and (c) apply only to outdoor live music venues that meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Are located within 1,000 feet of IH-35 or SH-45; and 
(2)  The front of the stage is a minimum of 2,500 feet from any residential use or hotel/motel/lodging uses as of the submittal date of the first city required development application. 
(c)  Said outdoor live music venues are exempt from the requirements of subsections 14-212(c) and (d) during the hours set forth below: 
(1)  From noon to 6:00 p.m. on week days for sound check(s); 
(2)  From 6:00 p.m. to midnight on week days for sound check(s) and/or live performances; 
(3)  From noon to midnight on Sunday for sound checks and/or live performances; and 
(4)  From 10:00 a.m. to midnight on Saturday and federal holidays for sound checks and/or live performances. 
(c)  Except for the exemption set forth above, said outdoor live music venues are subject to the other requirements of this article VIII, specifically including the requirements of Tables I and II of subsection 14-212(b). 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5091, § I, 1-25-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § II, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 14-213.2. - Specific regulations for outdoor music venues zoned MU-1. 
(a)  Applicability. This section is applicable to outdoor music venues that are on property zoned MU-1. 
(b)  Restrictions on time and decibel levels. 
(1)  "Permitted hours" shall mean the times set forth below: 
a.  From 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday; 
b.  From 10:00 a.m. to midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  During permitted hours, permit holders shall not operate sound equipment in excess of 80 decibels as measured at the property line of the business. 
(3)  During non-permitted hours, permit holders shall not operate sound equipment in excess of 60 decibels as measured at the property line of the business. 
(4)  It shall be a violation for the owner and/or tenant of an outdoor music venue to operate sound equipment in excess of the decibel limits set out in this section. 
(c)  Permit and decibel meter required. 
(1)  It shall be a violation for the owner and/or tenant of an outdoor music venue to operate sound equipment without possessing an amplified sound permit and a decibel meter located on-site which has been approved by the chief of police (or his/her designee). 
(2)  The chief of police (or his/her designee) shall be responsible for the review of applications and the issuance of amplified sound permits, subject to the requirements of this section. 
(3)  The chief of police (or his/her designee) may inspect an outdoor music venue prior to issuing a permit under this section to verify whether an approved decibel meter is located on-site. 
(4)  The amplified sound permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(5)  A decision by the chief of police to approve or deny a permit under this section may be appealed to the city manager, whose decision shall be final. 
(6)  The outdoor music venue shall post the amplified sound permit inside the business so that it is visible to the general public. 
(d)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  An application for a permit required by this section must include: 
a.  The name, address, telephone number, and title of the individual filing an application on behalf of an outdoor music venue; 
b.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the outdoor music venue; 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the business's registered agent on file with the Texas Secretary of State; 
d.  An application fee of $50.00; 
e.  A statement that the outdoor music venue has an approved decibel meter on-site; and 
f.  A statement that the applicant has obtained a copy of this chapter and section and agrees to comply with all applicable requirements. 
(e)  Permit issuance. The amplified sound permit shall be issued to the business which submits an application that meets the requirements of this section and pays the applicable fee. 
(f)  Revocation of a permit. 
(1)  The chief of police shall revoke a permit issued under this section if the permit holder has been found guilty of violating any provisions of this section three times in a 12-month period. 
(2)  The period of revocation shall be one year from the date of revocation. 
(3)  A permit holder may appeal to the city council a revocation not later than ten calendar days after the date of the revocation. 
(4)  The notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and must include: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the appellant; 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of the outdoor music venue; 
c.  The reasons the appellant believes that the decision does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  The city council shall hear the appeal at the next available regularly scheduled meeting following ten days after receipt of the appeal. 
(6)  A revocation order remains in effect during the pendency of an appeal under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0129, § III, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 14-214. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following uses and activities are exempt from the sound level regulations contained in this article, except for the sound level regulations provided in table I and table II of subsection 14-212(b): 
(1)  Noise of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure release valves. 
(2)  Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noise resulting from emergency work. 
(4)  All noise coming from the normal operations of interstate motor and rail carriers, to the extent that the provisions of this article regulating the sound levels of such vehicles has been preempted by the Noise Control Act of 1972 (42 USC 4901 et seq.) or other applicable federal laws or regulations. 
(5)  Noise resulting from the operation of any aircraft within the parameters and guidelines prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the rules and regulations of the city. 
(6)  Noise resulting from a city-sponsored celebration or event. 
(7)  Noise resulting from a lawfully scheduled stadium event. 
(8)  Noise resulting from a fireworks display or fireworks discharge if the person has acquired a permit from the fire marshal and otherwise complied with the provisions of chapter 16, article V. 
(9)  Noise from church bells or chimes when a part of a religious observance or service. 
(10)  Any noise resulting from activities of temporary duration permitted by law for which a permit has been approved by the chief of police in accordance with section 14-215. 
(b)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.206), 11-8-2007; Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C5, § II, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 14-215. - Temporary noise exemption permits. 
(a)  Permits generally. 
(1)  A person may apply for a permit to engage in any activity that creates a noise that would otherwise constitute a nuisance or be in violation of this article. 
(2)  A person must apply in writing to the chief of police at least ten calendar days prior to the requested issuance date and time, unless the chief determines that unforeseeable circumstances justify a shorter amount of time. 
(b)  The application for a permit must be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and must include the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant including both daytime and nighttime contact; 
(2)  A description of the type, duration, and location of the noise, specifically including the date and time the noise will occur; 
(3)  The name, if different from the applicant, of the owner of the property on which the noise will occur and a written letter of permission from the owner and any tenants or other persons occupying the property from which the noise will occur; 
(4)  A statement from the applicant that all property owners within 200 lineal feet to the property upon which the noise originates will be provided written notification within 24 hours of making the application of their right to respond directly to the chief of police to voice support or opposition to the application; and 
(5)  A copy of the notification(s) sent to any property owners. 
(c)  Filing fee. 
(1)  A filing fee must be submitted with the application for a permit, in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  No filing fee is to be assessed to any governmental entity or any person conducting activities on behalf of the governmental entity. 
(d)  No permit issued will be valid for more than two consecutive calendar days. 
(e)  In determining whether to grant or deny the permit, the chief of police must consider the following factors: 
(1)  The safety of the persons that will be subjected to the noise, whether voluntarily or involuntarily; 
(2)  The number of persons who will be involuntarily subjected to the noise; 
(3)  The reasonableness of the time, place, and manner of the noise and duration of the noise; and 
(4)  Any other factors necessary to determine the impact on public health, safety, or disruption of the peace that the noise may cause. 
(f)  Notice of decision. 
(1)  The chief of police will notify the applicant of the decision to either grant or deny the permit within five calendar days following the date of the application. 
(2)  If the chief of police denies the permit, the chief will state the reasons for the denial in a written notice provided to the applicant. 
(3)  If the chief of police grants the permit, the chief may place reasonable time, place, and other restrictions on the activity authorized by the permit. 
(g)  Appeal. 
(1)  Upon receiving notice of the chief of police's decision, the applicant may appeal the decision, including restrictions placed on the activity placed on the permit, to the city manager. 
(2)  Within one working day of receiving the appeal, the city manager will consider the application, the basis of denial, or any restrictions placed on issuance of the permit. 
(3)  Based on the standards listed in subsection (e) of this section, the city manager may: 
a.  Uphold the decision of the chief of police; 
b.  Approve or deny the issuance of the permit as applied for; or 
c.  Modify or delete restrictions placed on the permit. 
(h)  Permit. 
(1)  The permit shall be in a form prescribed by the chief of police and must be displayed in the immediate vicinity of the source of the noise at all times during the production of the noise. 
(2)  The permit must include the following: 
a.  The date and time that the permit begins and ends; 
b.  The name of the permit holder and who will be generating the noise; 
c.  A description of the basic nature of the noise; 
d.  The specific location of the noise; and 
e.  Any special limitations or restrictions placed on the permit. 
(i)  The chief of police may revoke any permit issued under this article for the following reasons or causes: 
(1)  The substantial violation of this article or the terms and conditions of a permit; 
(2)  A material misstatement of any fact on the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.207), 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 14-216. - Enforcement procedures, penalties, and other remedies. 
(a)  The city police department has primary, but not exclusive, enforcement responsibility for this article. The city council and chief of police both maintain the right to designate other agencies or departments to enforce this article as needed. 
(b)  The enforcement official has the authority to have any device removed or toned down instantly until it can be otherwise operated in compliance with this article. 
(c)  Persons cited for violations of any part of this article will be fined in accordance with section 1-9, per occurrence. 
(d)  Violations of sections 14-212 through 14-215 are also hereby subject to abatement by means of a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. G-07-11-08-0E1, § I(6.208), 11-8-2007) 
Secs. 14-217-14-240. - Reserved. 
Article IX. - SMOKING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND VAPING IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 14-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air purification system means an electrically powered hospital grade filter that: 
(1)  Has an air-exchange rate of four times per hour or once every 15 minutes for the designated smoking/vaping bar; 
(2)  As its first stage, contains a minimum 30 percent rated pleated prefilter; 
(3)  As its second stage, contains a HEPA filter media that is rated to remove not less than 99.97 percent of 0.3 microns; and 
(4)  As its third stage, contains an industrial grade processed carbon composite adsorber filter specifically designed for removal of environmental tobacco smoke, vapor, and gases. 
    Bar means any establishment: 
(1)  That derives more than 50 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  That is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common enclosed area (other than a covered sidewalk or pedestrian way) with any other place not otherwise listed in subsection 14-243(a); and 
(3)  In which the serving of food, if any, is merely incidental to the primary business of serving alcoholic beverages. 
    Common areas means areas such as restrooms, lobbies, service line areas, public telephone areas, and other areas commonly used by the public. 
    Designated smoking/vaping bar means a bar which serves food and/or mixed drinks and which the owner or operator has designated all or any portion thereof for smoking and/or vaping. All designated smoking/vaping bars shall be equipped with an air purification system and/or an exhaust system, which shall be designed by a professional engineer and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of section 14-244. 
    Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or description. 
    Enclosed area means any area covered by a roof and having at least one wall. Vehicular drive-through lanes and open outdoor concourses of sports arenas shall not be considered enclosed areas. 
    Exhaust means air removed from a space and discharged to the exterior of the building. 
    Health care facility means any office or institution providing individual care or treatment of human medical, physiological or psychological illness, which definition shall include, but not be limited to, hospitals, doctor's offices, nursing and convalescent homes and senior citizen residential facilities. 
    Nonprofit private club means any building, premises or portion thereof which is wholly owned or leased and operated by an organization meeting the requirements of chapter 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer and which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee and employer offices, employee lounges, employee restrooms, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. A residence, including a home occupation, is not considered to be a place of employment. 
    Public conveyance means any mass transit vehicle or school bus. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, not including the offices or work areas not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. A residence is not a public place. 
    Retail tobacco store means an establishment whose primary purpose is to offer for sale, and sell to consumers, tobacco and tobacco products and accessories. 
    Retail vaping store means an establishment whose primary purpose is to offer for sale, and sell to consumers e-cigarettes, vaping products and/or vaping accessories. 
    Service line means a line of persons formed for the securing of a service or product on a first-come first-served basis. 
    Smoking means the lighting, holding, carrying of, inhaling and exhaling of the smoke of a tobacco product, which definition includes, but is not limited to, the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device. 
    Sports arena means an indoor or outdoor facility primarily used for sports, cultural or other similar events. 
    Tobacco product means the product derived from the dried leaves of any one of the various species of Nicotiana, including, but not limited to, the species Nicotiana tabacum , the broad leafed native American plant, which is utilized for smoking. 
    Vape or vaping means the act of inhaling and exhaling the vapor emitted by an e-cigarette. 
(Code 1995, § 6.401; Ord. No. O-2016-3730, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-242. - Prohibition. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection 14-243(a), smoking and/or vaping is unlawful inside of and outside within five feet of any entrance or open window of the following places: 
(1)  Common areas, except as provided in subsection 14-243(a). 
(2)  Elevators. 
(3)  Places of employment. 
(4)  Public conveyances. 
(5)  Public places. 
(6)  Public restrooms. 
(7)  Taxicabs. 
(8)  Service lines. 
(9)  Sports arenas. 
(b)  No smoking and no vaping shall be designated by signs posted in conspicuous locations located at any entrance to and within all public places and places of employment. Such signs shall be visible to the public and clearly recite the phrase "No Smoking, No Vaping" and/or use the international no-smoking and no vaping symbols. 
(Code 1995, § 6.402; Ord. No. O-2016-3730, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-243. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Smoking and vaping is lawful in the following places: 
(1)  Retail tobacco stores and retail vaping stores, including any common areas. 
(2)  Smoking and/or vaping as a part of a theatrical production. 
(3)  In bars, including common areas, which do not serve food and which serve alcoholic beverages pursuant to a wine and beer retailer's permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(4)  Subject to compliance with section 14-244, in a designated smoking/vaping bar. 
(5)  Separate patient care and/or sleeping quarters of health care facilities and convalescence facilities which have been designated as a smoking/vaping room by the owner or operator, provided however that lobbies, hallways and other common or public areas shall remain no smoking and no vaping areas. 
(6)  Hotel and lodging rooms, provided however that hotel lobbies, hallways and other public areas shall remain no smoking and no vaping areas. 
(7)  Open outdoor concourse of a sports arena, which has been designated as a smoking/vaping area by the owner or operator. 
(8)  Nonprofit private clubs. 
(b)  The owner or operator of all public places listed in subsection (a) of this section that have both no smoking/no vaping and areas where smoking/vaping is permitted shall post signs in conspicuous locations located at any entrance to and within such public places. Such signs shall be visible to the public and clearly recite the phrase "Smoking or Vaping in Designated Areas Only." 
(c)  The owner or operator of all public places listed in subsection (a) of this section where the entire premises is or has been designated as a smoking/vaping area shall post signs in conspicuous locations located at any entrance to and within such public places. Such signs shall be visible to the public and clearly recite the phrase "Smoking and/or Vaping is Permitted Throughout the Premises." 
(Code 1995, § 6.403; Ord. No. O-2016-3730, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-244. - Requirements for designated smoking bars. 
(a)  In order to have a designated smoking/vaping bar, the owner or operator of a bar not included within subsection 14-243(a)(5) must have a valid permit issued therefor by the city pursuant to subsection (b) of this section and shall: 
(1)  Provide the designated smoking/vaping bar with exhaust and/or air purification systems that will provide a minimum of four air changes per hour for the entire designated smoking/vaping bar; 
(2)  Properly maintain in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations the exhaust and air purification systems used in designated smoking/vaping bars and keep a log and receipts for all such maintenance, including filter replacement; 
(3)  Allow city personnel to inspect such systems and maintenance logs at all reasonable times; 
(4)  Provide signs conspicuously posted in the bar which state "Smoking/Vaping In This Area Only" or, if the entire premises has been designated a smoking bar, provide signs conspicuously posted at any entrances which state "Smoking/Vaping is Permitted Throughout the Premises"; and 
(5)  Provide receptacles for the extinguishment of smoking materials located within all designated smoking/vaping bars. 
(b)  In order to maintain a designated smoking/vaping bar, the owner or operator of the premises must apply for and receive a permit issued by the city in compliance with the following: 
(1)  An application for the permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. 
(2)  The fee for processing the application shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(3)  Prior to the permit being issued, the system as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section for the proposed designated smoking/vaping bar must successfully pass a test showing the system works properly. 
(4)  If the system fails two successive tests, the applicant shall pay a re-testing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each additional test. 
(c)  The owner or operator of a designated smoking/vaping bar shall be required to pass additional tests from time to time as determined by the city. 
(d)  Failure to pass a test shall result in the denial of the application for a permit, or the revocation of an existing permit to operate a designated smoking/vaping bar, and the bar shall be deemed to be nonsmoking and non-vaping until successfully tested or retested. 
(e)  Failure to maintain the exhaust and/or air purification systems so that said systems will not provide a minimum of four air changes per hour for the entire designated smoking/vaping bar shall result in the revocation of an existing permit to operate a designated smoking/vaping bar, and such bar shall be deemed to be nonsmoking and non-vaping until such time that it can be demonstrated that said systems are operating satisfactorily. 
(Code 1995, § 6.404; Ord. No. O-2016-3730, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-245. - Unlawful. 
    A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly, intentionally or by criminal negligence smokes or vapes in an area designated as prohibited under section 14-242; 
(2)  Knowingly, intentionally or by criminal negligence fails to post any sign as required by this article; 
(3)  Knowingly, intentionally or by criminal negligence fails to designate nonsmoking and non-vaping areas and smoking and vaping areas as required by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly, intentionally or by criminal negligence designates or maintains a smoking/vaping area in violation of the requirements of this article; or 
(5)  Knowingly, intentionally or by criminal negligence violates any other provision of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.405; Ord. No. O-2016-3730, § I, 9-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-246. - Injunction. 
    In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.016, the city may obtain against the owner or owner's representative with control over the premises an injunction that: 
(1)  Prohibits specific conduct that violates this article; and/or 
(2)  Requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.406; Ord. No. 2101, 2-23-1984; Ord. No. G-93-07-08-8A, 7-8-1993; Ord. No. G-02-11-26-9C1, 11-26-2002) 
Secs. 14-247-14-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - GRAFFITI[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Graffiti, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.08. 

Sec. 14-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designee. 
    Etching or engraving device means a device that makes a delineation or impression on property, regardless of the manufacturer's intended use for that device. 
    Graffiti. 
(1)  The term "graffiti" means temporary or permanent visual blight or any unauthorized form of painting, scratching, writing, marking, or inscription including initials, slogans, symbols or drawings, regardless of the content or nature of the material that has been applied to any wall, building, fence, window, sign or other structure or surface and is visible from any public property or right-of-way or is visible from the private property of another person. 
(2)  The term "graffiti" does not include any of the foregoing used for advertising purposes placed on any property in compliance with any applicable city ordinance or regulation, or state or federal law. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching or engraving device, brush, indelible marker or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
    Indelible marker means a device that makes a mark with a paint or ink product that is specifically formulated to be more difficult to erase, wash out, or remove than ordinary paint or ink products. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid or liquid form of paint, chalk, wax epoxy, or other similar substance that leaves a visible mark upon application to a surface. 
    Owner means: 
(1)  Any owner of record as noted in the appraisal district records of the county in which the property is located; 
(2)  Any owner of record as noted in the tax rolls of the city; 
(3)  Any registered owner of property if the property is required to be registered; 
(4)  Any person who has primary responsibility for control of the property or for repair or maintenance of the property; 
(5)  Any person who has contractual responsibility for the property; or 
(6)  Any occupant, lessee, tenant, manager or operator of the property. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent or adoptive parent of a minor. As used herein, the term "parent" shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person 21 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Property means: 
(1)  Real property, including any lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof whether improved or unimproved, or any building or portion thereof whether occupied or unoccupied; or 
(2)  Tangible or intangible personal property, including anything severable or severed from land. 
    Unauthorized means: 
(1)  Without the consent of the owner. It shall be presumed that an owner did not consent under circumstances tending to show: 
a.  The absence of immediate or obvious evidence of specific authorization by the owner; 
b.  That the graffiti is inconsistent with the design or the use of the subject property; or 
c.  That the person causing the graffiti was unknown to the owner; or 
(2)  In violation of or without authority of any city ordinance or regulation, or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.801), 3-27-2008) 
Sec. 14-272. - Declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  The city council finds that graffiti that is visible from a public place, public right-of-way, or the property of others: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private and public property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism, additional graffiti, and other criminal activities; and 
(4)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and development of the city. 
(b)  The presence of graffiti on property where it is visible from a public place, public right-of-way or from another's property is therefore declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided in this article, the city shall have all remedies available at law and equity to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.802), 3-27-2008) 
Sec. 14-273. - Possession by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implements. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that at the time of possession: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied or supervised by a parent; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied or supervised by a teacher or other authorized school official in connection with a bona fide school project; 
(3)  The minor possessed the graffiti implement on the property on which he lives; 
(4)  The possession occurred as part of an organized event sponsored by a school, church or some other officially recognized entity and supervised by an adult representative of the organization; or 
(5)  The possession occurred during employment while the minor was supervised by his employer. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.803), 3-27-2008) 
Sec. 14-274. - Possession prohibited in designated areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, transportation vehicle, park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city or while in, on or within 50 feet of an underpass, overpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type of infrastructure, unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.804), 3-27-2008) 
Sec. 14-275. - Permitting or allowing a minor to create graffiti or possess graffiti implement. 
    It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence permit or allow a minor to make or create or cause to make or create graffiti on any property within the city or to permit or allow a minor to possess any graffiti implement in violation of section 14-273. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.805), 3-27-2008) 
Sec. 14-276. - Owner responsibility. 
(a)  If graffiti is visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists, an owner of such property commits an offense if the owner fails to paint over or completely remove all graffiti from the owner's property within 72 hours after the owner is served with notice to remove the graffiti as provided below. 
(b)  Before issuing a citation for a violation under subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police shall serve the owner with notice to remove the graffiti within 72 hours from the date the notice was served. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The date and nature of the violation; 
(2)  The physical location of the violation by street address, legal description or by any other method that reasonably describes the location; 
(3)  The name of owner, if known; and 
(4)  A statement that if the condition is not corrected within 72 hours of service of such notice, the city may, without further notice, enter upon the property by its agent or its contractors, remove the graffiti and charge the costs incurred to the owner. If the graffiti is removed by the city, the cost may be charged to a property owner and a lien may be filed against the property. 
(c)  The notice may be served by personal delivery to an owner of the property, or by United States mail to an owner at the owner's last known address or the address as shown on the tax rolls or the appraisal district records of the county in which the property is located. If an address for an owner cannot be reasonably determined or the notice is returned by the United States Postal Service as undeliverable, then an owner may be notified by: 
(1)  Publication at least twice within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
(2)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of a building on the property in violation; or 
(3)  If the property contains no buildings, posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property. 
(d)  Notice is deemed to be served: 
(1)  For personal delivery, on the date and time an owner is personally served with notice; 
(2)  For mailed notice, at 5:00 p.m. on the third day after the notice is mailed; 
(3)  For published notice, at 5:00 p.m. on the date the last notice is published in the newspaper; or 
(4)  For posted notice, at 5:00 p.m. on the third day after the notice is posted. 
(e)  If an owner fails to timely abate the graffiti, the city may, without further notice, enter upon the property by its agent or its contractors, remove the graffiti and charge the costs incurred by the city to an owner. If the graffiti is removed by or at the direction of the city, the cost may be charged to a property owner. 
(f)  An owner maintains a public nuisance if he fails to remove graffiti or refuses to allow graffiti to be removed from the property after having been notified by the city. 
(Ord. No. G-08-03-27-7B1, § I(6.806), 3-27-2008) 
Secs. 14-277-14-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES; OTHER ABANDONED PROPERTY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683. 

Sec. 14-301. - Abandoned motor vehicles. 
(a)  Abandoned motor vehicle provisions adopted; definition. The provisions of subchapters A through D of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683 et seq., and the provisions of this article are hereby adopted to establish a comprehensive and uniform procedure for the impounding, storage, use and sale of abandoned motor vehicles, watercraft and outboard motors within the city. 
(1)  City manager to establish administrative procedures. The city manager is authorized to provide for the impounding, storage and disposition of abandoned motor vehicles, watercraft and outboard motors and shall establish such administrative procedures as he deems necessary for the securing of proof of abandonment, collection of fees, distribution of proceeds of sale or reclamation, giving of notices, and impounding and sale of abandoned motor vehicles, watercraft and outboard motors, consistent with this section and state law. 
(2)  Abandoned motor vehicle defined. As used in this section, the term "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that: 
a.  Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
b.  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
c.  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours; 
d.  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state or federal highway for more than 48 hours; or 
e.  Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority or a controlled access highway. 
(3)  Authority to take abandoned motor vehicle into custody. The police department of the city may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor found on public or private property. 
(4)  Notice. 
a.  After taking into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, the police department shall send written notice of abandonment to: 
1.  The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor taken into custody by the police department or for which a report of abandonment is received from a garage keeper pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; and 
2.  Each lienholder of the motor vehicle recorded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501 or each lienholder of the watercraft or outboard motor recorded under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31. 
b.  The written notice of abandonment must: 
1.  Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the police department takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor into custody or receives the report of abandonment from a garage keeper pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; 
2.  Specify the year, make, model and identification number of the item; 
3.  State the location of the facility where the item is being held; 
4.  Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of towing, preservation, storage charges, and garage keeper's charges and fees; and 
5.  State that the failure of the owner or lienholder to timely claim the item is a waiver by that person of all right, title and interest in the item and constitutes consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
c.  The police department may publish the notice of abandonment in lieu of sending notice in the manner required by subsection (a)(4)a of this section if: 
1.  The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; 
2.  The registration has no address for the owner; or 
3.  The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible. Such notice of abandonment must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor was abandoned. 
d.  The published notice of abandonment must: 
1.  Be published not later than the tenth day after the police department takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor into custody or receives the report of abandonment from a garage keeper pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; 
2.  Specify the year, make, model and identification number of the item; 
3.  State the location of the facility where the item is being held; 
4.  Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of towing, preservation, storage charges, and garage keeper's charges and fees; and 
5.  State that the failure of the owner or lienholder to timely claim the item is a waiver by that person of all right, title and interest in the item and constitutes consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
The notice of abandonment published pursuant to this section may contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor. 
(b)  Fees for impounding, storage, etc., and disposition of auction proceeds. 
(1)  The following fees shall be charged by and shall be paid to the city police department or the person, if any, engaged by the city to impound and store abandoned motor vehicles, watercraft or outboard motors upon reclamation of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor or out of the proceeds of sale of such item if not reclaimed: 
a.  The towing, preservation, and storage fees incurred and resulting from the taking into custody of the item. 
b.  All costs incurred and resulting from the notice and publication requirements of this section and state law. 
c.  All costs incurred and resulting from the sale of the item at a public auction. 
(2)  In addition to the above charges, when the abandoned motor vehicle is one impounded at a storage facility operated by a garage keeper for commercial purposes, the garage keeper has a valid claim for servicing, storage or repair of such vehicle. Such charges shall be paid to the garage keeper by the person reclaiming the motor vehicle before the motor vehicle is released by the police department. In the event the motor vehicle is not reclaimed, the proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to the garage keeper's charges. 
(3)  After deducting the charges provided for in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the police department shall hold the proceeds of the sale for the owner or lienholder for a period of 90 days. Upon the expiration of the 90-day holding period, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from taking other motor vehicles, watercraft or outboard motors into custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to pay those fees. Funds in this account in excess of $1,000.00 may be transferred to the city's general revenue account for use by the police department. 
(c)  Notice of sale of abandoned motor vehicles at public auction. Any motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor not claimed as provided by law may be sold at public auction in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014, or the police department may use the item for departmental purposes. Before selling a motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, the police department shall post two notices of sale, one at the county courthouse and one at the Main Street entrance of city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the official newspaper of the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall describe the impounded motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor to be sold by year, make and model, state that same is unclaimed and is being sold at public auction pursuant to state law, and state the time, date, place and manner of sale. The notice shall further state that the purchaser of the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor shall take title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, shall receive a sales receipt from the police department, and is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title. Such notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles, watercraft and outboard motors. A garage keeper who has a garage keeper's lien on an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor to be sold at a public auction shall be notified by the police department of the time and place of the auction. Failure to give the notice required by this section, in whole or part, shall not affect the sale of such motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, it being the intention of the city council that following the above procedures for giving notice of the sale shall not be a condition of the sale but merely a means of advertising the sale to potential bidders. 
(d)  Record book of impounded motor vehicles. The police department, or its delegate, shall keep a record book which shall contain a description by year, make and model or all motor vehicles, watercraft and outboard motors impounded; the date and time of such impounding; the date notices of abandonment advertised or mailed to lienholders and owners or record and the return receipts therefrom; the date the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was reclaimed or sold; the amount realized for each motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor at such sale; the amount of fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to this section; the name and address of the owners and lienholders, if known; the name and address of the buyer; the name and address of the garage keeper, if any entitled to recover his charges for servicing, storage or repair of the motor vehicle upon reclamation or sale and the amount of his charges; and any other information the city manager may deem necessary. 
(e)  Visible notice of abandonment; prima facie evidence. At least 48 hours prior to impounding any motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor, as abandoned, whether on public or private property, a police officer of the city shall securely affix a visible, dated, brightly colored notice of abandonment to such motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor and a record of the date and time such notice was affixed shall be maintained by the chief of police or his delegate. In the event the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is subsequently impounded as abandoned, proof that the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was not removed from the public or private property after the visible notice of abandonment was attached thereto shall be prima facie proof in any court that: 
(1)  Such motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was left unattended and abandoned for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor; and 
(2)  That the owner of such motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor caused, allowed, suffered and permitted the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor to remain at the place where such motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was impounded for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor. 
(f)  Unlawful to interfere with impounding. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor by the police department or its delegate pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2101; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996; Ord. No. G-01-09-27-14B2, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 14-302. - Abandoned property other than motor vehicles. 
(a)  Declared a nuisance; duty of police to impound; notification of impoundment. 
(1)  Any personal property, other than a motor vehicle, which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance, the charter of the city or any state law; or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, public property or public place in the city; or which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in or on any public street, alley or sidewalk in such a manner as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or constitute a barrier to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is declared a public nuisance, and any such property when, so found by the police officers of the city shall be removed or caused to be removed summarily to the police pound or any other place of impoundment designated by the city manager. 
(2)  Trash receptacles placed in compliance with city ordinance and newspaper and magazine vending machines on public sidewalks shall not be deemed obstructions under this section. 
(3)  Within ten days after any personal property is impounded under this section, the impounder shall notify the owner of such property and all lienholders, if their names and addresses be known, that such property has been impounded. 
(b)  Lien on impounded property. A lien for all costs incurred in the impounding, storing and advertising for sale of personal property pursuant to this section shall exist and inure to the benefit of the person actually impounding such property. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the impounder may retain possession of such property until all costs are paid and may sell the same as provided in this section. 
(c)  Redemption of impounded property. The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any impounded personal property as provided for in this section may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying to the impounder before sale, the applicable fees set out in subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer at the sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property, and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping the same, provided that the property shall be redeemed from the buyer within 30 days after the date of the sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise title to the property shall become absolute in the buyer. 
(d)  When impounded property to be sold. When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within 30 days after being impounded, the same may be sold in the manner designated by the city manager. 
(e)  Notice of sale of impounded property. Before selling any personal property as provided for in this section, the impounder shall post two notices thereof, one at the county courthouse door and one at the Main Street entrance of the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the official newspaper published in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold, designate the place of sale, the manner of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of the first posting of such notices. 
(f)  Procedure for selling impounded property. When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the impounder shall sell such property in the manner designated by the city manager, and execute a bill of sale of such property to the purchaser thereof; provided, that he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(g)  Disposition of proceeds of sale of impounded property. After deducting the fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to subsection (h) of this section, the impounder shall hold the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to pay the same to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds within 30 days, they shall belong to the impounder. 
(h)  Fees for impounding, storage, etc. The fees as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be charged and shall be paid to the impounder. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2102) 
Sec. 14-303. - Junked vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed below, except where the context in which the word or phrase is used clearly indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled, or any part thereof, and: 
a.  Displays an expired or invalid license plate or expired or invalid motor vehicle registration insignia or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle registration insignia; and 
b.  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(2)  The term "junked vehicle" does not include: 
a.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
b.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard if the vehicle or part thereof and the outdoor storage area are: 
1.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
2.  Not a health hazard; and 
3.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery and not including a tarp or other cover. 
c.  An antique or special interest vehicle or part thereof stored by a motor vehicle collector on his property if the vehicle or part thereof and the outdoor storage area are: 
1.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
2.  Not a health hazard; and 
3.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery and not including a tarp or other cover. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(b)  Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance; duty of property owners; unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
(1)  Junked vehicles are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city and state by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement as set out hereunder. 
(2)  The owner or occupant of any real property within the city shall keep such property free of and shall not permit or suffer the presence of junked vehicles on such property. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any junked vehicle pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Notice to owner to abate nuisance-When on occupied premises. 
(1)  Whenever any such junked vehicle is located on occupied premises within the city in violation of this section, the city shall order the owner of the premises, if in possession thereof, or the occupant of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall: 
a.  Be in writing. 
b.  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days after the date of mailing or personal delivery of notice. 
c.  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before expiration of said ten-day period. 
d.  State that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten-day period it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this section. 
The order must be personally delivered or mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be personally delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(2)  If the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the city within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the city shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises upon the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(d)  Same-When on unoccupied premises or on public property or public right-of-way. 
(1)  a.  Whenever any such junked vehicle is located on unoccupied premises within the city in violation of this section, the city shall order the owner of the premises, as shown on the current tax rolls of the city or the appraisal district records, whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
b.  The order must be personally delivered or mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and to the owner of the premises, as shown on the city tax rolls or the appraisal district records, on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be personally delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(2)  If the owner of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the city within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the city shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises upon the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(3)  a.  Whenever any such junked vehicle is located on public property or on a public right-of-way within the city in violation of this section, the city shall order the owner or occupant of the public premises or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon said public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under subsections (c)(1) and (d)(1) of this section. 
b.  The order must be personally delivered or mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of records, and to the owner of occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exits. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be personally delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(e)  Visible notice to abate nuisance. 
(1)  At the time a junked vehicle is located by the city on either occupied or unoccupied private or public property or public right-of-way, in addition to any other notices required herein, a visible notice, brightly colored but of a color different from that used for notices of abandonment, subsection 14-301(e), shall be securely affixed to such vehicle. Such notice shall: 
a.  State that the vehicle is a public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days from the date on such notice. 
b.  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of said ten-day period. 
c.  Shall state that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten-day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this section. 
d.  Shall state the date it was affixed. 
(2)  Affixing the notice set out herein shall not be a condition or requirement precedent to any proceeding or official action to abate such public nuisance and such proceeding or action shall not be rendered void or voidable nor in any way affected by failure to affix the visible notice prescribed herein. 
(3)  In the event the ten-day period set out on the visible notice is different from that prescribed in any other notice served as provided for herein, then official action or proceedings to abate such public nuisance shall not be commenced until after the expiration of both periods of time. 
(f)  Public hearing; finding and orders of judge. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which a junked vehicle is located may, within ten days after service of a notice to abate said nuisance, request of the clerk of the municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of the bond, that a date and a time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
(2)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before such court, as set out herein, and shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle and in violation of this section. At the hearing, the motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. Such hearing shall not be criminal in nature and shall be as summary as due process and orderly procedure allows. Rules of evidence as in civil suits shall be followed. Upon finding that such motor vehicle is in violation of this section, the judge of such court shall order such defendant to remove and abate such nuisance within ten days, the same being a reasonable time. If the defendant shall fail and refuse, within such ten days, to abate or remove the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order directing the city to have the same removed, and the city shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. Such order shall include a description of the vehicle, and the current identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(3)  Notice of any hearing set under this section shall be delivered to the chief of police. 
(4)  The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the territorial limits of the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect of the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(5)  Records from the city's tax rolls and the appraisal district are admissible at the hearing to establish or prove the ownership of the premises. Records from the city's utility department are admissible at the hearing to establish or prove the occupant of the premises. Records from the Texas Department of Motor Vehicle registration system are admissible at the hearing to establish or prove the registered owner of the vehicle and any lienholder. 
(g)  Abatement under court order. If there is a junked motor vehicle, as herein defined, on-premises that are occupied or unoccupied, and: 
(1)  Neither the owner, nor the occupant of the premises can be found and notified to remove same; or 
(2)  The notice required by subsections (c) or (d) of this section is returned undelivered by the U.S. Post Office and ten days after the return of such notice, the nuisance has not been abated, then upon a showing of such facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order directing the city to have the same removed, and the city shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. 
(h)  Notice to state department of transportation. Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation that a junked vehicle has been impounded within five days after the removal of the junked motor vehicle as provided in this section, identifying the vehicle or part thereof impounded. 
(i)  Disposition of impounded junked vehicles. The city shall dispose of all impounded junked vehicles in such manner as the city manager may designate, consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrap yard or demolisher. 
(j)  Authority to inspect, enforce and administer. This section shall be enforced and administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city as designated by the city manager, except that the removal of a vehicle or part of vehicle from property may be performed by any authorized person. Any person authorized to enforce and administer this section may enter private property to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles or parts thereof and to remove or cause or direct the removal of vehicles or parts thereof. 
(k)  Criminal offense. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, property occupant or registered owner of any vehicle or part thereof to maintain, allow, or permit a junked vehicle in violation of this section. Each day or part of a day that the violation is maintained, allowed or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. The notices in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section are not required to be given prior to the filing of a criminal case. Upon conviction for an offense under this section, the court shall order the guilty party to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof which was the subject of the criminal case within 48 hours from the effective date of the order. The order shall take effect immediately upon the conviction becoming final. If abatement and removal is not done pursuant to the court order, the city is authorized to abate and remove the vehicle without further notice to any person. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2103; Ord. No. 524, 2-9-1978; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. G-96-05-23-13C, 5-23-1996; Ord. No. G-01-09-27-14B2, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. G-12-06-28-F6, § I, 6-28-2012; Ord. No. O-2016-3445, § I, 5-12-2016) 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public safety, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341 et seq.; safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 751 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Arson reward. 
    The city council hereby offers a reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 5.400; Ord. No. 200, 6-11-1963) 
State Law reference- Arson generally, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; crime stoppers, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414. 
Secs. 16-2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 417; warrants for fire marshals, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 

Sec. 16-21. - Office of fire marshal created; appointment. 
    The office of fire marshal is hereby created, which office shall be under the supervision and direction of the fire chief. Any action or responsibility of the fire marshal may be performed by his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 5.301; Ord. No. 2462, 2-22-1990) 
Sec. 16-22. - Fire marshal to investigate all fires. 
    The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. 
(Code 1995, § 5.302) 
State Law reference- Investigation of fire by state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.007. 
Sec. 16-23. - Fire marshal to take testimony and furnish evidence. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1995, § 5.303) 
Sec. 16-24. - Fire marshal to summon witnesses. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1995, § 5.304) 
Sec. 16-25. - Unlawful to disobey any lawful order of fire marshal. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. 
(Code 1995, § 5.305) 
Sec. 16-26. - Investigations by fire marshal may be private. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1995, § 5.306) 
Sec. 16-27. - Fire marshal may enter buildings where fire has occurred. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this section, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1995, § 5.307) 
Sec. 16-28. - Fire marshal to make periodic inspections and reports. 
    The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, annually or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or system, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the fire fighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. 
(Code 1995, § 5.308; Ord. No. G-09-05-14-8E1, § V, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 16-29. - Unlawful to maintain fire hazards. 
    Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same, when for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished as provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 5.309) 
Sec. 16-30. - Owners who maintain hazards guilty of misdemeanor. 
    Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with any improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to fire fighters or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof; shall be punished as provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 5.310) 
Sec. 16-31. - Violators to be notified before prosecution. 
    No prosecution shall be brought under sections 16-29 and 16-30 until the order provided for in section 16-28 is given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Code 1995, § 5.311; Ord. No. 229, 5-13-1958) 
Secs. 16-32-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 16-51. - International Fire Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fire Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as amended hereafter. 
(Code 1995, § 5.101; Ord. No. 2536, 6-13-1991; Ord. No. G-94-08-25-9D, 8-25-1994; Ord. No. G-94-10-27-9A, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. G-02-01-24-8C3, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. G-06-12-07-10C1, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. G-12-11-20-F3, § XI, 11-20-2012; Ord. No. O-2016-3797, § X, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 16-52. - Amendments to the International Fire Code (2015 edition). 
    The International Fire Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 101.2.1. Amended to read: Appendices. Provisions in adopted appendices shall apply. 
(3)  SECTION 108 BOARD OF APPEALS is repealed in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 109.4. Amended to read: Violations of any provision of this Fire Code shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  Section 111.4. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
(6)  Section 307.1.1 Amended to read: Prohibited open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. Any open burning not for the purpose of cooking requires a permit from the Fire Department. 
(7)  Section 307.4.2 
Exception: Any recreational fire must be in a fire resistant container and must not be used to burn household waste, yard debris, leaves, or processed lumber. Recreational containers shall be contained in a metal or non-combustible container and shall not be greater than 60 inches by 60 inches in width of length and shall not have sides less than 15 inches in height. The burning fuel (wood) shall not be stacked above the edge of the container sides. The overall flame shall not be over 4 feet in height from the ground or pit surface and shall be constantly attended. 
(8)  Section 308.1.4. ;hg;Exception 2 is repealed in its entirety. 
Exception 3 is repealed in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 506.1. The last sentence is repealed in its entirety, and is replaced with the following: The key box shall be a Knox-Box&reg; and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. A key box is required in all commercial occupancies that have an alarm system, sprinkler system, standpipe system, any type of fire suppression system, any commercial building over 5,000 square feet or any commercial structure over 1,000 square feet that has two or more businesses or suites, any commercial business with an extraordinary hazard, and for any gated community or apartment complex. 
(10)  Section 506.1.1. Amended to read: Locks. An approved Knox&reg; Padlock shall be installed on gates or similar barriers when required by the fire code official. 
(11)  Section 507.5.1. Amended to read: Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet for commercial or multifamily, or more than 500 feet for one- or two-family residential, from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
(12)  Section 507.5.1. ;hg;Exception 1 is repealed in its entirety. 
Exception 2 is repealed in its entirety. 
(13)  Section 507.5.1.1. Amended to read: Hydrant for any fire department connections system. Buildings equipped with any fire department connections system installed in accordance with Section 903 and Section 905 shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet of the fire department connections. 
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet where approved by the fire code official. 
(14)  Section 509.1. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Access to fire protection equipment shall be within 15 feet of an exterior door, or there must be wall mounted post indicator valves accessible from the exterior of the structure. 
(15)  Section 510.1. Amended to read: Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. Within twelve months from occupancy permission, all new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. 
(16)  Section 903.2.1.1. Amended to read: Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
4.  The fire area contains a multitheater complex. 
(17)  Section 903.2.1.3. Amended to read: Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
(18)  Section 903.2.1.4. Amended to read: Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
(19)  Section 903.2.3. Amended to read: Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows: 
1.  Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than 7,500 square feet in area. 
2.  Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that portion of the building. 
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in any area below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that area where every classroom throughout the building has at least one exterior exit door at ground level. 
(20)  Section 903.2.4. Amended to read: Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  A Group F-1 fire area is located on any floor. 
3.  The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
4.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(21)  Section 903.2.7. Amended to read: Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
2.  A Group M fire area is located above or below grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 20,000 square feet. 
4.  A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
(22)  Section 903.2.8. A subsection 903.2.8.5 shall be added at the end of the section to read: Townhouses. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in townhouses. 
(23)  Section 903.2.9. Amended to read: Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  A Group S-1 fire area is located above or below grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 20,000 square feet. 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
5.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(24)  Section 903.2.9.1. Amended to read: Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406.8 of the International Building Code, as shown: 
1.  Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Buildings no more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet. 
3.  Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
(25)  Section 903.2.10. Amended to read: Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code, as follows: 
1.  Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 10,000 square feet; or 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-3 occupancies. 
(26)  Section 903.2.11.3. is repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following: Buildings three of more stories in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings three or more stories in height. 
Exception: Open parking structures. 
(27)  Section 903.2.13. A section shall be added to read: Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group B occupancies where the fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
(28)  Section 905.3.4.1. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Such cabinet containing the hose connections shall contain a fire extinguisher in conformity with Section 906 in place of fire hose. 
(29)  Section 912.4.1. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Where required, Knox FDC plugs or FDC Stortz Caps shall be installed. 
(30)  Section 1103.2. Amended to read: Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings. Existing buildings that do not have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building, shall be equipped with such coverage according to one of the following: 
1.  Whenever an existing wired communication system cannot be repaired or is being replaced, or where not approved in accordance with Section 510.1. Exception 1. 
2.  Within a time frame established by the adopting authority, which shall be twelve months from notice. 
(31)  Section 5504.3. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the City of Round Rock city limits, with the exception of areas zoned for industrial use. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids may be permitted at the discretion of the fire chief following his review of the proposed location and the fire protection for the storage area. Storage shall not be allowed within 100 feet of the property line of any Group E, I, or R occupancies. 
(32)  Section 5706.2.4.4. Amended to read: Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above ground tanks is prohibited within the City of Round Rock city limits, with the exception of areas that are zoned for industrial use. Storage of Class I and II liquids may be permitted at the discretion of the fire chief following his review of the proposed location and the fire protection for the storage area. Storage shall not be allowed within 100 feet of the property line of any Group E, I, or R occupancies. 
(33)  Section 5804.2. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited within each and every zoning district within the City of Round Rock, with the exception of those districts which are zoned for industrial use. Installation of above ground tanks in industrial districts shall be permitted at the discretion of the fire chief following his review of the proposed installation location and the fire protection for the storage area. When used in conjunction with Chapter 23, above ground storage will be allowed at the discretion of the fire chief. Tanks shall not be located within 100 feet of the property line of any Group E, I, or R occupancies. 
(34)  Section 6104.2. A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: Tanks shall not be located within 100 feet of the property line of any Group E, I, or R occupancies. 
(35)  Appendix A is not adopted, and is repealed in its entirety. 
(36)  Appendix D, Figure D103.1 dealing with cul-de-sac. Any reference to 96' or 96-foot diameter is replaced with 100' or 100-foot diameter. 
(37)  Appendix L, Section L101.1 is adopted with the following amendment: A sentence is added at the end of the section to read: 5. For new construction of eight (8) floors or more. 
(Code 1995, § 5.102; Ord. No. 585, 2-22-1979; Ord. No. G-02-01-24-8C3, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. G-06-12-07-10C1, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. G-09-05-14-8E1, § II, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. G-12-11-20-F3, § XI, 11-20-2012; Ord. No. O-2016-3797, § X, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 16-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-11-20-F3, § XI, adopted Nov. 20, 2012, amended § 16-52 which included provisions covering amendments to section 903 of the 2012 International Fire Code, therefore § 16-53 was no longer current. Former § 16-53 was entitled "Amendments to section 903 of the International Fire Code", relating to the 2006 edition and derived from: Ord. No. G-08-12-18-6A1, § I(5.102.1), adopted Dec. 18, 2008). 
Sec. 16-54. - Fire lanes. 
    Whenever any provision regarding the regulation of fire lanes contained in the most recent edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the city are in conflict with the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(1)  The owner, manager, or person in charge of any building or property for which fire lanes have been approved or required by the fire marshal or his authorized representative shall mark and maintain said fire lanes as provided below: 
a.  All curbs and curb ends shall be painted red with four-inch white lettering stating "NO PARKING-FIRE LANE," "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE," or similar wording. Wording may not be spaced more than 30 feet apart. 
b.  In areas where fire lanes are required but no continuous curb is available, one of the following methods shall be used, in conjunction with the curb markings, to indicate that the fire lane is continuous: 
1.  Option # 1. Signs 12 inches wide and 18 inches in height with red lettering on a white background stating "NO PARKING-FIRE LANE," "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE," or similar wording shall be mounted conspicuously along the edge of the fire lane. Signs may be spaced no more than 60 feet apart and the lettering shall be at least three-eighths inch stroke; or 
2.  Option # 2. From the point the fire lane begins to the point the fire lane ends, including behind all parking spaces which adjoin a fire lane, shall be marked with one continuous red stripe having a minimum width of at least four inches painted on the drive surface behind the parking spaces. All curbing adjoining a fire lane must be painted red. Red stripes and curbs will contain the wording "NO PARKING-FIRE LANE," "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE," or similar wording painted in four-inch white letters. Wording may not be spaced more than 30 feet apart. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to or to in fact alter, destroy, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any sign designating a fire lane required by the terms of this Code. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, or person in charge of any premises to abandon or close a required fire lane without written permission of the fire marshal. 
(4)  a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, allow, permit, or cause to be parked, placed, or remain unattended, any non-emergency motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar obstruction within or upon an area designated as a fire lane and marked by an appropriate sign or curb marking. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of any such motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction parked or unoccupied within an area designated as a fire lane or in such a manner as to obstruct in whole or in part any such fire lane is the person that parked, placed, or permitted to be parked or placed the motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction in such a manner. 
b.  The records of the state department of transportation or appropriate county office showing the name of the registered owner of the motor vehicle, boat or trailer or the person to whom the boat or trailer license is issued shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the named person. 
(5)  Any non-emergency motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction found parked or unoccupied within an area designated as a fire lane as required by this section is hereby declared a nuisance per se. 
(6)  The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of this section upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this section; provided that the spirit of this section shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(7)  a.  The fire marshal or any member of the fire department designated by the fire marshal, the chief of police, or any member of the police department designated by the chief of police are hereby authorized to issue parking citations for any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction found parked or unattended in or upon a designated fire lane and may have such obstruction removed by towing it away. Such vehicle or obstruction may be redeemed by payment of the towage and storage charges at the owner's expense. 
b.  No parking citations shall be voided nor shall the violator be relieved of any penalty assessed by a judge of the municipal court for any provision by the redemption of the obstruction from the storage facility. 
(8)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply herewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1995, § 5.103; Ord. No. G-03-04-24-13D2, 4-24-2003) 
Sec. 16-55. - Emergency access systems. 
    Whenever any provision regarding the regulation of emergency access systems or gates contained in the most recent edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the city are in conflict with the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire marshal means the fire marshal of the city or his designee. 
    Limited access drive means any vehicle access way from a public street to private property which has a device which limits or controls vehicle access onto the property. 
    Limited access gates means a device located on private property which controls or limits access to more than one residential dwelling. 
    Gate opening system means the 3M Opticom Priority Control System or other substantially similar system approved by the fire marshal and compatible with the equipment currently installed in the city's emergency vehicles. 
    Owner means any person or persons, firm, corporation, partnership, association or any other similar entity owing, keeping, being in control of, or managing a residential development or property. 
    Primary emergency access means the drive or access point designed as the primary point or one of several primary points of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. 
    Secondary emergency access means a drive or access point designed as a secondary or back-up means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. 
(2)  General requirements. 
a.  All limited access drives from public streets shall be designed to accommodate emergency service vehicles, including fire, police, and medical services vehicles. All limited access drives from public streets shall be designated as either a primary or secondary emergency access way, as determined by the fire marshal. 
b.  All primary emergency access points shall be equipped to operate with a gate opening system in addition to any emergency key box. The gate opening system shall incorporate a fail-safe manual backup or automatic release in the event of a failure of the electrical or mechanical system. The gate opening system shall be maintained by the property owner in good working condition at all times. The fire marshal shall have the right to inspect the gate opening system at any time. 
c.  All secondary emergency access points shall be equipped with a manual disconnect to allow manual opening of the gate by emergency service personnel. Such manual opening system may be an emergency key box or other device as approved by the fire marshal. 
d.  After December 31, 2003, any primary emergency access gate not fitted with a fully operational gate opening system must be left in the fully open position 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
(3)  Offenses. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to damage, destroy, or tamper with an installed gate opening system or otherwise render an installed gate opening system inoperable. 
b.  After 12:00 midnight on December 31, 2003, it shall be unlawful to close or allow to be or remain closed, a limited access gate which is not fitted with a fully operational gate opening system and a manual backup gate opening system. 
c.  It shall be presumed that the owner of the property on which a violation of subsection (3)a or b of this section has occurred is the party responsible for the offense. 
d.  An offense under subsections (3)a and b of this section is a violation relating to fire safety and public health and is subject to the penalty under section 1-9. 
(Code 1995, § 5.104; Ord. No. G-03-04-24-13D1, 4-24-2003) 
Sec. 16-56. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to other authority granted in this Code, the fire chief and any member of the fire department designated by the fire chief, shall be the enforcement officials for this chapter. These officials, along with peace officers, shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city and the fire department in investigating complaints, issuing stop work orders, summarily abating violations at the owner's or occupant's expense, closing establishments pending corrective action, issuing citations and taking other lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  These officials shall have the authority to order an operation or use to be stopped, or the evacuation of any area, premises, building or vehicle or portion thereof, which contains or is a fire hazard or when it is determined to be necessary in the interest of public safety or the safety of emergency personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to evacuate upon such order, to resist or obstruct the evacuation of another person, or to refuse or resist an order to stop an operation or use. These officials shall have the authority to order the disconnection of utilities to a building or portion thereof to alleviate an immediate and imminent threat to life or property that is occurring in violation of this chapter or to alleviate a fire or life safety hazard that is causing an immediate threat to a building or person. It is unlawful for any person to resist, interfere with or refuse to comply with an order issued under this chapter. Such an order may be verbal or in writing. 
(c)  These officials, along with peace officers, shall also have the authority to issue citations for vehicles parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant in violation of section 545.302 of the Texas Transportation Code. Any vehicle found parked in violation of that section or section 16-54 regarding fire lanes may be removed and impounded at the direction of these officials or a peace officer and any expenses incurred by such removal or impoundment shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 5.105; Ord. No. G-06-09-28-13D1, 9-28-2006) 
Sec. 16-57. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever any provision regarding fire code appeals contained in the most recent edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the city are in conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(1)  Fire code board of appeals. The building standards commission established in chapter 2, article IV, division 4, sitting as the fire code board of appeals, shall hear all appeals under the fire code as set out below. The procedures established in chapter 2, article IV, division 4 shall be followed, except as provided in this article. 
(2)  Subject matter of appeal. When the fire chief rejects or refuses to approve of the mode or manner of fire prevention or fire safety proposed to be followed, or materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that an equally good or more desirable form of fire prevention or fire safety can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent of the meaning of the fire code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or duly authorized agent may appeal the decision to the fire code board of appeals by filing a notice of appeal. 
This appeal process does not apply to a pending criminal charge. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall be in writing on a form approved by the fire chief and shall be filed within ten business days from the date the decision is rendered by the fire chief. 
(4)  Pending appeal. A notice of appeal shall not stay the decision from which the appeal is taken. 
(5)  Hearing. The board, when appealed to, shall conduct a hearing. An appellant shall be entitled to present evidence in support of the appeal and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. The fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall be entitled to present evidence in support of the fire chief's decision and to cross-examine witnesses. The board shall make all determinations regarding the admissibility of evidence and credibility of witnesses and may make reasonable rulings regarding the conduct of the hearing and the manner in which evidence is presented. 
(6)  Decision by the board. After a hearing, the board shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the fire chief. The board is only authorized to reverse or modify the decision if it finds that one or more of the following conditions is satisfied: 
a.  The provisions of the fire code do not apply to the specific case; 
b.  The true intent and meaning of the fire code has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted; 
c.  The alternate method or material is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety; or 
d.  The fire chief did not have or consider all of the relevant evidence necessary to make the decision. 
(b)  The board shall have no authority to waive the requirements of the fire code. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-14-8E1, § III(5.106), 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 16-58-16-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BURNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Outdoor burning of waste and combustible material, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.018; prescribed burning, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 153. 

Sec. 16-88. - Unlawful to burn trash within city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits of the city to burn any type of trash, brush, or any other type of burnable debris within the city limits of the city except as provided in section 16-89. 
(Code 1995, § 5.501) 
Sec. 16-89. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Citizens may burn tree leaves and brush from shrubs, after first obtaining an open burning permit from the fire department. 
(b)  Upon the issuance of an open burning permit by the fire department, the applicant shall pay the fire department a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 5.502; Ord. No. G-08-03-06-8C2, § I, 3-6-2008) 
Secs. 16-90-16-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 217.003, 342.003; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2154. 

Sec. 16-107. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  This article shall apply to fireworks, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer, or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as are not prohibited in this section; or the sale of any kind of fireworks, provided that the same are to be shipped directly out of state, in accordance with the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail, and water; or the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports; or for use by military organizations. 
(c)  The storage, offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling at retail, possession, or using or exploding any fireworks is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and this section shall be applicable and in force in the corporate limits and within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city and extending for a distance outside the city for a total of 5,000 feet, and it shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this article within such area of 5,000 feet outside the city. 
(Code 1995, § 5.601; Ord. No. G-05-02-10-11B1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. G-05-06-23-13A1, 6-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-108. - Fireworks defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, fireworks shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy canons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used; the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same; firecrackers; torpedoes; skyrockets; Roman candles; sparklers; or other devices of like construction; and any devices containing any explosive substance, except that the term fireworks shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of any average 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the interstate commerce regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices for the use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 5.602) 
Sec. 16-109. - Manufacture, sale, possession, and discharge. 
(a)  The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city. 
(b)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, possess, or use or explode any fireworks; provided, that the state fire marshal or other appropriate state official or department, or any city authorities delegated by the state fire marshal, may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by cities, fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or group of individuals. Such permits may be granted upon application to the state fire marshal and after approval of the city, police and fire authorities, and the filing of a bond by the applicant as provided in this article. Every such display shall be handled by competent operators licensed or certified as to competency by the state fire marshal and shall be of such composition, character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the fire marshal, after proper inspection, and of the chief of police, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any persons. 
(c)  Application for permits shall be made, in writing, at least 30 days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege has been granted, sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(d)  The sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for display purposes shall be conducted in accordance with nationally recognized good practices. (See NFPA No. 49-1964 ed.) 
(Code 1995, § 5.603; Ord. No. G-05-06-23-13A1, 6-23-2005) 
Sec. 16-110. - Firework displays; bond and proof of financial responsibility required; site inspection fee. 
(a)  The city council shall require a bond for a licensee under this article, in a sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this article and the regulations of the state fire marshal; provided, however, that no municipality shall be required to file such a bond. 
(b)  Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person making application therefor: 
(1)  Shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person or any agent or employee thereof, in such amount, character, and form as the state fire marshal determines to be necessary for the protection of the public; and 
(2)  Shall pay at the time of application a site inspection fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to the fire department and request the fire department perform a pre-show site inspection prior to the commencement of the display. 
(Code 1995, § 5.604; Ord. No. G-08-03-06-8C2, § II, 3-6-2008) 
Sec. 16-111. - Disposal of unfired fireworks. 
    Any fireworks that remain unfired after a display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in any way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(Code 1995, § 5.605) 
Sec. 16-112. - Seizure of unauthorized fireworks. 
    The fire marshal, chief of police, or their designates shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 5.606; Ord. No. 921, 8-27-1981) 
Sec. 16-113. - Affirmative defense. 
(a)  In this section, the term "passenger area" means the area of a motor vehicle designed for the seating of the operator and passengers of the vehicle. The term does not include: 
(1)  A glove compartment or similar storage area that is locked; 
(2)  The trunk of a vehicle; or 
(3)  The area behind the last upright seat of the vehicle, if the vehicle does not have a trunk. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of a charge of possession of fireworks under this section if: 
(1)  The defendant was operating or was a passenger in a motor vehicle that was being operated in a public place; and 
(2)  The fireworks were not in the passenger area of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 5.607; Ord. No. G-05-06-23-13A1, 6-23-2005) 
Secs. 16-114-16-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXPLOSIVES 

Sec. 16-140. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale, transportation, and use of explosives and blasting agents. 
(Code 1995, § 5.201) 
Sec. 16-141. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to: 
(1)  The Armed Forces of the United States or the State Militia. 
(2)  Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia. 
(3)  The sale, possession or use of fireworks. 
(4)  The possession, transportation and use of small arms ammunition. 
(5)  The possession, storage, transportation and use of not more than 20 pounds of smokeless powder and 2,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal use. 
(6)  The transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents by the United States Bureau of Mines, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Secret Service or police and fire departments acting in their official capacities. 
(7)  Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than 50 pounds of explosives. 
(Code 1995, § 5.202) 
Sec. 16-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blaster's license is an instrument issued by the city engineer, or his designate, authorizing certain individuals to engage in the loading, firing, and supervision of the loading or firing, of explosive materials in accordance with pertinent ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in the city. 
    Blasting agent means any material or mixture consisting of a fuel or oxidizer, intended for blasting, not otherwise classified as an explosive, in which none of the ingredients are classified as explosives; provided that the finished product, as mixed and packaged for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. Materials or mixtures classified as nitrocarbonitrates by the U.S. Department of Transportation regulations shall be included in this definition. 
    Bullet resistant means materials and construction methods capable of preventing penetration of a 180 grain, 30 caliber, soft nose, hunting type bullet, when propelled at a maximum velocity of 2,700 feet per second. 
    Class A permit is an instrument indicating approval by the city engineer, or his designate, for the use of explosives or blasting agents, as required by section 16-143(a)(3), at the specified location for a time period of 45 days from the date of issuance. 
    Class B permit is an instrument indicating approval by the city engineer, or his designate, for the use of explosives or blasting agents, as required by section 16-143(a)(3), at the specified location for a time period of 120 calendar days from the date of issuance. 
    Class C permit is an instrument indicating approval by the city engineer, or his designate, for the use of explosives or blasting agents, as required by section 16-143(a)(3), at the specified location for a time period of one year from the date of issuance. 
    Class D permit is an instrument indicating approval by the city engineer, or his designate, for the use of explosives or blasting agents as required by section 16-143(a)(3), at the specified location for a period of ten days from the date of issuance. 
    Explosives means any substance, or combination of substances, that is commonly used for the purpose of detonation and which upon exposure to any external force or condition, is capable of a relatively instantaneous release of gas and heat. The term "explosives" shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  Substances determined to be Class A and Class B explosives as classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(2)  Nitrocarbonitrates substances (blasting agent) as classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Any material designated as an explosive by the state fire marshal. 
(4)  Certain Class C explosives as designated by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
    Gunpowder means any of various powders used in firearms and small arms ammunition as propelling charges. 
    Inhabited building is a building regularly occupied in whole or in part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, school, railway passenger station, store, airport terminal for passengers or any other building or structure where people are accustomed to congregating and assembling, but excluding any building or structure occupied in connection with manufacture, transportation, storage and use of explosives and blasting agents. 
    Special industrial explosive device means any explosive powerpack containing an explosive charge in the form of a cartridge or construction device. The term includes but is not limited to explosive rivets, explosive bolts, explosive charges for driving pins or studs, cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools and charges of explosives used in jet tapping of open hearth furnaces and jet perforation of oil well casings. 
    Special industrial high explosive material means sheets, extrusions, pellets and packages of high explosives, containing dynamite, trinitrotoluol, penaerythritoltetranitrate, cyclotrimenthylene-trinitramine or other similar compounds used for high-energy-rate forming, expanding and shaping in metal fabrication, and for dismemberment and quick reduction of scrap metal. 
    Test blasting cap No. 8 means one cap containing two grams of a mixture of 80 percent mercury fulminate and 20 percent potassium chlorate, or a cap of equivalent strength. 
(Code 1995, § 5.203; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978; Ord. No. 2330, 3-24-1988) 
Sec. 16-143. - Permits required. 
(a)  Obtaining permits. Permits shall be obtained: 
(1)  To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of explosives or blasting agents. 
(2)  To transport explosives or blasting agents. 
(3)  To use explosives or blasting agents. 
(4)  To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents. 
(5)  To deliver to or receive explosives or blasting agents from a carrier at a terminal between the hours of sunset and sunrise. 
(6)  To transport blasting caps or electric blasting caps on the same vehicle with explosives. 
(b)  Exceptions. Permits required by subsection (a) of this section shall not be issued for: 
(1)  Liquid nitroglycerin. 
(2)  Dynamite (except gelatin dynamite) containing over 60 percent of liquid explosive ingredient. 
(3)  Dynamite having an unsatisfactory absorbent or one that permits leakage of a liquid explosive ingredient under any conditions liable to exist during storage. 
(4)  Nitrocellulose in a dry and uncompressed condition in quantity greater than ten pounds net weight in one package. 
(5)  Fulminate of mercury in a dry condition and fulminate of all other metals in any condition except as a component of manufactured articles not hereinafter forbidden. 
(6)  Explosive compositions that ignite spontaneously or undergo marked decomposition, rendering the products or their use more hazardous, when subjected for 48 consecutive hours or less to a temperature of 167 degrees F (75 degrees C). 
(7)  New explosives until approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation, except that permits may be issued to educational, governmental, or industrial laboratories for instruction or research purposes. 
(8)  Explosives condemned by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(9)  Explosives not packed or marked in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(10)  Explosives containing an ammonium salt and a chlorate. 
(c)  No explosives to be kept at place of habitation or within 100 feet. No person shall keep or store, nor shall any permit be issued to keep or store, any explosives at any place of habitation, or within 100 feet thereof. 
(d)  Storage of explosives not to exceed that authorized in permit. No person possessing a permit for storage of explosives at any place shall keep or store any greater amount or other kind of explosives than are authorized in such permit. 
(e)  City engineer may require explosive operations to be supervised. The city engineer may require that any operations permitted under the provisions of subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section shall be supervised at any or all times by employees of the city, designated by the city engineer to see that all safety and fire regulations are observed. When, in the opinion of the city engineer, or his designate, no undue hazard to life or property exists, the required supervision may be waived. 
(f)  City engineer may deny permit. When, in the opinion of the city engineer or his designate, there is a substantial danger to life, health, or property in the immediate area exposed to the blasting for which a permit is being requested, said permit may be denied. 
(g)  City engineer may request comments from utilities or franchise holders. The city engineer or his designate may request written comments on each permit application from the various affected city utilities or franchise holders. When, in the opinion of the city engineer, or his designate, such utility or franchise holder has valid objection to the issuance of a permit, no permit shall be approved until such objection has been resolved to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his designate. 
(h)  Blaster to apply to city engineer for blasting permit. To obtain a permit as required by this subsection, the licensed blaster or his authorized representative shall file with the city engineer or his designate an application in writing on a form to be furnished for that purpose. Each application shall describe the proposed work, the location of such work, and such other pertinent information as may be required by the city engineer or his designate. 
(i)  Permit fees. Permits authorized by the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of this section shall be issued only upon payment of the appropriate fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. The various city departments, the utilities, and city franchise holders, where normally engaged in such work as described in this article, shall not be required to pay permit fees. 
(Code 1995, § 5.204; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978; Ord. No. 2364, 10-27-1988) 
Sec. 16-144. - Bond required. 
    Before a permit is issued as described in section 16-143, the applicant shall file with the jurisdiction a corporate surety bond in the principal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, or a public liability insurance policy for the same amount, for the purpose of the payment of all damages to persons or property which arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act authorized by the permit upon which any legal judgment results. The city engineer may specify a greater amount when, in his opinion, conditions at the location of use indicate a greater amount is required. Public agencies shall be exempt from this bond requirement. The city engineer may cancel this permit for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 5.205) 
Sec. 16-145. - General requirements. 
(a)  Manufacture of explosives. The manufacture of explosives shall be prohibited unless such manufacture is authorized by the city engineer. 
(b)  Storage of explosives. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of the district in which such storage is to be prohibited, except for temporary storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of explosive material. 
(c)  Quantity of explosives may be limited. The city engineer may limit the quantity of explosives or blasting agents to be permitted at any location. 
(d)  Explosives restricted to authorized locations. No person shall possess, offer for sale, sell or display explosives or blasting agents at any location not authorized by permit issued by the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 5.206; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978) 
Sec. 16-146. - Blaster's license. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  No person shall engage in the use of explosive materials within the city unless that person is a licensed blaster or is under the direct supervision of a licensed blaster. Any person engaging in the use of explosives who is not a licensed blaster or working under the direct supervision of a licensed blaster, or who violates any provision of this article, shall be subject to the criminal sanctions imposed for violations of this Code. No person shall engage in the use of explosive materials within any area determined by the fire department to be so congested that only specialized, controlled, and technical blasting can ensure public safety unless such person has a Class "A" blaster's license. 
(2)  Such congested areas shall include downtown Round Rock, areas in and adjacent to schools, hospitals, and densely populated residential areas, and other areas in which blasting would pose a high risk of damage to property or injury to the public, except as permitted by other subsections of this section. The necessity of the appropriate blaster's license shall be determined during preconstruction construction planning by the city engineer or his designate. Further, the city engineer or his designate may accept an appropriate blaster's license granted by another municipality if said municipality has agreed to accept blaster's licenses issued by the city. 
(b)  Classifications of blasting licenses. There shall be four classifications of blasters: Class "A" blaster, Class "B" blaster, Class "C" blaster, and Class "S" blaster. In order to obtain a Class "C" blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. In order to obtain a Class "B" blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy the requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (3) of this section. In order to obtain a Class "S" blaster's license the applicant must satisfy the requirements of subsections (b)(1) and (5) of this section. 
(1)  General requirements for all blasters. In order to obtain a blaster's license of any classification, the applicant shall: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age; 
b.  Be in adequate physical and mental condition to perform the work required; 
c.  Be able to understand and give written and oral directions in the English language; 
d.  Not be addicted to alcohol, or to narcotics and other dangerous drugs; 
e.  Have a working knowledge of federal, state, and local laws and regulations pertaining to explosive materials; 
f.  Have no revoked, suspended, or terminated blaster's license, or any criminal action involving blasting activities pending in a federal, state, or municipal court of law; and 
g.  Pay the license fee in accordance with the schedule established by the city council. 
(2)  Requirements for Class "C" blaster. In order to obtain a Class "C" blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant satisfies the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
b.  The applicant has at least two years experience in the field of transportation, storing, handling and use of explosive materials and submits credible documentary proof of such experience. 
c.  The applicant takes and passes a test which demonstrates that the applicant has adequate knowledge to safely handle or use explosive materials. 
(3)  Requirements for Class "B" blaster. In order to obtain a Class "B" blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant satisfies the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
b.  The applicant has held a Class "C" blaster's license from the city for a period of at least two years or has at least four years of experience in the field of transporting, storing, handling, and using explosive materials and submits credible documentary proof of such experience. 
c.  The applicant must take the Class "B" blasting test and achieve a grade of at least 70. 
(4)  Requirements for Class "A" blaster. In order to obtain a Class "A" blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant satisfies the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
b.  The applicant has held a Class "B" blaster's license from the city for at least two years or the applicant has at least six years of experience in the field of transporting, storing, handling, and using explosive materials and submits credible documentary proof of such experience. 
c.  The applicant must be knowledgeable in designing blasting programs, in figuring powder factors, and in deploying the precise use of delay blasting for all phases of construction. 
d.  The applicant must be capable of instructing others in the explosives field. 
e.  The applicant must take the Class "A" blasting test and achieve a grade of at least 70. The test will consist of 100 questions taken from the Dupont Blasters Handbook and the city blasting regulations. 
(5)  Requirements for class "S" blaster. In order to obtain a Class "S", blaster's license, the applicant must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant satisfies the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
b.  The applicant has had a Class "C", blaster's license from the city for a period of at least two years or has at least four years of experience in the field of transporting, storing, handling, and using explosive materials and submits credible documentary proof of such experience. 
c.  The applicant takes the Class "S" blaster's test and achieves a grade of at least 70. 
(c)  License to remain in effect for one year. A license issued hereunder shall remain in full force for one year from the date it was issued unless revoked, suspended, or terminated by the city engineer or his designate. Reexamination may be required by the city engineer before a license is renewed should the performance of an individual license holder indicate the need for such reexamination. 
(d)  License fee. A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be charged for initial issuance of each license. 
(e)  License not transferable. No license shall be assigned or transferred. 
(f)  City engineer may revoke license. All licenses approved hereunder are conditioned that all work performed shall be done with faithful and strict compliance with the terms of all federal and state laws, permits, pertinent ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city. Violations of such conditions, as determined by the city engineer or his designate, shall be cause for the revocation, suspension, or termination of such license for any period up to one year by the city engineer or his designate. The city engineer or his designate may reinstate a revoked, suspended or terminated license only after resolution of first offense violations. No license shall be approved by the city engineer and issued to any person who has had a license revoked, suspended or terminated more than once without the approval of the explosives appeal board. 
(g)  Applicant failing examination. If an initial applicant for a blasting license fails to pass the required examination, the applicant shall not be eligible for reexamination for a period of 30 days. If an applicant fails to pass the required examination at any subsequent time, he shall not be eligible for another examination for a period of six months following such failure. 
(h)  Restrictions applicable to Class "C" blasters. Although a Class "C" blaster may blast under instruction and direction of a Class "A" or Class "B" blaster, a Class "C" blaster shall not be named on the blasting permit as the responsible blaster except on permits for blasting operations involving uninhabited areas. 
(i)  Restrictions applicable to Class "S" blasters. A Class "S" blaster is restricted to blasting operations involving swimming pools and septic tanks. 
(j)  Restrictions applicable to Class "B" blasters. A Class "B" blaster is restricted from blasting operations involving swimming pools and septic systems unless a Class "S" rider is attached to the Class "B" license. To obtain a Class "S" rider, a Class "B" blaster must pass the Class "S" blaster's test and achieve a grade of at least 70. 
Exception: Blasters holding only Class "B" licenses may conduct blasting operations involving swimming pools and septic systems for up to a year after the effective date of this section or until the blaster's Class "B" license requires renewal, whichever occurs first. 
(k)  Acceptance of City of Austin licenses. A valid City of Austin license applicable to the respective blasting classification shall satisfy these blasting requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 5.207; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978; Ord. No. 2330, 3-24-1988; Ord. No. 2364, 10-27-1988) 
Sec. 16-147. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of appeals. The fire code board of appeals as established in section 16-57 shall conduct hearings and make decisions regarding action taken by the city engineer or his designate, upon the issuance, revocation, suspension, or termination of permits and licenses authorized by this section. 
(b)  Handling of appeals; distribution of findings. 
(1)  Any person who has been denied issuance of a permit or license authorized by this section or who has had a permit or license revoked, suspended or terminated by the city engineer or his designate, may appeal such action by notifying the chairman of the fire code board of appeals in writing within ten calendar days of such action by the city engineer. 
(2)  Upon receipt in writing of an appeal pursuant to this section, the chairman of the fire code board of appeals shall call a meeting within ten days of the receipt of the appeal and shall notify the applicant in writing of the time and place of the hearing. Complete minutes shall be taken of all the proceedings of the fire code board of appeals, and the findings and decision of the board shall be in writing. The minutes and decision of the fire code board of appeals shall be distributed to all members of the board, to persons appealing to the board and to the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 5.208; Ord. No. G-09-05-14-8E1, § IV, 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 16-148. - Storage of explosives. 
(a)  Explosives to be stored in magazines. Explosives, including special industrial high-explosive materials, shall be stored in magazines which meet the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Custody of magazines. Magazines shall be in the custody of a competent person at all times who shall be at least 21 years of age and who shall be held responsible for compliance with all safety precautions. 
(c)  Open flames prohibited within 50 feet of magazines. Smoking, matches, open flames, spark producing devices and firearms shall be prohibited inside or within 50 feet of magazines. Combustible materials shall not be stored within 50 feet of magazines. 
(d)  Surrounding land to be kept clear of debris. The land surrounding magazines shall be kept clear of brush, dried grass, leaves, trash and debris for a distance of at least 50 feet. 
(e)  Magazines to be kept locked. Magazines shall be kept locked except when being inspected or when explosives are being placed therein or being removed therefrom. 
(f)  Magazines to be kept clean. Magazines shall be kept clean, dry and free of grit, paper, empty packages and rubbish. 
(g)  Artificial heat or light approved. Magazines shall not be provided with other than approved artificial heat or light. Approved electric safety flash lights or safety lanterns may be used. 
(h)  Certain explosives not to be stored. Blasting caps, electric blasting caps, detonating primers and primed cartridges shall not be stored in the same magazine with other explosives. 
(i)  Type magazines allowed. Magazines shall be of two types, namely Class I and Class II. 
(j)  Storage of explosives exceeding 100 pounds. Storage of explosives in quantities exceeding 100 pounds shall be in a Class I magazine, except that a Class II magazine may be used for temporary storage of a larger quantity of explosives at the site of blasting operations where such amount constitutes not more than one day's supply for use in current operations. At the end of the day's operations, any remaining explosives shall be safely destroyed or returned to a Class I magazine. 
(k)  Storage of explosives of 100 pounds or less. Storage of explosives in quantities of 100 pounds or less shall be in Class I or Class II magazines, except that explosives in any quantity when stored in remote locations shall be in Class I, bullet-resistant magazines. 
(l)  Location of magazines. Class I and Class II magazines shall be located away from inhabited buildings, passenger railways, public highways and other magazines in conformity with the provisions of the American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives, Table No. 201, except as provided in subsection (m) of this section. 
(m)  Distance to be maintained. At the site of blasting operations, a distance of not less than 100 feet shall be maintained between Class I magazines and the blast area. Class II magazines shall be kept not less than 150 feet from the blast area when the quantity of explosives temporarily kept therein is in excess of 25 pounds and not less than 50 feet when the quantity of explosives is 25 pounds or less. 
(n)  Packages of explosives. Packages of explosives shall not be unpacked or repacked in a magazine nor within 50 feet of a magazine or in close proximity to other explosives. Opened packages of explosives shall be securely closed before being returned to a magazine. 
(o)  Magazines to store explosives only. Magazines shall not be used for the storage of any metal tools nor any commodity except explosives, blasting agents and oxidizers used in compounding blasting agents. The quantity of blasting agents and oxidizers shall be included when computing the total quantity of explosives for determining distance requirements. 
(p)  Disposition of deteriorated explosives. When an explosive has deteriorated to an extent that it is in an unstable or dangerous condition, or if nitroglycerin leaks from any explosive, then the person in possession of such explosive shall immediately report the fact to the city engineer and, upon his authorization, shall proceed to destroy such explosives and clean floors stained with nitroglycerin in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. Only experienced persons shall do the work of destroying explosives. 
Table 201. American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives 
Explosives Distance In Feet When Storage Is Barricaded Pounds 
Over Pounds Not Over From 
Inhabited 
Buildings From 
Passenger 
Railways From 
Public 
Highways Separation 
of 
Magazines 2 5 70 30 30 6 5 10 90 35 35 8 10 20 110 45 45 10 20 30 125 50 50 11 30 40 140 55 55 12 40 50 150 60 60 14 50 75 170 70 70 15 75 100 190 75 75 16 100 125 200 80 80 18 125 150 215 85 85 19 150 200 235 95 95 21 200 250 255 105 105 23 250 300 270 110 110 24 300 400 295 120 120 27 400 500 320 130 130 29 500 600 340 135 135 31 600 700 355 145 145 32 700 800 375 150 150 33 800 900 390 155 155 35 900 1,000 400 160 160 36 1,000 1,200 425 170 165 39 1,200 1,400 450 180 170 41 1,400 1,600 470 190 175 43 1,600 1,800 490 195 180 44 1,800 2,000 505 205 185 45 2,000 2,500 545 220 190 49 2,500 3,000 580 235 195 52 3,000 4,000 635 255 210 58 4,000 5,000 685 275 225 61 5,000 6,000 730 295 235 65 6,000 7,000 770 310 245 68 7,000 8,000 800 320 250 72 8,000 9,000 835 335 255 75 9,000 10,000 865 345 260 78 10,000 12,000 875 370 270 82 12,000 14,000 885 390 275 87 14,000 16,000 900 405 280 90 16,000 18,000 940 420 285 94 18,000 20,000 975 435 290 98 20,000 25,000 1,055 470 315 105 25,000 30,000 1,130 500 340 112 30,000 35,000 1,205 525 360 119 35,000 40,000 1,275 550 380 124 40,000 45,000 1,340 570 400 129 45,000 50,000 1,400 590 420 135 50,000 55,000 1,460 610 440 140 55,000 60,000 1,515 630 455 145 60,000 65,000 1,565 645 470 150 65,000 70,000 1,610 660 485 155 70,000 75,000 1,655 675 500 160 75,000 80,000 1,695 690 510 165 80,000 85,000 1,730 705 520 170 85,000 90,000 1,760 720 530 175 90,000 95,000 1,790 730 540 180 95,000 100,000 1,815 745 545 185 100,000 110,000 1,835 770 550 195 110,000 120,000 1,855 790 555 205 120,000 130,000 1,875 810 560 215 130,000 140,000 1,890 835 565 225 140,000 150,000 1,900 850 570 235 150,000 160,000 1,935 870 580 245 160,000 170,000 1,965 890 590 255 170,000 180,000 1,990 905 600 265 180,000 190,000 2,010 920 605 275 190,000 200,000 2,030 935 610 285 200,000 210,000 2,055 955 620 295 210,000 230,000 2,100 980 635 315 230,000 250,000 2,155 1,010 650 335 250,000 275,000 2,215 1,040 670 360 275,000 300,000 2,275 1,075 690 385  
Notes: 
(1)  All types of blasting caps in strengths through No. 8 be rated at 11/2 pounds of explosives per 1,000 caps. 
(2)  The term "barricaded" means that a building containing explosives is effectually screened from a magazine, building, railway, or highway, either by a natural barricade, or by an artificial barricade of such height that a straight line from the top of any sidewall of the building containing explosives to the eave line of any magazine, or building, or to a point 12 feet above the center of a railway or highway, will pass through such intervening natural or artificial barricade. 
(3)  The term "artificial barricade" means an artificial mound or revetted wall of earth of a minimum thickness of three feet. 
(4)  The term "natural barricade" means natural features of the ground, such as hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures which require protection cannot be seen from the magazine when the trees are bare of leaves. 
(5)  When a building containing explosives is not barricaded, the distances shown in the table shall be doubled. 
(6)  The term "inhabited building" means a building regularly occupied in whole or in part as a habitation for human beings, or any church, school, railway station, store, or other structure occupied in connection with the manufacture, transportation, storage, or use of explosives. 
(7)  When two or more storage magazines are located on the same property, each magazine shall comply with minimum distances specified from inhabited buildings, railways, and highways, and in addition they shall be separated from each other by not less than the distances shown from "separation of magazines," except that the quantity of explosives contained in cap magazines shall govern in regard to the spacing of said cap magazines from magazines containing other explosives. If any two or more magazines are separated from each other by less than the specified "separation of magazines" distances, then such two or more magazines, as a group, shall be considered as one magazine, and the total quantity of explosives stored in such group must be treated as if stored in a single magazine located on the site of any magazine of the group, and shall comply with the distances specified from other magazines, inhabited buildings, railways, and highways. 
(8)  This table applies only to the manufacture and permanent storage of commercial explosives. It is not applicable to transportation of explosives, or any handling or temporary storage necessary or incident thereto. It is not intended to apply to bombs, projectiles, or other heavily encased explosives. 
(Code 1995, § 5.209) 
Sec. 16-149. - Gunpowder. 
(a)  Storage. The city engineer may authorize the storage of smokeless powder not to exceed 100 pounds, black sporting powder not to exceed five pounds, and small arms primers not to exceed 20,000, in approved establishments. Smokeless powder exceeding 20 pounds shall be stored in an approved Class II magazine. Small arms primers shall be stored in a manner prescribed by the city engineer. 
(b)  Display of smokeless powder. The display of smokeless powder shall only be in original containers and shall not exceed 20 pounds. 
(c)  Small arms primers. Small arms primers shall not be stored or displayed with smokeless powder or other explosives. 
(d)  Smokeless powder not to be repackaged. Smokeless powder shall not be repackaged except in original type containers and repackaging shall only be permitted in locations designated and approved by the city engineer. 
(e)  Black sporting powder not to be repackaged. The repackaging of black sporting powder shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1995, § 5.210) 
Sec. 16-150. - Class I magazines. 
(a)  Structure. A magazine may be a building or excavation, tunnel or igloo, or military-type magazine or a portable magazine constructed as required in this section. 
(b)  Magazines to be resistant. Class I magazines shall be bullet resistant, fire resistant, weatherproof, theft resistant and well ventilated. 
Exception: Magazines used for the storage of blasting agents, Class B and Class C explosives need not be bullet resistant. 
(c)  Building-type magazines. Building-type magazines shall be constructed of masonry, wood, metal or a combination of these materials when bullet resistance is required: 
(1)  Masonry units not less than eight inches in thickness with all hollow spaces filled with concrete, well-tamped sand, or equivalent material; 
(2)  Reinforced concrete not less than six inches in thickness; 
(3)  Steel walls of minimum manufacturers standard gauge No. 14 (0.0747 inch) may be used, provided there are two layers spaced at least six inches apart with all hollow spaces filled with concrete, well tamped sand or equivalent material; 
(4)  One layer of manufacturers standard gauge No. 6 (0.1943 inch) or heavier steel, lined on the interior with a minimum of four inches of wood; 
(5)  Two layers of manufacturers standard gauge No. 6 (0.1943 inch) or heavier steel, spaced a minimum one-half inch apart and lined on the interior with a minimum of two inches of wood; or 
(6)  Two layers of wood, at least two inches nominal thickness each, spaced a minimum of four inches apart with the hollow spaces filled with concrete, well-tamped sand, or equivalent material. 
The roof shall also be protected when the magazine is located where it is possible to fire a bullet directly through it into the explosives stored inside. 
NOTE: Any sheeting used shall be tongue and groove lumber or plywood. 
(d)  Doors. Doors shall be of bullet resistant construction and shall be installed in such a manner that the hinges and hasps cannot be removed when the doors are locked and closed. Doors shall be equipped with substantial and approved means of locking. Each door shall be equipped with two separate locks or a lock requiring two separate keys. All padlocks shall be protected with steel caps constructed so as to prevent sawing or lever action on the locks or hasps. 
(e)  Floors. Floors of magazines shall be securely fastened in place and shall be capable of withstanding the loads imposed. 
(f)  Roofs and exterior sides. The roofs and exterior sides of building-type magazines may be of wood construction covered with not less than No. 26 gauge metal. Roofs of building-type magazines located where it is possible to fire a bullet directly through the roof into the magazine at such an angle that the bullet would strike the explosives therein, shall be constructed according to subsection (c) of this section, or equipped with a sand tray located at the eaves line and covering the entire magazine ceiling area except that necessary for ventilation. Sand in the sand tray shall be maintained at a depth of not less than four inches. 
(g)  Ventilation. Magazines shall be ventilated to minimize dampness and heating of stored explosives. Ventilation openings shall be screened with 14 mesh, No. 21 gauge wire to prevent the entrance of sparks and shall be protected in a manner that will maintain the bullet resistance of the magazine. 
(h)  Interiors. Magazine interiors shall have a smooth finish with all nails, screws, bolts, and nuts countersunk or blinded. 
(i)  Approaches to magazines. The approaches to magazines shall be provided with warning signs reading, "EXPLOSIVES-KEEP OUT" in red letters not less than four inches in height and a stroke of at least five-eighths inch. The lettering shall be imposed upon a white background. Location of signs shall be within 100 feet of the magazine and so placed that a bullet through the sign will not strike the magazine. 
(j)  Warning sign on door. There shall be posted an additional warning sign on the door with the letters not less than two inches in height and a stroke of one-fourth inch on a contrasting background reading "EXPLOSIVES, DANGEROUS." 
(Code 1995, § 5.211) 
Sec. 16-151. - Class II magazines. 
(a)  Construction. Class II magazines shall be constructed of wood, metal, fiber, or a combination thereof, or any equivalent construction. Class II magazines shall be well constructed as follows: 
(1)  Two-inch nominal thickness lumber covered on the exterior with a minimum of No. 20 manufacturer's standard gauge steel; 
(2)  Two thicknesses of one-inch plywood covered on the exterior with minimum No. 20 manufacturer's standard gauge steel; 
(3)  Fiber equal in strength to wood as indicated in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section covered on the exterior with a minimum of No. 20 manufacturer's standard gauge steel; 
(4)  Minimum No. 14 manufacturer's standard gauge steel, lined on the interior with one layer of one-inch thick plywood; or 
(5)  Material of equal strength and fire resistance. 
(b)  To be located for easy removal. Class II magazines containing explosives and located in buildings shall be located for easy removal in case of fire. 
(c)  To be painted. Class II magazines shall be painted red and when size permits shall bear lettering in white on sides and top, at least three inches high with a one-half-inch stroke which reads "EXPLOSIVES." 
(d)  To be adequately secured. Class II magazines containing explosives, left at locations where no one is in attendance, shall be adequately secured to prevent their theft. 
(Code 1995, § 5.212) 
Sec. 16-152. - Use and handling of explosives. 
(a)  Blasting operations. Blasting operations shall be conducted during daylight hours except when authorized at other times by the city engineer. 
(b)  Who may handle and fire explosives. The handling and firing of explosives shall only be performed by the person possessing a valid explosives certificate issued by the city engineer, or by employees under his direct personal supervision who are at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  Handling while under the influence of drugs and intoxicants prohibited. No person shall handle explosives while under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics. 
(d)  Smoking prohibited. No person shall smoke or carry matches while handling explosives or while in the vicinity thereof. No smoking signs shall be posted in areas where explosives are being handled. The signs shall be visible for at least 25 feet. 
(e)  Open flame light prohibited. No open flame light shall be used in the vicinity of explosives. 
(f)  Utilities to be notified in advance of blasting. Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas, electric, water, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph or steam utilities, the blaster shall notify the appropriate representative of such utilities at least 24 hours in advance of blasting, specifying the location and intended time of such blasting. In an emergency, this time limit may be waived by the city engineer. 
(g)  Conduct of blasting. Blasting operations shall be conducted in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(h)  Pre-blast precautions. Before a blast is fired, the person in charge shall make certain that all surplus explosives are in a safe place, all persons and vehicles are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, and a loud warning signal has been sounded. 
(i)  Precautions against accidental discharge. Due precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental discharge of electric blasting caps from current induced by radio or radar transmitters, lightning, adjacent power lines, dust storms, or other sources of extraneous electricity. These precautions shall include: 
(1)  The suspension of all blasting operations and removal of persons from the blasting area during the approach and progress of an electrical storm. 
(2)  The posting of signs warning against the use of mobile radio transmitters on all roads within 350 feet of the blasting operations. 
(3)  Compliance with nationally recognized good practice when blasting within 11/2 miles of broadcast or high-power short wave transmitters. 
(j)  When adequate blasting mat required. When blasting is done in a congested area or in close proximity to a building, structure, railway, highway, or any other installation that may be damaged by material being thrown into the air, the blast shall be covered with an adequate blasting mat. Proof that any such building, structure, railway, highway, vehicle, conveyance, or other installation was damaged to any degree by material which was so thrown into the air shall raise a rebuttable presumption that said blast was not covered with an adequate blasting mat. For purposes of this subsection, an otherwise adequate blasting mat used improperly shall not be considered to be an adequate blasting mat. 
(k)  Tools. Tools used for opening packages of explosives shall be constructed of non-sparking materials. 
(l)  Packing materials to be disposed of. Empty boxes and paper and fiber packing materials which have previously contained high explosives shall not be used again for any purpose, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
(m)  Explosives not to be abandoned. Explosives shall not be abandoned. 
(n)  Exposed blasting cap lead wires. All exposed blasting cap lead wires in the ground from previous shots shall be removed at the end of the work day. 
(o)  Particle velocities. Particle velocities shall not exceed the safe levels indicated in figure A below and in no case shall particle velocities exceed 1.7 inches per second. Monitoring of particle velocities for all blasting operations shall be carried out as outlined in this section. When particle velocities exceed 0.5 inches per second, blast frequencies in excess of the safe limits specified herein will require the immediate suspension of blasting and procedures to correct the excess velocity or frequency. The city engineer or his designate may grant or require variances from this limit as required to adequately protect the public safety. Air over pressures shall not exceed 129 decibels on five-sixths hertz high pass monitoring system. 
FIGURE A 

Safe Levels of blasting vibration using a combination of velocity and displacement. 
(p)  Blast monitors. Blast monitors, such as a seismic blast recording machine, are required for all blasting operations for which a permit is issued by the city unless specifically exempted by the city engineer or his designate. Blast monitors may be inspected by the city engineer or his designate. Frequency and air over pressures need not be monitored until six months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived unless specifically required by the city engineer or his designate. 
(q)  Monitoring technician. Monitoring technicians, not employed by a blasting operator, shall be used whenever a blast monitor is required. Monitoring technicians shall be trained in proper placement of monitor sensors and proper functioning of the instrument to be used. All monitoring reports shall carry the seal of a state professional engineer indicating the accuracy and validity of such reports. 
(r)  Blasting trunk wire. Blasting trunk wire of 18-gauge minimum shall be used while conducting blasting operations under permits. 
(s)  Approved blasting machines. Approved blasting machines shall be used. All other equipment is prohibited. 
(t)  Detonating cord. Detonating cord may be used only when approved on the blasting permit. Unauthorized use of detonating cord shall result in the temporary suspension of the blasting permit and/or blaster's license. 
(u)  Other conditions set by city engineer or his designate. Other conditions may be set by city engineer or his designate for the approval of a permit application that are necessary, in his opinion, to adequately protect the public health and safety. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, reduced allowable particle velocities, additional monitoring, increased insurance protection, hours of operation, type and amount of explosives used and engineered blasting plans. 
(v)  No blasting on Sundays, legal holidays, or between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Except with written approval, no blasting shall be done on Sundays, legal holidays, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(w)  Pre-blast notification. All blasting operations shall be preceded by a pre-blast notification to the owners or managers of all affected premises. The range of the pre-blast notification shall be at the discretion of the blaster or as required by the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 5.213; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978; Ord. No. 2330, 3-24-1988) 
Sec. 16-153. - Transportation of explosives. 
(a)  Transporting explosives restricted. Explosives shall not be carried or transported in or upon a public conveyance or vehicles carrying passengers for hire. 
(b)  Requirements of vehicles transporting explosives. Vehicles used for transporting explosives shall be strong enough to carry the load without difficulty and shall be in good mechanical condition. If vehicles do not have a closed body, the explosives shall be covered with a flameproof and moistureproof tarpaulin or other effective protection against moisture and sparks. Such vehicles shall have tight floors, and exposed spark-producing metal on the inside of the body shall be covered with wood or other non-sparking material to prevent contact with packages of explosives. Packages of explosives shall not be loaded above the sides of open-body vehicles. 
(c)  City engineer approval required. Explosives shall not be transported on any vehicle not authorized by the city engineer. 
(d)  Fire extinguishers required. Every vehicle when used for transporting explosives shall be equipped with not less than one approved type fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 2-A, 10-B, C, or two approved type fire extinguishers, one of which shall have a minimum rating of 2-A and the other a minimum rating of 10-B, or C. Extinguishers shall be so located as to be readily available for use. 
(e)  Vehicles transporting explosives to be inspected. It shall be the duty of the person to whom a permit has been issued to transport explosives over the highways of the municipality, to inspect those vehicles employed by him to determine that: 
(1)  Fire extinguishers are filled and in operating condition. 
(2)  Electric wires are insulated and securely fastened. 
(3)  The motor, chassis and body are reasonably clean and free of excessive grease and oil. 
(4)  The fuel tank and fuel line are securely fastened and are not leaking. 
(5)  Brakes, lights, horn, windshield wipers and steering mechanism are functioning properly. 
(6)  Tires are properly inflated and free of defects. 
(7)  The vehicle is in proper condition for transporting explosives. 
(f)  Spark-producing metals not to be carried. Spark-producing metals or spark-producing metal tools shall not be carried in the body of a vehicle transporting explosives. 
(g)  Dangerous articles restricted. Only those dangerous articles authorized by the U.S. Department of Transportation to be loaded with explosives shall be carried in the body of a vehicle transporting explosives. 
(h)  Flame-producing devices prohibited. No person shall carry matches or any other flame-producing device, or carry any firearms or loaded cartridges while in or near a vehicle transporting explosives; or drive, load or unload any such vehicle in a careless or reckless manner. 
(i)  Drivers of vehicles transporting explosives. Vehicles transporting explosives shall be in the custody of drivers who are physically fit, careful, capable, reliable, able to read and write the English language, not addicted to the use or under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics, and not less than 21 years of age. They shall be familiar with state and municipal traffic regulations, and the provisions of this section governing the transportation of explosives. 
(j)  Explosives signs required. Vehicles transporting explosives shall display explosives signs on both sides, front and rear conforming to the requirements of the Vehicle Code. 
(k)  Blasting caps to be separated from other explosives. Blasting caps and electric blasting caps when transported on the same vehicle with other explosives shall be separated from the other explosives by containment within a Class II magazine. 
(l)  Congested traffic to be avoided. Vehicles transporting explosives shall be routed to avoid congested traffic and densely populated areas. 
(m)  Transporting through tunnels or subways prohibited. Explosives shall not be transported through any completed vehicular tunnel or subway. 
(n)  Vehicles not to be left unattended. Vehicles transporting explosives shall not be left unattended at any time within the jurisdiction. 
(o)  Passengers on transporting vehicles. Unless authorized by the city engineer, no person other than the driver and one assistant who is at least 18 years of age, shall ride on any vehicle transporting explosives. 
(p)  Requirements when involved in accidents. The fire and police departments shall be promptly notified when a vehicle transporting explosives is involved in an accident, breaks down, or catches fire. Only in the event of such an emergency shall the transfer of explosives from one vehicle to another be allowed on highways within the jurisdiction and only when qualified supervision is provided. Except in such an emergency, a vehicle transporting explosives shall not be parked before reaching its destination except at stopping and parking places designated and approved by the city engineer. 
(q)  Delivery. Delivery shall only be made to authorized persons and into approved magazines or approved temporary storage or handling areas. 
(r)  Restrictions on repairs or storage. Vehicles containing explosives shall not be taken into a garage, or repair shop, for repairs or storage. 
(Code 1995, § 5.214) 
Sec. 16-154. - Explosives and blasting agents at terminals. 
(a)  City engineer may designate permitted locations. The city engineer may designate the location and specify the maximum quantity of explosives or blasting agents which may be loaded, unloaded, reloaded or temporarily retained at each terminal where such operations are permitted. 
(b)  Shipments to comply with federal regulations. Shipments of explosives or blasting agents delivered to carriers shall comply with the U.S. Department of Transportation regulations. 
(c)  Carriers to notify city engineer. Carriers shall immediately notify the city engineer when explosives or blasting agents are received at terminals. 
(d)  Carriers to notify consignees. Carriers shall immediately notify consignees of the arrival of explosives or blasting agents at terminals. 
(e)  Truck terminals to conform to conditions. Truck terminals where explosives are loaded, unloaded or transferred shall conform to the following conditions: 
(1)  There shall be no aboveground storage tanks of flammable or combustible liquids or other hazardous substances on the terminal property or on immediate adjoining property, which would present a significant exposure hazard. 
(2)  There shall be no structures or occupancies on immediately adjoining property which would constitute a serious exposure hazard to the terminal. 
(3)  The terminal property shall be sufficiently large that dock or vehicle storage areas containing explosives shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any structure on adjoining property. 
(4)  Adequate access to adjoining streets shall be provided to and from the terminal property. Local routes between terminals and deviations from state approved routes shall be prescribed by the city engineer. 
(5)  Explosives shall be kept in vehicles to the greatest extent possible. During transferring or loading operations, the explosives should remain on the ground or on docks for as short a time as possible. 
(6)  Specific areas of docks shall be designated for the temporary "storage" of explosives, during loading or transferring operations. A minimum distance shall be specified and maintained between this designated area and all other materials on the dock. Combustible storage and particularly flammable or combustible liquids shall be kept at the greatest possible distance from this designated area. 
(7)  At all times, a watchman or guard shall be on duty on the terminal property and he shall be capable of driving all equipment in the area. At times when there are a substantial number of vehicles carrying explosives in the terminal, additional persons capable of driving shall be provided. 
(8)  Adequate security against unauthorized persons entering the terminal shall be provided. In metropolitan areas, this will require a fence and adequate gates. 
(9)  The terminal shall be adequately lighted for normal observation of all vehicles containing explosives. 
(10)  Adequate fire protection appliances shall be provided for the loading dock near the designated explosives area and near parked vehicles. 
(11)  A specific area of the terminal property shall be designated for vehicles containing explosives. 
(12)  Vehicles containing any special inherent hazard, such as mechanical refrigeration equipment, shall be kept separated from the area designated for the parking of explosives vehicles. 
(13)  Shipments of explosives shall be transported without unnecessary delay, keeping the explosives in the terminal an absolute, minimum length of time, not to exceed 48 hours, excluding Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1995, § 5.215) 
Sec. 16-155. - Blasting agents in general. 
(a)  To be handled in the same manner as explosives. Except when subject to U.S. Department of Transportation regulations, blasting agents shall be stored, handled and used in the same manner as explosives. 
(b)  Ammonium nitrate stores. Any ammonium nitrate stored at a closer distance to the blasting agent storage area than as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall be added to the quantity of blasting agents to calculate the total quantity involved for application of the American Table of Distances. 
(c)  Separation distances between mixing units. Minimum intra-plant separation distances between mixing units and the ammonium nitrate storage areas and blasting agent storage areas shall be in conformity with the Table of Recommended Separation Distances of Ammonium Nitrate and Blasting Agents from explosives or blasting agents as set forth in NFPA pamphlet No. 495, appendix A. 
(Code 1995, § 5.216) 
Sec. 16-156. - Mixing blasting agents. 
(a)  Buildings and other facilities used for mixing. Buildings or other facilities used for mixing blasting agents shall be located away from inhabited buildings, passenger railways, and public highways, in accordance with the provisions of the American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives, Table No. 201. 
(b)  Production of blasting agents limited. Not more than eight hours' production of blasting agents or the limit determined by the American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives, Table No. 201, whichever is less, shall be permitted in or near the building or other facility used for mixing blasting agents. Larger quantities shall be stored in magazines. 
(c)  Construction of blasting facilities. Buildings or other facilities used for the mixing of blasting agents shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the building code. 
(d)  Mixing of blasting agents. Compounding and mixing of recognized formulations of blasting agents shall be conducted in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(e)  Smoking or open flames not permitted. Smoking or open flames shall not be permitted in or within 50 feet of any building or facility used for the mixing of blasting agents. 
(f)  Empty oxidizer bags to be disposed of daily. Empty oxidizer bags shall be disposed of daily in a manner approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1995, § 5.217) 
Sec. 16-157. - Transportation of blasting agents. 
    Vehicles transporting blasting agents not subject to U.S. Department of Transportation regulations shall comply with all requirements of section 16-153 except that they shall be marked or placarded on both sides, front and rear, with the words "BLASTING AGENTS" in letters not less than four inches in height and approximately 2 5/8 -inch stroke on a contrasting background. 
(Code 1995, § 5.218) 
Sec. 16-158. - Seizure of explosives and blasting agents. 
    The city engineer may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all explosives, ammunition or blasting agents offered or exposed for sale, stored, possessed or transported in violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 5.219; Ord. No. 550, 8-10-1978) 
Secs. 16-159-16-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS 

Sec. 16-185. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Costs means expenses incurred by the fire department attributable to the containment, abatement, cleanup, control, capture or disposal of any hazardous materials incident as set out in section 16-191 as well as actual expenses incurred by the fire department through the use of an outside source or sources to perform or assist in performing such actions. Costs shall also include actual expenses incurred by any other department of the city including but not limited to costs of equipment operations, costs of personnel, costs of materials and supplies, costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the city, disposal costs, overhead costs, overtime costs and any other incidental costs incurred by the city related to a hazardous materials incident. Costs shall also include costs incurred by area governmental entities requested through mutual aid agreements with the city related to a hazardous materials incident. 
    Hazardous materials means any substances or materials in any quantity or form which, are capable of creating a risk to the life, health or safety of persons or causing damage to property or the environment. It shall include but not be limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products, poisons, flammables and corrosives. 
    Hazardous materials incident means the release or potential release of a hazardous material from its container into the environment. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.701), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-186. - Reporting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person with knowledge of a hazardous materials incident to fail to immediately notify the fire department of such incident. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.702), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-187. - Responsibility. 
    Any person who owns, possesses, stores or transports hazardous materials involved in a hazardous materials incident shall be responsible for the payment of hazard mitigation costs to the city. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.703), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-188. - Authority at hazardous materials incidents. 
    Fire department personnel at the scene of a hazardous materials incident shall have the authority to direct such operation as necessary for the protection of persons, property or the environment and to take the necessary steps for containment, abatement or cleanup of hazardous materials, including retaining an outside source or sources to perform or assist in performing such actions. In the exercise of such authority, fire department personnel are authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene and are authorized to remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle, vessel or thing. Fire department personnel are authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across any street, alley, place or private property in the vicinity of such operations so as to prevent accidents or interferences with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage and control the situation. Fire department personnel are authorized to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of a hazardous materials incident. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.704), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-189. - Interference with fire department personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, obstruct or disobey the lawful commands of fire department personnel exercising authority under this article. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.705), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-190. - Cost recovery procedures. 
    The city shall send a detailed invoice for hazardous material costs to the person responsible for the costs of a hazardous materials incident within 60 days after the incident is completely contained and all property and/or environmental damage is repaired. The city may send such invoice prior to complete containment and repair. The responsible person shall pay said invoice in full within 30 days after the date the invoice is mailed. Failure to timely pay each invoice shall result in the accumulation of interest on any unpaid balances in an amount allowed by law. The city may enforce the provisions of this article by any action allowed by law for the collection of any amounts due hereunder, including reasonable and necessary attorneys fees, costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.706), 5-28-2009) 
Sec. 16-191. - Fire department fees. 
    The fees for services provided by the fire department related to a hazardous materials incident are as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11B1, § I(5.707), 5-28-2009) 
Chapter 18 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 431; food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 437; public health measures relating to food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 438. 

Sec. 18-1. - Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted. 
    Regulations of food service establishments, retail food stores and mobile food establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 437; and the Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part 1; Texas Department of Health, chapter 229 Food and Drug, subchapter K; Texas Food Establishments, sections 161 through 171 and sections 173 through 175, including the provisions of 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228 when adopted, are hereby adopted by the city. Penalties, conditions and terms of the said Texas Food Establishment Rules are hereby adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 6.501; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Authorized agent or employee means the designated representative of the Williamson County and Cities Health District (WCCHD). 
    Bed and breakfast limited facility means: 
(1)  An establishment with seven or fewer rooms for rent; 
(2)  An establishment that serves breakfast to overnight guests; 
(3)  The establishment is not a retail food establishment; and 
(4)  The owner or manager shall successfully complete a food manager's certification course accredited by the department. 
    Business days means the days that the WCCHD is open to conduct business with the public. 
    Cottage food production operation means an individual, operating out of the individual's home, who: 
(1)  Produces at the individual's home, subject to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.0196: 
a.  A baked good that is not a potentially hazardous food, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.0196; 
b.  Candy; 
c.  Coated and uncoated nuts; 
d.  Unroasted nut butters; 
e.  Fruit butters; 
f.  A canned jam or jelly; 
g.  A fruit pie; 
h.  Dehydrated fruit or vegetables, including dried beans; 
i.  Popcorn and popcorn snacks; 
j.  Cereal, including granola; 
k.  Dry mix; 
l.  Vinegar; 
m.  Pickles; 
n.  Mustard; 
o.  Roasted coffee or dry tea; or 
p.  A dried herb or dried herb mix. 
(2)  Has an annual gross income of $50,000.00 or less from the sale of food described by paragraph (1); 
(3)  Sells the foods produced under paragraph (1) only directly to consumers at the individual's home, a farmers' market, a farm stand, or a municipal, county, or nonprofit fair, festival or event; and 
(4)  Delivers products to the consumer at the point of sale or another location designated by the consumer. 
    Director means the director of the WCCHD or its designated representative. 
    Food establishment. 
(1)  The term "food establishment" means an operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption: 
a.  Such as a restaurant, retail food store, satellite or catered feeding location, catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to a conveyance used to transport people, market, vending location, (machine), self-service food market, conveyance used to transport people, institution, or food bank; and 
b.  That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common carriers; 
c.  The term "food establishment" includes: 
1.  An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the WCCHD; and 
2.  An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. 
d.  The term "food establishment" does not include: 
1.  An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety food; 
2.  A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; 
3.  A food processing plant; 
4.  A cottage food production operation; 
5.  A bed and breakfast limited facility; or 
6.  A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food. 
    Food handler means any person in a food establishment who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in an area where food or drink is prepared, served, transferred, stored, packed, sold, or otherwise handled. 
    Health official means the authorized representative of the WCCHD. 
    Mobile food establishment means a vehicle-mounted food establishment that is readily moveable. 
    Nonprofit organizations means a civic or fraternal organization, charity, lodge, association, proprietorship or corporation possessing a 501(C) exemption under the Internal Revenue Code; or religious organizations meeting the definition of "church" under the Internal Revenue Code § 170(b)(1)(A)(I). 
    Person means person, firm, or corporation or association. 
    State laws and rules means Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
    Temporary food establishment means a food establishment that operates in conjunction with a special event or celebration that: 
(1)  Operates for more than four hours in a single day, serves potentially hazardous foods, and is open to the general public; or 
(2)  Operates for a period of no less than two consecutive days and no more than 14 days. 
(Code 1995, § 6.502; Ord. No. G-09-07-23-9A1, § I, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-3. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the city, issued by the WCCHD. The health official shall be and is hereby authorized to issue permits to any person making application therefor, authorizing the operation of a food establishment in the city; provided, only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such permit. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. All permits expire on December 31 of each year, with the exception of permits issued to schools (K-12). School food establishment permits are valid September 1 through August 31. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 6.503; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-4. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Every person seeking to operate a food establishment in the city shall make a written application to the WCCHD, upon forms prescribed and furnished by the WCCHD, for a permit. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. Incomplete applications will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required, may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the health official shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules may be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  If the food establishment comes within the requirements of this chapter, the health official shall approve said application; whereupon, the applicant shall pay to the WCCHD a fee based on the formula as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(d)  All applications for permits and inspections shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) as set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(e)  Nonprofit organizations, as defined in this chapter, are exempt from payment of the permit fee for temporary food establishments. 
(Code 1995, § 6.504; Ord. No. 2383, 12-22-1988; Ord. No. G-93-10-28-8B, 10-28-1993; Ord. No. G-02-12-19-8A1, 12-19-2002; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-5. - Review of plans. 
(a)  A permit applicant or permit holder shall be required to submit to the WCCHD properly prepared plans and specifications for review and approval before: 
(1)  The construction of a food establishment; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing structure for use as a food establishment; or 
(3)  The remodeling of a food establishment or a change of type of food establishment or food operation, or under the conditions set by the WCCHD, if the WCCHD determines plans and specifications are necessary to determine compliance with code provisions. 
(b)  The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction materials and finish schedules, proposed equipment types, manufacturers, model numbers, locations, dimensions, performance capacities and installation specifications. The plans will contain an intended menu and the anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold or served. The plans and specifications will be approved by the WCCHD if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(c)  The plans must include information and evidence that standard procedures that ensure compliance with the requirements of the state rules are developed or are being developed. 
(d)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension or revocation. 
(e)  The establishment plan review fee must be submitted before the plan will be reviewed. 
(Code 1995, § 6.505; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-6. - Registration of food handlers. 
    It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person operating any food establishment to work or employ a food handler until regulations and all city ordinances, now and hereafter enacted, and all provisions of this section are complied with, and until such food handler has received a food handler's registration certificate from the WCCHD which is valid at the time of such employment. 
(1)  Issuance of registration certificates and payment of fees. WCCHD shall issue food handler's registration certificates to food handlers who received approved training and paid the appropriate fee. The food handler certificate will be valid for two years. 
(2)  Display of food handler's certificate. The food handler's certificate issued to each individual shall be posted at the place of employment in a location readily visible and accessible to the health official for verification. 
(3)  Managers and supervisory personnel. Managers and supervisory personnel who have received a certification document from an accredited food protection managers certification program shall be exempt from obtaining a food handler's certificate from WCCHD. The certificate shall be posted at the place of employment in a location readily visible and accessible to the health official for verification. 
(4)  Certified food protection manager requirement. Each food establishment must employ at least one employee that has supervisory and management responsibility that is a certified food protection manager. The certified food protection manager must have the authority to direct and control food preparation and service. The certificate shall be posted at the place of employment in a location readily visible and accessible to the health official for verification. 
(Code 1995, § 6.506; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-7. - Inspection of food establishments. 
(a)  The health official shall inspect every food establishment located within the city. The frequency of inspection shall be prioritized based upon assessment of the food establishment's history of compliance and the potential for causing food-borne illness. An assessment will be completed by the WCCHD to rank the food establishment as high, medium, or low risk for the potential for causing food-borne illness. The inspection frequency will vary by risk and be determined by the WCCHD. 
(b)  Upon request of the health official, the person operating the food establishment shall permit access to all parts of the establishment under inspection and shall permit inspection and copying of all records of food purchased. The health official shall be allowed to take photographs as part of the inspection process. 
(c)  The health official may take and examine samples of food, drink and other substances found on the premises for the detection of unwholesomeness and adulteration and may condemn and forbid, and cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome, adulterated, or any potentially hazardous food held at temperatures which allow the growth of dangerous organisms. 
(Code 1995, § 6.507; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-8. - Violations and posting of certificates. 
    If, during an inspection, the health official discovers violations of state laws and rules or this chapter that earn more than 30 demerits on multiple inspections during a 12-month period, then based upon the results of the inspection the health official shall post a certificate of grade as follows: 
(1)  First failure. An "UNSATISFACTORY" placard shall be posted on the front door or front window, or if the food establishment does not have a front door or front window, then upon a wall of the food service area inside the food establishment, and said placard shall be displayed in clear view to the public and shall not be covered from sight, defaced or removed except by the health official after an inspection is performed earning 30 or fewer demerits. The followup inspection shall occur within two business days of the failed inspection. A compliance inspection fee must be paid prior to the inspection and removal of the placard. 
(2)  Second failure. When a second failed inspection occurs within 12 months of the first failed inspection, an "UNSATISFACTORY" placard shall be posted on the front door or front window, or if the food establishment does not have a front door or front window, then upon a wall of the food service area inside the food establishment, and said placard shall be displayed in clear view to the public and shall not be covered from sight, defaced or removed except by the health official after an inspection is performed earning 30 or fewer demerits. The permit shall be suspended and the operations of the establishment shall cease immediately. The food establishment shall remain closed for a minimum of 48 hours and fulfill the following requirements before reopening: 
a.  The management of the food establishment must meet with and submit a written plan of action to the director of the environmental division of WCCHD or his appointee. The plan of action shall address critical violations of the previously failed inspections. 
b.  A reinstatement fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid to the WCCHD Environmental Division located at 303 Main, Georgetown, Texas 78626. 
c.  A followup inspection will be conducted within one business day of fulfillment of the requirements listed in subsections (2)a and b of this section. A compliance inspection fee must be paid prior to the inspection. 
d.  The food establishment shall be placed on a 30-day inspection schedule until two consecutive inspections result in a score of 30 or fewer demerits. 
(3)  Third failure. When a third failed inspection occurs within 12 months of the first failed inspection, an "UNSATISFACTORY" placard shall be posted on the front door or front window, or if the food establishment does not have a front door or front window, then upon a wall of the food service area inside the food establishment, and said placard shall be displayed in clear view to the public and shall not be covered from sight, defaced or removed except by the health official. The person in charge shall be provided written notice of the intent of WCCHD to permanently revoke the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 6.508; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-9. - Suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit to operate a food establishment may be suspended by the health official without warning, notice or hearing if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health, or upon violation by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice to the person in charge. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall cease immediately. WCCHD may lift the suspension at any time if it deems that the reasons for the suspension no longer exist. 
(b)  The WCCHD may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter or for interference with the WCCHD in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the WCCHD shall provide written notice to the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the five working days following service of such notice. 
(c)  The suspension or revocation notice shall include the procedure for appealing the suspension or revocation. In the event the health official refuses a permit to an applicant, or a permit is suspended or revoked by the health official, the applicant whose permit is refused, or the holder of a permit which has been revoked or suspended, shall have the right of appeal to the WCCHD director by filing an appeal in writing with the WCCHD director within five days from refusal to grant said permit, or receipt of the revocation or suspension notice of said permit by the health official. Pending action on the appeal, a permit which has been suspended or revoked shall be considered suspended or revoked. If a written appeal is not filed within five days from refusal to grant a permit or receipt of the written notice, the suspension, revocation or refusal to grant a permit shall be sustained. 
(Code 1995, § 6.509; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-10. - Reinstatement of permit. 
    Any person whose permit has been suspended may at any time make application to the health official for reinstatement of the permit. Such application shall contain a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the violation of this chapter has been corrected and shall be accompanied by payment of the permit reinstatement fee. Within one week after the receipt of such application, the health official shall reinspect the applicant's food establishment to determine whether the applicant is again complying with the requirements of this chapter, and shall reinstate the permit if the applicant is complying with this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 6.510; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-11. - Enforcement interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the health official in accordance with the state laws and rules. 
(Code 1995, § 6.511; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Sec. 18-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties herein before provided and unless another penalty is in this chapter provided, whoever shall do any act or thing required by the terms of this chapter or in anywise violate the provisions thereof, shall be fined as provided for in section 1-9. 
(b)  It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or to prove that the act or omission was knowingly done or omitted. 
(Code 1995, § 6.512; Ord. No. 2239, 6-26-1986; Ord. No. G-03-06-26-10A1, 6-26-2003; Ord. No. O-2015-2895, § I, 10-8-2015) 
Chapter 20 - LIBRARY 

Sec. 20-1. - Library cards and fees. 
(a)  Card required. No person shall be allowed to check out any library book unless that person has been issued a valid library card. 
(b)  No library card fee required. No person shall be charged a fee for a library card. 
(c)  Late return fees. Fees shall be paid by the borrower for failure to return, at the date due, any books or other library materials and equipment which have been loaned to holders of library cards. Late fees are as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(d)  Miscellaneous fees. The miscellaneous library fees charged to the borrower shall be currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(e)  Fees for damaged or lost material. 
(1)  Fees for damaged books shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  Lost and damaged book replacements. 
a.  Materials owned by the Round Rock Public Library will be replaced and the customer charged full replacement costs for the type of damages listed below, with the exception of damage costs provided in subsection (e)(1) of this section: 
1.  Water damage. 
2.  Damaged spine, irreparable (including binding by a vendor). 
3.  Missing or damaged page and item cannot be found. 
4.  More than five pages of an item that are missing or damaged. 
5.  Lost, cannot be found. 
b.  The customer will be charged the replacement cost (including any unique binding or storage units). Annual standard pricing from professional book review material, grouped by subject area and age level and relevant to public libraries, will be used to determine replacement costs for books other than those listed below that are no longer in print or distribution. The pricelist will be updated annually by the library staff. 
Exceptions to this procedure for print material shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(3)  Other library materials in book format. Interlibrary loan materials will be replaced at the rate required by the sending library. 
(4)  Lost and damaged audio, video, CD, and DVD cases. Damaged cases are considered cases that no longer protect the contents of the items enclosed due to damage and not to normal wear and tear. Damaged cases will be replaced with new cases; they will not be repaired. Prices reflect actual case cost and processing fees and shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(5)  Lost and damaged audios, videos, CDs and DVDs. Damaged items will be treated as lost, as these media formats have little use when damaged. Such fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Equipment and building use fees. 
(1)  The library equipment fees shall be charged as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  Meeting room use and fees. 
a.  Nonprofit users. Nonprofit corporations are defined as entities meeting the qualifications of sections 501(c)(3) and 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code. The organization's legal place of business or a current executive board member must reside within the city limits to receive the nonprofit rate. 
b.  State and county government. The library will waive the fees for state and county government for four hours a month. However, such agencies will pay for kitchen and equipment use at the prevailing rates and will be billed for any damage to the facility. Security deposits are waived for the four free hours a month. 
c.  Cosponsorship of programs. The library will provide cosponsorship of programs with nonprofit corporations that provide similar programs as the library, including but not limited to genealogy training, book sales, and reading programs that expand upon core library services. 
1.  The library will waive the room rental fee under such co-sponsored programs. Other fees, such as kitchen use and equipment, may also be waived when the use of the room is open to the general public without a fee and is not used by a group primarily for their membership. The library director is authorized to approve cosponsorships resulting in waived fees. 
2.  Cosponsorship requires advertising stating that the city public library system or the city is a cosponsoring agency, which will be provided on any advertising done by both parties. Other city departments may cosponsor programs and receive the same benefit. All damage will be paid by the nonprofit corporation using the facility, not the library or other city agencies. However, other cosponsoring city agencies will be responsible for maintaining communication and obtaining such fines or fees from the nonprofit corporation as may be levied for misuse of city property. 
3.  Under no condition will the library cosponsor a program with a for-profit corporation where the sole goal is for the financial benefit of the agency. The library may, however, include for-profit corporations as part of a planned library program where such corporations enhance the library's programming; such programming includes but is not limited to a puppeteer during the Summer Reading Program or a paid trainer for computer training for the aging. 
d.  Setup. Rooms are set up and returned to their original state by the user of the room. Equipment that is leased ahead of time will be set up and operational prior to the reserved time for the room. Equipment that is not leased ahead of time will be leased at a 50 percent surcharge and will be set up and operational at the reserved time for the room. The room rates do not include any form of set up assistance other than that of equipment use. Room rates shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(g)  Computer lab. 
(1)  The computer lab was funded by the telecommunications infrastructure fund and as such has certain limitations in its use. The computer lab may be used by nonprofit and governmental entities (state, county, and school district) when such use is compatible with the mission of the public library. 
(2)  The fee for the computer lab is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. This will provide the services of installation of specialized software, access to the internet, and the cleaning up of the computer stations after the use of the computer lab. 
(3)  The lab may be reserved up to 60 days ahead of time. Library programming will take priority in the use of the computer lab. 
(4)  The library may waive such fees when the event is cosponsored by the public library and training or services are open to the general public. Cosponsorship requires advertising of the cooperative programming by the city public library system on all print media and other advertising provided by both parties. The library director is authorized to waive such fees. 
(5)  The computer lab is not available to the for-profit market. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1902; Ord. No. 931, 12-22-1981; Ord. No. 2148, 2-14-1985; Ord. No. 2511, 10-23-1990; Ord. No. 2591, 9-24-1992; Ord. No. G-95-10-12-12A, 10-12-1995; Ord. No. G-96-05-23-13A, 5-23-1996; Ord. No. G-99-08-26-9A1, 8-26-1999; Ord. No. G-03-05-22-10B1, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. G-05-05-26-11C1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. G-07-04-26-11A1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. G-08-03-27-74A, §§ I, II, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. O-2015-2470, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 20-2. - Noncompliance with library rules. 
(a)  Any person who shall take from the public library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper, or other property, except in accordance with the rules of the library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided for in section 1-9. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly fails to return library materials to the public library which were loaned to the actor or borrowed in the actor's name. The actor's intent and knowledge shall be presumed if: 
(1)  Pursuant to agreement, the library materials were to be returned on a date specified; 
(2)  Actual notice is given or notice in writing is sent by depositing in the United States mail stating that the library materials were not returned on the date specified, said notice when mailed to be sent to the address shown on the records of the library; 
(3)  The library material is not returned to the owner within ten days of receipt of such notice; 
(4)  If notice is sent by mail in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, it is presumed that the notice was received no later than five days after it was sent; 
(5)  In prosecution hereunder, it is no defense that the actor, through the actual borrower, no longer possesses the library materials. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1903; Ord. No. 931, 12-22-1981; Ord. No. 2085, 12-22-1983) 
Chapter 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29; general law for municipal courts of record, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30; court procedures, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 45. 

Sec. 22-1. - Warrants of arrest. 
(a)  Upon failure of a person to report as ordered after such person has received due notice, issuing from a police officer or magistrate, that such person has violated a law or ordinance of the city, the municipal judge shall order that a warrant of arrest shall issue and be served for the arrest of such person who fails to appear as directed. A special expense of $25.00 for the issuance and service of such warrant for arrest shall be collected from the person who fails to appear and against whom the warrant of arrest is issued. 
(b)  Upon commission of an offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.10, or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.009, the municipal judge shall order that a warrant of arrest shall issue and be served for the arrest of the person committing the offense. A special expense of $25.00 for the issuance and service of the warrant shall be collected from the person who commits the offense and against whom the warrant of arrest is issued. 
(c)  The collection of fines and special expenses shall be enforced, as necessary, by execution against the property of the defendant, or by imprisonment of the defendant. 
(d)  All fines and special expenses for the issuance and service of warrants shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2201; Ord. No. 2094, 2-9-1984; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
Sec. 22-2. - Driving safety course fee. 
    The municipal court is authorized to collect a fee not to exceed $10.00 from each person requesting a driving safety course pursuant to subchapter B of chapter 543, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.111 et seq. The fees collected shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2202; Ord. No. 2294, 8-27-1987; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
Sec. 22-3. - Teen court fee. 
    The municipal court is authorized to collect a fee not to exceed $10.00 from each person authorized by the municipal court judge to attend a teen court program pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.052. The fees collected by the municipal court hereunder shall be deposited into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. A person who is authorized by the municipal court judge to attend a teen court program and fails to complete the program is not entitled to a refund of the fee. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2203; Ord. No. G-96-04-11-12E, 4-11-1996) 
Sec. 22-4. - Municipal court building security fee. 
    The municipal court is authorized to collect a municipal court building security fee of $3.00 per conviction. The fees collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the city treasury for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be expended as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2204; Ord. No. G-00-04-27-11B1, 4-27-2000) 
Sec. 22-5. - Municipal court technology fee. 
    The municipal court is authorized to collect a municipal court technology fee of $4.00 per conviction. The fees collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the city treasury for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be expended as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2205; Ord. No. G-00-04-27-11B1, 4-27-2000; Ord. No. G-05-08-11-10C1, 8-11-2005) 
Sec. 22-6. - Collection fee on municipal court fees and fines. 
(a)  A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031, in the amount of 30 percent of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, and restitution ordered paid by a municipal court serving the city when such debt or account receivable is more than 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney or private vendor for collection. 
(b)  Said collection fee is authorized and imposed in cases in which the accused has failed to appear: 
(1)  As promised under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.001 et seq., or other law; 
(2)  In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 14.06(b), or other law; 
(3)  In compliance with a lawful summons issued under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 15.03(b); 
(4)  In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the city; or 
(5)  As specified in a citation, summons, or other notice authorized by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 682.002, that charges the accused with a parking or stopping offense. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2206; Ord. No. G-04-04-08-9A1, 4-8-2004) 
Sec. 22-7. - Credit card processing fee. 
(a)  The municipal court is authorized to collect a processing fee for the payment by credit card of a fee, fine, court cost, or other charge processed by the municipal court. The processing fee shall be the lesser of five dollars or five percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge being paid. 
(b)  The processing fee shall be assessed for each credit card payment transaction processed by the municipal court that is submitted for payment through a website maintained by, or on behalf of, the city. 
(Ord. No. G-10-12-02-9A1, § I, 12-2-2010) 
Sec. 22-8. - Traffic safety fund. 
(a)  Establishment of traffic safety fund. Pursuant to V.T.C.A, Transportation Code ch. 707, there is hereby established the traffic safety fund. 
(b)  Source of funds. Funds are derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the city for traffic signal violations under the city's photographic traffic signal enforcement system. Such funds are held, disbursed, and used in accordance with V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, § 707.008. V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, § 707.008(a)(2) requires that a certain amount of those funds be deposited in a special account in the city's treasury that may be used only to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs, intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement. 
(c)  Statutory requirements. The city shall do the following: 
(1)  From the funds derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the city for traffic signal violations under the city's photographic traffic signal enforcement system, the city may deduct and retain amounts authorized by V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, § 707.008(b), to-wit: (a) amounts necessary to cover the costs of purchasing or leasing equipment that is part of or used in connection with the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city; (b) installing the photographic traffic signal enforcement system at sites in the city, including the costs of installing cameras, flashes, computer equipment, loop sensors, detectors, utility lines, data lines, poles and mounts, networking equipment, and associated labor costs; (c) operating the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city, including the costs of creating, distributing, and delivering violation notices, review of violations conducted by employees of the city, the processing of fine payments and collections, and the costs associated with administrative adjudications and appeals; and (d) maintaining the general upkeep and functioning of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(2)  Not later than the 60th day after the end of the city's fiscal year, the city shall send 50 percent of the revenue derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the city for traffic signal violations under the city's photographic traffic signal enforcement system to the comptroller for deposit to the credit of the regional trauma account established under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 782.002. 
(3)  Thereafter, the city shall deposit the remainder of the revenue in the city's traffic safety fund, and those monies shall only be used to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs, intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement. 
(Ord. No. G-13-02-28-H2, § I, 2-28-2013) 
Sec. 22-9. - Juvenile case manager, fee and fund. 
(a)  Juvenile case manager. 
(1)  Pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 45.056, the city council hereby authorizes the employment of one or more full-time or part-time juvenile case managers to provide services in cases involving juvenile offenders before the municipal court consistent with the court's statutory powers and to assist the court in administering the court's juvenile docket and in supervising its court orders in juvenile cases. 
(2)  As required by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 45.056, the city council has adopted by resolution the juvenile case manager code of ethics, the educational pre-service and in-service training standards and has required the juvenile case managers to receive training in the role of the juvenile case manager, case planning and management, applicable procedural and substantive law, courtroom proceedings and presentation, services to at-risk youth, local programs and services for juveniles and the detection and prevention of abuse, exploitations, and neglect of juveniles. 
(b)  Juvenile case manager fee. There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fee (the "fee") as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 102.0174. The fee shall be in the amount of $5.00. A defendant who is convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay the fee as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted of an offense if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the defendant; or 
(2)  The person receives deferred disposition, including deferred proceedings under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., arts. 45.052 or 45.053. 
The municipal court judge may waive the fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted defendant if the defendant is indigent. 
(c)  Juvenile case manager fund. There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund (the "fund") as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 102.0174. All juvenile case manager fees collected by the municipal court shall be deposited into the fund. The fund may be used only to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary expenses relating to the position of a juvenile case manager. 
(Ord. No. G-13-08-08-E2, § I, 8-8-2013) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Unlawful to possess or sell street signs. 
(a)  Defined. As used herein, the term "street sign" shall mean any sign erected or to be erected on any street within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of identifying the name of the respective street. 
(b)  Possession of signs a misdemeanor. Whosoever shall possess a street sign, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Sale of signs a misdemeanor. Whosoever shall sell, lease, give, barter, exchange, or trade, or cause to be sold, leased, given, bartered, exchanged, or traded, a street sign as hereinabove defined to any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Exceptions. Nothing contained in subsections (b) or (c) of this section shall prohibit or interfere with the possession or sale of street signs by duly authorized employees of the city engaged in their normal and usual duties. 
(Code 1995, §§ 1.1301-1.1304; Ord. No. 523, 2-9-1978) 
Sec. 24-2. - Unlawful to discharge firearms within city limits. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful to discharge within the corporate limits of the city any firearm, airgun, BB gun, pellet gun, or any other mechanism projecting lead or any missiles. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(2)  Any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(3)  The use by workers in the construction business of any mechanism designed to propel nails, bolts, screws, rivets or other fasteners, as long as such mechanism is being used in the manner in which it was intended. 
(4)  The discharge of firearms during organized competitive events, when a permit therefor has been issued by the city council. The city council may issue a permit only when the organizer has: 
a.  Made application for a permit, indicating its name, address, date, time, duration, location, number of participants, and type of event; 
b.  Provided evidence that adequate provisions have been made to ensure the safety of the public, spectators, participants and property; and 
c.  Provided the city with evidence of insurance coverage for spectators and property in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. The insurance policy shall also name the city as an additional insured. 
(5)  The discharge of firearms in an approved indoor firing range. 
(6)  The discharge of firearms during an organized training or competitive event, authorized and supervised by the chief of police or his designated agent. 
(Code 1995, §§ 1.1401, 1.1402; Ord. No. 519, 1-12-1978; Ord. No. 2474, 6-14-1990; Ord. No. 2616, 12-22-1992; Ord. No. G-02-02-28-11C1, 2-28-2002) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.003. 
Sec. 24-3. - Reward for criminal mischief information. 
(a)  The city hereby offers a standing reward in an amount up to $200.00 to persons who furnish information leading to the arrest and prosecution of any individual for committing the crime of criminal mischief, as provided for in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03, within the city limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. The chief of police shall determine the amount of the reward, if any, to be paid to the person or persons furnishing the information. 
(b)  This offer for a reward shall not apply to any officer, employee, or agent of the city, or any other officer, employee, or agent of the state or political subdivision thereof, who provides information or makes an arrest in the discharge of official duties. 
(c)  The chief of police is the sole judge of any dispute arising over the reward and the persons, if any, entitled to share in it, and his decision on any point connected with the reward will be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2900; Ord. No. G-94-12-22-9C, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. G-95-03-09-9D, 3-9-1995) 
State Law reference- Crime stoppers advisory council, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414. 
Secs. 24-4-24-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YOUTH CURFEW[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority for juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; county juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.903. 

Sec. 24-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means; 
(1)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; 
(2)  1:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2701; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10B1, § 1.2701, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. G-10-11-09-9B1, § I, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E3, § I, 11-26-20133; Ord. No. O-2016-3984, § I, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 24-26. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains, walks, runs, stands, drives or rides about in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2702; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10B1, § 1.2702, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. G-10-11-09-9B1, § I, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E3, § I, 11-26-20133; Ord. No. O-2016-3984, § I, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 24-27. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 24-26 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, Round Rock Independent School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, Round Rock Independent School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 24-26(b) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during the curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 24-26 with respect to the curfew hours of 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, that the offense occurred during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled; or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from the school or be in a public place from an authorized school official or a parent or guardian. In the case of a minor being educated in a home school, a parent or guardian shall be deemed a school official. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2703; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10B1, § 1.2703, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. G-10-11-09-9B1, § I, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E3, § I, 11-26-20133; Ord. No. O-2016-3984, § I, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 24-28. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 24-27 is present. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2704; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10B1, § 1.2704, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. G-10-11-09-9B1, § I, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E3, § I, 11-26-20133; Ord. No. O-2016-3984, § I, 12-15-2016) 
Sec. 24-29. - Penalties. 
    When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection 24-26(a) of this article and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2705; Ord. No. G-94-05-26-9A, 5-26-1994; Ord. No. G-95-03-09-9D, 3-9-1995; Ord. No. G-01-08-23-13B1, 8-23-2001; Ord. No. G-02-08-08-10A1, 8-8-2003; Ord. No. G-094-11-23-8A1, 11-23-2004; Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10B1, § 1.2705, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. G-10-11-09-9B1, § I, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E3, § I, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. O-2016-3984, § I, 12-15-2016) 
Secs. 24-30-24-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CAMPING IN PUBLIC AREAS 

Sec. 24-51. - Definitions. 
    Camp means to use an area for sleeping and/or living accommodation purposes including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Making preparations to construct a temporary shelter, such as the setting up of a tent, laying down of bedding, lying in or on a cot, sleeping bag, bedroll or other similar sleeping equipment, or the construction of a temporary shelter with other materials such as cardboard or newspapers; 
(2)  Parking of a motor vehicle, motorhome, or trailer for the apparent purpose of overnight occupancy; 
(3)  Storing or accumulating clothing, food, beverages or other personal belongings; 
(4)  Doing any digging or earth breaking; or 
(5)  Using any tent or temporary shelter. 
    Public area means an outdoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to streets, highways, parks, parking lots, alleyways, pedestrian ways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and retail shopping establishments. 
(Ord. No. G-10-05-13-10B1, § I, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-52. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in a public area within the city limits of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(b)  The activities listed in section 24-51, under the definition of "camp", shall constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the person, in conducting these activities, is in fact using the area for living accommodation purposes regardless of the intent of the person or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging. Camping does not include the act of merely falling asleep in a public area. 
(Ord. No. G-10-05-13-10B1, § I, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-53. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this article if the person was camping in an approved area designated by the city or on property for which the person has received prior permission by the owner or agent in charge of the property. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this article if the person: 
(1)  Is traveling through the city in a motor vehicle; 
(2)  Is on a trip which has a point of origin and a point of destination outside of Williamson County, Texas and contiguous counties; 
(3)  Parks the motor vehicle at a location not greater than one-half mile off the most direct route of the trip; 
(4)  Parks the motor vehicle for the purpose of resting or sleeping in the vehicle because further operation would endanger himself or others due to the need for sleep; 
(5)  Sleeps or rests in the motor vehicle or in a trailer directly attached to the motor vehicle for a period not longer than four hours; and 
(6)  Is not intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. G-10-05-13-10B1, § I, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 24-54. - Penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not exceeding the amount set forth in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. G-10-05-13-10B1, § I, 5-13-2010) 
Secs. 24-55-24-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC 

Sec. 24-75. - Definitions. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment house, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    Restroom means an enclosed structure with toilets or urinals installed for the purpose of urinating or defecating. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-2537, § I, 6-25-2015) 
Sec. 24-76. - Urinating or defecating. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to urinate and/or defecate: 
(1)  In or on public property; 
(2)  In or on a public place; 
(3)  In public view; or 
(4)  In or on private property when the act may be viewed by another. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-2537, § I, 6-25-2015) 
Sec. 24-77. - Affirmative defense. 
    It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this article if the person was in a restroom. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-2537, § I, 6-25-2015) 
Sec. 24-78. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not exceeding the amount set forth in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-2537, § I, 6-25-2015) 
Secs. 24-79-24-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMPLIANCE WITH PEACE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS 

Sec. 24-101. - Offense. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence fail or refuse to comply with any order, direction, instruction or warning of a peace officer, firefighter or fire official that is given in a visible or audible manner. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5788, § I, 9-13-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § III, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 24-102. - Affirmative defense. 
    It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this article that the order, direction, instruction or warning of a peace officer, firefighter or fire official is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5788, § I, 9-13-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § III, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 24-103. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not exceeding the amount set forth in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5788, § I, 9-13-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § III, 9-27-2018) 
Secs. 24-104-24-125. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public buildings and grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 281 et seq.; parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq.; parks and wildlife, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-19. - Hours open to the public. 
(a)  The municipal parks shall be open to the general public only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person except for employees of the city engaged in the performance of their official duties to be in any municipal park except between the hours set forth herein. 
(c)  Any exceptions to the requirements of this section are authorized only by council approval. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1701) 
Sec. 26-20. - Motor vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, including but not limited to motorcycles, motor scooters and mini-bikes, in or through any city owned or operated park and pool areas, except on parking areas and driving lanes provided by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1702; Ord. No. 2126, 7-12-1984) 
Sec. 26-21. - Use and rental fees. 
    Park use and rental fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1995, §§ 1.1703-1.1707; Ord. No. 2593, 9-24-1992; Ord. No. G-96-04-25-9A, 4-25-1996; Ord. No. G-97-05-22-10A, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. G-98-02-26-9A, 2-26-1998; Ord. No. G-98-11-24-13B1, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. G-00-01-27-12A1, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. G-00-06-08-10B1, 6-8-2000; Ord. No. G-01-04-12-3A1, 4-12-2001; Ord. No. G-03-03-06-8A1, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. G-06-04-13-9C1, 4-13-2006; Ord. No. G-10-04-22-9D1, §§ I, II, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-22. - Recreation programs. 
    The fees charged for recreation classes, special events, and sports leagues shall be set by the parks and recreation director subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1708; Ord. No. G-06-04-13-9C1, 4-13-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-2470, § II, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 26-23. - Refundable deposits. 
    A refundable deposit shall be charged for the use of facilities and equipment in addition to user fees. All deposits shall be returned if the users do not damage equipment or facilities, leave the facility in a litter-free condition, and return equipment. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1709) 
Sec. 26-24. - Waiving of fees. 
    The city manager or his designate may waive all or a portion of a fee when appropriate. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1710; Ord. No. 2267, 1-8-1987) 
Sec. 26-25. - Parks improvement and acquisition account. 
(a)  Establishment of account. A parks improvement and acquisition account is hereby established. 
(b)  Funds to be deposited. Contributions and donations from any source which are earmarked by the donor for use by the parks department shall be deposited in the parks improvement and acquisition account. 
(c)  Payments from developers and subdividers. Payments of cash in lieu of land from developers and subdividers shall be deposited in the parks improvement and acquisition account. 
(d)  Use of funds. Expenditures from the parks improvement and acquisition account shall be used exclusively for improvement of existing and future parks and for the acquisition of land for future parks. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1711; Ord. No. 579, 1-11-1979) 
Sec. 26-26. - Rules and regulations for special use parks. 
(a)  Round Rock Dog Depot. 
(1)  Applicability of subsection. This subsection shall apply to the park known as the Round Rock Dog Depot located in Lake Creek Park and all other locations within the city which have been designated by the parks and recreation department as leash-free dog parks. It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to comply or to violate a rule or to be the owner or handler of a dog which is in violation of a rule in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Use of parks and waiver of liability. By using the leash-free dog parks, such users assume all risk associated with use of the parks and waive liability on the part of the city for any injury or damage cause by dogs or humans while accessing or using the parks. Dog owners/handlers are responsible for the actions and behavior of their dogs and are liable for damages or injury inflicted by their dogs. The city has no liability or responsibility for damage or injuries in the dog parks. 
(3)  Rules. In addition to the rules regarding parks as set forth in this article, the following rules apply to all persons and dogs using leash-free dog parks: 
a.  All dogs must be on a leash while entering and leaving the park. 
b.  Dogs are not required to be on a leash while in the fenced area of the park. All dogs must be under the control of the owner/handler. Each owner/handler shall have no more than two dogs in the park. 
c.  All dogs must be within view of and within voice control of the owner/handler at all times. Dog owners/handlers must be physically capable of controlling their dogs and must prevent aggressive behavior, biting, fighting and aggressive barking. 
d.  Dogs showing any aggression must be leashed and immediately removed from the park. Dogs with a known history of aggressive or dangerous behavior are prohibited from entering the park. Any dog that has been determined to be aggressive by an animal control officer or police officer is prohibited from entering any leash-free dog park at all times. 
e.  Dog owners/handlers must carry one leash for each dog under their control while in the park. 
f.  Dogs under four months of age are prohibited in the park. 
g.  Dogs must have current vaccinations to enter the park. 
h.  Dogs must wear a collar with a current rabies tag and current city license tag while in the park. 
i.  Dogs must be healthy and free of contagious diseases and parasites while in the park. 
j.  Choke chains, prong, spiked and shock collars are prohibited in the park. 
k.  Dogs in heat are prohibited in the park. 
l.  Food (dog or human) is prohibited in the park. 
m.  Glass and metal containers are prohibited in the park. 
n.  Bicycles, skateboards, roller blades, skates, scooters, strollers and carriages are prohibited in the park. 
o.  Smoking is prohibited in the park. 
p.  Appropriate dogs toys are allowed in the park, but toys that are edible such as rawhides and bones are prohibited. 
q.  Dog owners/handlers are responsible for immediately picking up and disposing of all of their dog's waste. 
r.  Dog owners/handlers must repair any damage caused by their dog (such as holes dug by the dog). 
s.  Animals other than dogs are prohibited in the park. 
t.  The small dog enclosure is only for dogs weighing under 40 pounds. Dogs weighing 40 pounds or more are prohibited in the area. The large dog enclosure is for dogs weighing 40 pounds or more. Small dogs are permitted in the large dog enclosure but enter at their own risk. 
u.  All children 16 years of age and younger must be accompanied and supervised by an adult at all times while in the park. 
v.  The park is subject to closure upon a determination by the city that such closure is in the public's interest or for safety or for maintenance. 
w.  The park hours are as follows: 
1.  April 1 through September 30: 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
2.  October 1 through March 31: 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  Additional penalty. In addition to any penalty set forth in section 1-9, any person who violates the rules as set forth above may be removed from the park and may be prohibited from returning to or using any leash-free dog park within the city. 
(b)  Round Rock Skate Park. 
(1)  Applicability of subsection. This subsection shall apply to the area known as the Round Rock Skate Park located in Greenslopes Park, north of the Clay Madsen Recreation Center. 
(2)  Use of park and waiver of liability. The city's liability or responsibility for damage or injuries in the skate park is limited to that imposed on it by V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 75.002. 
(3)  Rules. In addition to the rules regarding parks as set forth in this article, the following rules apply to all persons using the Round Rock Skate Park: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage in the city owned area known as the Round Rock Skate Park. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke inside of and outside within five feet of any entrance of the city owned area known as the Round Rock Skate Park. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or other similar device within the city owned area known as the Round Rock Skate Park. 
(4)  Additional penalty. In addition to any penalty set forth in section 1-9, any person who violates the rules as set forth above may be removed from the park and may be prohibited from returning. 
(Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11E1, § I(1.1712), 5-28-2009) 
Secs. 26-27-26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AFTER-SCHOOL RECREATION PROGRAM STANDARDS OF CARE 

Sec. 26-56. - Purpose. 
    This article and the standards of care established in this article are adopted in compliance with V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.041(b)(14), in order to exempt the after-school recreation program from state child-care licensing requirements. These standards of care are intended to be minimum standards by which the city will operate its parks and recreation department after-school recreation program. The program operated by the city is recreational in nature and is not a child-care program. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1701.1; Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1701.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    After-school assistant supervisor means a part-time employee of the department who is responsible for assisting the after-school supervisor in scheduling and providing a developmentally appropriate, safe recreational environment for the youth participating in the program. 
    After-school counselor means a part-time employee of the department who is responsible for providing a developmentally appropriate, safe recreational environment for the youth participating in the program. 
    After-school recreation program or program means a city-sponsored recreational program for youth that may be offered by the parks and recreation department after school. The term does not include any program or activity to which attendees are free to come and go at will without regard to the presence of a parent or other responsible adult to care for them. 
    After-school supervisor means a part-time employee of the department who is responsible for scheduling and providing a developmentally appropriate, safe recreational environment for the youth participating in the program. 
    Department means the parks and recreation department of the city. 
    Director means the director of the parks and recreation department or the director's authorized representative. 
    Parent means a person who: 
(1)  Is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, or a stepparent of a youth; 
(2)  Is, under court order, the guardian of a youth or is a public or private agency with whom a youth has been placed by a court; or 
(3)  Otherwise has legal custody or is the primary care giver and has the authority to enroll a youth in the after-school recreation program. 
    Participant means a youth whose parent has completed all required registration procedures and who is determined by the director to be eligible to participate in the after-school recreation program. 
    Program employee or employee means any person hired to work for the department who is assigned responsibility for managing, administering, or implementing some portion of the after-school recreation program. The term includes recreation manager, recreation center supervisor, recreation program coordinator, after-school supervisor, after-school assistant supervisor and after-school counselor. 
    Program manual means a notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, and organizational and programming information relevant to the city's after-school recreation program, as promulgated or otherwise approved by the director. 
    Program site means the main facility and administrative site for the after-school recreation program. 
    Recreation center supervisor means a full-time professional employee of the department who is responsible for managing the recreational facility where the after-school recreation program is conducted and managing the daily operation of the after-school recreation program including activity planning, staff training, scheduling and supervision, enforcement of all rules, and payroll. 
    Recreation manager means a full-time professional employee of the department who is responsible for the overall operation of the Clay Madsen Recreation Center, the senior center and city-wide community events, and assisting the director. 
    Recreation program coordinator or coordinator means a full-time professional employee of the department who is responsible for managing and overseeing the planning, administration, and implementation of the after-school recreation program. 
    Standards of care means all provisions contained in this article. 
    Youth means a person who is not less than five years of age and no more than 13 years of age. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1703.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-58. - Administration. 
(a)  The director shall implement, administer, and enforce the after-school recreation program standards of care. The director may by written order establish such rules, regulations, and policies, not inconsistent with this article, as the director determines are necessary to discharge any duty under or to effectuate the policies of this article. 
(b)  No after-school recreation program may be advertised as a child-care program or facility. 
(c)  When registering for the after-school recreation program, each participant's parent will be provided a current copy of the standards of care and will be informed that the after-school recreation program is not licensed by the state. A current copy of the standards of care shall be maintained by the city secretary and will also be available at the program site for inspection and review by the public and by program employees. 
(d)  The director, through the human resources department of the city, shall cause a criminal background check to be conducted on each prospective after-school recreation program employee who is 18 years or older. If results of that criminal check indicate that an applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses, the applicant will not be considered for employment: 
(1)  A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person or family; 
(2)  A felony or misdemeanor classified as public indecency; 
(3)  A felony or misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled substance; 
(4)  Any offense involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Any offense that would potentially put youth participants or the city at risk. 
(e)  The provisions of this article are administrative in nature and are not subject to criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1704.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-59. - Inspection, monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The recreation center supervisor, coordinator, after-school supervisor or after-school assistant supervisor shall initiate an inspection report for the after-school recreation program to confirm that the standards of care are being met. Each inspection report will be sent to the recreation manager for review and kept on record for at least three years. 
(b)  The recreation manager shall make a monthly inspection of the after-school recreation program site for compliance with the standards of care and shall provide a report to the director. The director shall review the report and establish deadlines and criteria for program compliance with the standards of care, as necessary. 
(c)  Any complaint regarding enforcement of the standards of care at the after-school recreation program must be directed to the recreation center supervisor or coordinator. The recreation center supervisor or coordinator shall take necessary steps to resolve each problem. The complaint and its resolution must be recorded by the recreation center supervisor or coordinator. The director shall address any complaint regarding enforcement of the standards of care that cannot be resolved by the recreation center supervisor or coordinator. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1705.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-60. - Enrollment. 
    Before a youth may be enrolled in the after-school recreation program, a parent must sign registration forms that contain the following information: 
(1)  The youth's name, date of birth, age, address, home telephone number, grade level, and school name; 
(2)  The name and address of each parent, a home telephone number, and a telephone number where each parent may be reached during program hours; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the youth's physician; 
(4)  The name and telephone number of the person that can be contacted in case of an emergency if the parent cannot be reached; 
(5)  The name, telephone number, driver's license number and relationship to the youth of each person to whom the child may be released; 
(6)  A statement of the youth's special problems or needs; 
(7)  A statement of the youth's allergic reactions; 
(8)  A list of medications the youth is taking; 
(9)  Transportation authorization and school information; 
(10)  Photo release; 
(11)  An emergency medical authorization; 
(12)  A liability waiver; and 
(13)  An acknowledgment that the parent has been informed and understands that the program is not licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1706.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-61. - Suspected abuse. 
    Every program employee shall report suspected child abuse or neglect in accordance with the Texas Family Code. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1707.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-62. - Recreation manager qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  The recreation manager must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university or the equivalent in one of the following areas: 
a.  Recreation administration or general recreation; 
b.  Elementary education; 
c.  Physical education; or 
d.  Any other comparable degree plan that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment; 
(3)  Have four years of experience in providing recreation or leisure time services; 
(4)  Have a minimum of one year administrative and supervisory experience; 
(5)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; and 
(6)  Have a valid Texas driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance requirements. 
(b)  The recreation manager is responsible for: 
(1)  The overall operation of the Clay Madsen Recreation Center, the Allen R. Baca Senior Center, and city-wide community events; 
(2)  Providing staff assistance to the director; 
(3)  Monitoring program compliance with appropriate federal, state and local rules and regulations; and 
(4)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1708.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-63. - Recreation center supervisor qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  The recreation center supervisor must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Have one of the following: 
a.  A bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university with major course work in one of the following areas: 
1.  Recreation administration or general recreation; 
2.  Physical education; 
3.  Any other comparable degree plan that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment; or 
b.  If a bachelor's degree has not been obtained, then 60 semester hours from an accredited college or university, plus four years experience in two of the specialty areas provided in subsection (3) of this section; 
(3)  Have two years of experience in two of the specialty areas listed below: 
a.  Recreation classes/programs; 
b.  After school programs; 
c.  Special events; 
d.  Athletics/aquatics programs; and 
e.  Revenue based programs; 
(4)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; and 
(5)  Have a valid Texas driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance requirements. 
(b)  The recreation center supervisor is responsible for: 
(1)  Planning, developing and implementing programs, while managing daily facility and staff operations; 
(2)  Maintaining appropriate records and preparing requested reports; 
(3)  Managing the daily operation and usage of the recreation facility; 
(4)  Assisting in the hiring of staff and monitoring staff performance; and 
(5)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1709.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-64. - Recreation program coordinator qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  Each coordinator must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in one of the following areas: 
a.  Recreation administration or general recreation; 
b.  Elementary education; 
c.  Physical education; or 
d.  Any other comparable degree plan that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment; 
(3)  Have a minimum of two years experience planning and implementing recreational activities or related experience; 
(4)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; 
(5)  Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards; and 
(6)  Have a valid Texas driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance requirements. 
(b)  A coordinator is responsible for: 
(1)  Planning, implementing, managing, evaluating, supervising and directing the after-school recreation program; 
(2)  Administering the daily operations of the after-school recreation program in compliance with the standards of care; 
(3)  Enforcing the standards of care; 
(4)  Supervising, and evaluating after-school recreation program staff; and 
(5)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1710.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-65. - After-school supervisor qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  The after-school supervisor must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 19 years of age; 
(2)  Have experience in one of the following areas: 
a.  Recreation administration or general recreation; 
b.  Elementary education; 
c.  Physical education; or 
d.  Any other experience that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment; 
(3)  Have a minimum of one year experience planning and implementing recreational activities or related experience; 
(4)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; 
(5)  Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards; and 
(6)  Have a valid Texas driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance requirements. 
(b)  The after-school supervisor is responsible for: 
(1)  Managing the daily operations of the after-school recreation program in compliance with the standards of care; 
(2)  Enforcing the standards of care; 
(3)  Scheduling, supervising, training and preparing the payroll of employees for the after-school recreation program; 
(4)  Planning, implementing, and evaluating the after-school recreation program; and 
(5)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1711.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-66. - After-school assistant supervisor qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  The after-school assistant supervisor must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 19 years of age; 
(2)  Have a high school diploma or equivalent; 
(3)  Have experience working with school age children in a recreational or childcare setting; 
(4)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; 
(5)  Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards; and 
(6)  Have a valid Texas driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance requirements. 
(b)  The after-school assistant supervisor is responsible for: 
(1)  Assisting the after-school supervisor in scheduling and providing a developmentally appropriate and safe recreational environment for the youth; 
(2)  Assisting the after-school supervisor in the daily operations of the after-school recreation program in compliance with the standards of care while keeping in close contact with the coordinator; 
(3)  Assisting the after-school supervisor in keeping track of supplies and inventory; 
(4)  Overseeing an assigned group and ensuring that proper disciplinary procedures are being practiced; and 
(5)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1712.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-67. - After-school counselors qualifications and responsibilities. 
(a)  Each counselor must meet all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be 16 years of age or older; 
(2)  Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first aid and cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards; and 
(3)  Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances. 
(b)  A counselor is responsible for: 
(1)  Planning and conducting activities, while interacting and supervising youth; and 
(2)  Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies, and procedures that apply to the after-school recreation program. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1713.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-68. - Training and orientation. 
(a)  The department shall provide training and orientation to program employees relating to working with youth in general and relating to the specific job responsibilities of each employee. The recreation center supervisor or a coordinator shall provide staff with a program manual specific to the after-school recreation program. 
(b)  Each program employee will be trained in appropriate procedures for handling emergencies and in other areas including but not limited to city, departmental, and program policies and procedures, provision of recreational activities and safety issues. 
(c)  Each program employee shall be familiar with these standards of care for the after-school recreation program and with all program policies including but not limited to check-in and check-out, late pick-up, discipline and release of participants, as outlined in the program manual. 
(d)  Each program employee will be required to sign an acknowledgment that the employee received the training required under this section. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1714.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-69. - Staff participant ratio. 
(a)  In the after-school recreation program, the maximum ratio of participants to staff will be 15:1. 
(b)  At all times at least one employee who is 16 years of age or older must be present at the program site. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1715.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-70. - Discipline. 
(a)  A program employee shall implement discipline and guidance in a consistent manner based on the best interests of program participants. 
(b)  No corporal punishment or treatment may be used. A program employee may use brief, supervised separation of a participant from the group, if necessary. 
(c)  As necessary, program employees shall provide discipline reports to the parents of participants. A parent will be asked to sign a participant's discipline report to indicate that the parent has been advised about a specific problem or incident. 
(d)  An excessive number of discipline reports or discipline reports of a severe nature, as described in the program manual, may result in a participant being suspended from a program. 
(e)  Any participant who poses a danger to other participants or staff will be removed from the program site as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1716.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-71. - Programming. 
(a)  A program employee shall plan, organize, instruct, direct and provide activities according to the participants' ages, interests, and abilities. The activities shall be appropriate, structured and well prepared to each participant's health, safety, and well-being. The activities shall also be flexible and promote each participant's emotional, social, and mental growth. 
(b)  A program employee shall encourage all youth to participate in the various program activities. 
(c)  A program employee shall stress friendliness, fair play and good sportsmanship to all participants. 
(d)  A program employee shall be attentive and considerate of the participants' safety on field trips and during any transportation provided by the program. A program employee must have a written list of all participants in each group and shall check the roll frequently. 
(e)  During trips, each program employee who supervises participants shall maintain immediate access to the emergency medical forms and emergency contact information for each participant. First aid supplies and a guide to first aid and emergency care must be readily available to each program employee on every field trip. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1717.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-72. - Communication. 
    The program site must have a mobile telephone/radio for use in contacting department personnel and making emergency calls. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1718.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-73. - Transportation. 
(a)  Before a participant may be transported to or from a city-sponsored activity, a transportation form, completed by a parent of the participant, must be filed with a coordinator. 
(b)  Every program vehicle used for transporting youth participants must be equipped with: 
(1)  First aid supplies and a first aid and emergency care guide that are easily accessible to program employees in the vehicle; and 
(2)  An operable portable fire extinguisher that is installed in the passenger compartment of the vehicle and that is easily accessible to program employees in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1719.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-74. - Release of participants. 
(a)  A participant will be released from the after-school recreation program only to a parent or to a person designated by the parent in the registration forms. 
(b)  If the parent or other person designated by the parent to pick up the youth is unknown to program staff, a participant will be released from the after-school recreation program only after photo identification is reviewed against the information provided in the registration forms. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1720.1, 7-26-2007) 
Sec. 26-75. - Facility standards. 
(a)  Safety. 
(1)  Program employees shall inspect the program site daily to detect sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the health and safety of the participants. All sanitation or safety concerns shall be reported by program employees to the coordinator or recreation center supervisor, who will keep a log of the concerns reported and how each concern was handled. The log will be kept for a minimum of three years. 
(2)  All buildings, grounds, and equipment at the program site must be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained to protect the health of the participants. Program employees shall report any needed repairs or damage to the recreation facility to the coordinator or recreation center supervisor. The coordinator or recreation center supervisor will cause the repair or damage to be taken care of immediately and will keep a log of the outcome for a minimum of three years. 
(3)  All equipment and supplies used in a program must be safe for use by the participants. 
(4)  First aid supplies must be readily available to all program employees at the program site, during transportation to an off-site activity, and for the duration of any off-site activity. A program employee shall maintain first aid supplies in a designated location, readily available to staff. Each program employee must at all times have immediate access to a guide to first aid and emergency care. 
(5)  Air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters at the program site must be mounted out of the participants' reach or have safeguards that keep participants from being injured. 
(b)  Fire. 
(1)  In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or any other emergency, a program employee's first priority is to evacuate the participants to a designated safe area. 
(2)  The program site must have at least one fire extinguisher that is readily available to all program employees. 
(3)  Fire drills will be initiated at the program site twice a year. 
(c)  Health. 
(1)  Illness or injury. 
a.  A youth who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or employees will not be admitted to a program. 
b.  Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner that protects the health of all participants and employees. 
c.  A program employee shall follow plans to provide emergency care for injured participants with symptoms of an acute illness as specified in the program manual. 
d.  Each program employee shall follow the recommendation of the state department of health concerning the admission or readmission of any participant after a communicable disease. 
(2)  Medication. Program employees shall not be permitted to administer, dispense or store medication, including injections, for a participant. 
(3)  Toilet facilities. The program site must have toilets located and equipped so that participants can use them independently and program employees can supervise as needed. 
(4)  Sanitation. 
a.  The program site must have adequate light, ventilation, and heat. 
b.  The program must be provided with an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the state department of health for drinking water. A program employee shall ensure that water is supplied to participants in a safe and sanitary manner. 
c.  Program employees shall ensure that garbage is removed daily from the program site and ensure that all food and crumbs have been swept and thrown away. 
(Ord. No. G-07-12-26-9A1, § 1721.1, 7-26-2007) 
Chapter 28 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; regulation of sales and solicitation, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1801 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IDENTIFICATION CARDS 

Sec. 28-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business hours means the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on days that the Round Rock City Hall is open for business. 
    Canvasser means a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation from or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose, the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause; or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or service. 
    Peddler. 
(1)  The term "peddler" means a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation from or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service. 
(2)  The term "peddler" does not include a person who distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence. 
    Solicitor means a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation from or appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such purpose, there is the sale of some good or service; or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or service. 
(Code 1995, § 4.202) 
Sec. 28-20. - Unlawful to peddle without an identification card available for solicitors and canvassers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to act as a peddler without having first applied for and obtained an identification card from the city police department. It shall also be unlawful for any person or persons to act as a peddler in the city without carrying such identification card while engaged in such soliciting or selling. Canvassers and solicitors are not required to have an identification card, but any canvasser or solicitor desiring an identification card for the purpose of reassuring city residents of the canvasser's or solicitor's good faith may voluntarily submit an application for an identification card. 
(Code 1995, § 4.203) 
Sec. 28-21. - Written application required. 
    Any person desiring to act as a peddler in the city shall make written application to the city police department during business hours for an identification card in accordance with this article. Any person desiring to act as a canvasser or solicitor has the option of making a written application for an identification card. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  A photo-identification card, including a driver's license, state identification card, student identification card, passport, or other photo-identification card issued by a government within the United States. 
(3)  The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant. 
(4)  A brief description of the proposed activity related to this identification card. Copies of literature to be distributed may be substituted for this description at the option of the applicant. 
(5)  Date and place of birth and (if available) the social security number of the applicant. 
(6)  A list of all misdemeanor and felony convictions of the applicant for the seven years immediately prior to the application. 
(7)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by the applicant. 
(8)  If a card is requested for a peddler, the following information is also required: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the business offering the event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal or employer). 
b.  A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the state. 
c.  The location where books and records are kept of sales which occur within the city and which are available for city inspection to determine that all city sales taxes have been paid. 
(9)  If a card is requested for a solicitor, the following information is also required: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the organization, person, or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted. 
b.  The web address for this organization, person, or group (or other address) where residents having subsequent questions can go for more information. 
(10)  Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, such as copies of literature to be distributed, references to other municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc. 
(Code 1995, § 4.204) 
Sec. 28-22. - Identification card fee. 
    The identification card fee for each peddler shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. A canvasser or solicitor desiring an identification card will not be charged a fee. Identification cards shall be valid for 90 days from the date of their issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of said identification cards. 
(Code 1995, § 4.205) 
Sec. 28-23. - Investigation. 
    During any time following the application for one or more identification cards and its issuance, the city may investigate as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. If the city has not completed this investigation within 16 business hours, the identification card will nonetheless be issued, subject, however, to administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation. If a canvasser or solicitor requests an identification card, the investigation will proceed as described above, but if the city refuses to issue the identification card (or revokes it after issuance), the canvasser or solicitor will be advised that the failure to procure an identification card does not prevent him from canvassing or soliciting the residents of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 4.206) 
Sec. 28-24. - Issuance of identification card. 
    The identification card shall be issued promptly after application but in all cases within 16 business hours of completion of an application, unless it is determined within that time that: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years; or 
(2)  Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable neglect. 
(Code 1995, § 4.207) 
Sec. 28-25. - Denial; administrative revocation. 
    If the issuing officer denies (or upon completion of an investigation revokes) the identification card to one or more persons, he shall immediately convey the decision to the applicant orally and shall within 16 business hours after the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which shall be immediately made available to the applicant. 
(Code 1995, § 4.208) 
Sec. 28-26. - Revocation of identification card. 
(a)  In addition to the administrative revocation of an identification card, a card may be revoked by the chief of police, the acting or assistant chief of police, the city manager, or the acting or assistant city manager for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Any violation of this article by the applicant or by the business or organization that the applicant is representing; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on the activity; 
(3)  Conviction of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the last seven years; or 
(4)  Conducting the activity in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Any police officer shall have the authority to confiscate the identification card of any person reasonably believed to have violated one or more of the above provisions for up to 16 business hours pending a revocation decision as set forth above. 
(Code 1995, § 4.209) 
Sec. 28-27. - Aggrieved persons may appeal to city council. 
(a)  Any solicitor, peddler or canvasser aggrieved by the denial or revocation of an identification card or the decision with reference to the revocation of the identification card, shall have the right of appeal to the city council. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken by filing a petition with the city secretary within ten days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the address on such person's application, or personally served with notice. The petition shall contain a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. 
(c)  The city secretary shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1995, § 4.210) 
Sec. 28-28. - Chief of police to keep record of identification cards. 
    The chief of police shall keep a permanent record of all identification cards issued. This record shall be open for inspection during business hours. 
(Code 1995, § 4.211) 
Sec. 28-29. - Display of identification cards. 
    Each peddler shall display the identification card on the outer clothing of the individual in a manner that it is reasonably visible to any person who might be approached by said peddler. 
(Code 1995, § 4.212) 
Sec. 28-30. - Criminal prosecution for violations. 
    The revocation of any identification card for violation of any provision of this article shall not preclude a criminal prosecution for such violation. 
(Code 1995, § 4.213) 
Sec. 28-31. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to: 
(1)  Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter, which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser; 
(2)  Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main entrance to the dwelling, or step from the sidewalk or indicated walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the property; 
(3)  Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors; 
(4)  Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(b)  The above prohibitions shall not apply when the peddler, solicitor, or canvasser has an express invitation from the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him to enter upon any posted property. 
(Code 1995, § 4.214) 
Sec. 28-32. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any federal, state or local government employee or to a employee of a public utility in the performance of his employment. 
(Code 1995, § 4.215; Ord. No. G-04-08-12-12A1, 8-12-2004) 
Secs. 28-33-28-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solicitation by pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.007 et seq. 

Sec. 28-53. - Findings and purpose for prohibiting solicitations from occupants in vehicles or pedestrians. 
(a)  The activity of soliciting employment, business or contributions from occupants of vehicles distracts drivers from their primary duties to watch traffic and to avoid potential hazards in the roadway, including pedestrians, to observe all traffic control signals or warnings, and to prepare to move through the city's streets and intersections. 
(b)  The practice of soliciting employment, business or contributions from occupants of vehicles impedes the flow of traffic on the streets within the city, results in the delay and obstruction of the public's free flow of travel, and results in congestion and blockage of the streets, driveways to parking areas, and sidewalks when persons approach vehicles to negotiate with the occupants. 
(c)  Distracted drivers are more prone to automobile accidents which constitute a substantial traffic safety problem which impedes and prevents the orderly flow of traffic, and is unsafe for the person engaging in the solicitation, pedestrian traffic, and the traffic in general. 
(d)  The city council does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control such traffic hazards, in order to provide for the safe, orderly flow of traffic, improve the safety for those drivers traveling the roadways within the corporate limits and improve pedestrian safety, especially children's safety, along the city's streets. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2201) 
Sec. 28-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arterial roadway means those roadways designated as such by the transportation master plan. 
    Cause means aid, direct, hire, encourage, permit or allow. 
    Curb means the lateral lines of a roadway, whether constructed above grade or not, which are not intended for vehicular travel. 
    Improved shoulder means a paved shoulder. 
    Public right-of-way means real property: 
(1)  Owned by a governmental entity or owned by a non-governmental entity or person and dedicated to public use; 
(2)  Including but not limited to sidewalks, medians, curbs, shoulders, improved shoulders, walkways, paths and any other area so owned, dedicated, used or reserved for public use, including but not limited to use by vehicles, pedestrians and public utilities; and 
(3)  That is in the area extending from the right and left of the center line of a public street, roadway or highway to the nearest property line which marks the juncture of private property and public right-of-way. 
    Roadway means that portion of the public street that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm or shoulder. In the event that a public street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall mean each roadway separately. 
    Shoulder means the portion of a highway that is: 
(1)  Adjacent to the roadway; 
(2)  Designed or ordinarily used for parking; 
(3)  Distinguished from the roadway by different design, construction, or marking; and 
(4)  Not intended for normal vehicular travel. 
    Sidewalk means that improved surface which is between the curblines, or lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, and is designed, intended or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the public right-of-way lines, including but not limited to frontage roadways of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Traffic median means a paved or planted area of public right-of-way dividing a street or highway into lanes according to the direction of travel and shall be held to include the curb, if any, at the outer edge of said area. 
    Vehicle or motor vehicle shall have the same meaning as defined under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.201. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2202) 
Sec. 28-55. - Prohibition of soliciting on interstate highways, state highways, farm-to-market roads, or arterial roadways. 
    A person commits an offense if he promotes, advertises, sells, distributes, or solicits financial assistance, employment, transportation, donations, money, goods or any other service, property or product: 
(1)  Upon or within the public right-of-way of an interstate highway, state highway, farm-to-market road or any arterial roadway; or 
(2)  Upon or within the public right-of-way within 250 feet of an intersection of a street or roadway crossing of such interstate highway, state highway, farm-to-market road, or arterial roadway. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2203) 
Sec. 28-56. - Causing a child to solicit. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly cause a child 12 years of age or younger to stop, stand, sit, walk upon or occupy any portion of a public right-of-way for the purpose of promoting, advertising, selling, distributing, or soliciting financial assistance, employment, transportation, donations, money, goods or any other service, property or product to or from occupants of motor vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2204) 
Sec. 28-57. - No soliciting near public or private schools. 
    A person commits an offense if he solicits in the public right-of-way that is within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when such school is in session. The measurement of the distance shall be from the nearest property line of the public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2205) 
Sec. 28-58. - Compliance with other laws. 
    This section does not relieve responsibility for compliance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 552, pedestrians, or any other statute or ordinance that may be applicable. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2206; Ord. No. G-03-09-25-13A1, 9-25-2003) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 363; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND RECYCLING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    City shall mean the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    Container shall mean a privately-owned cart, metal or plastic can, securely fastened trash bags, or other sturdy receptacle for refuse or recyclable materials. 
    Garbage shall mean all animal and vegetable matter, such as waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops, cafes, restaurants, drug stores, hotels, rooming, boarding, and apartment houses, and other deleterious substances, not to include dirt, concrete, tile, plaster, rocks and other substances. 
    Person shall include both singular and plural and shall mean and embrace any person, firm, or corporation, their agents, servants, tenants and employees. 
    Premises shall mean business houses, boarding houses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, apartments, sanitariums, rooming houses, schools, private residences, vacant lots, and other places within the city limits where refuse, either garbage or trash, accumulates. 
    Recyclable materials or recyclables shall mean materials that have been designated by the city to be recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous solid waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling or reclamation. 
    Recycling cart shall mean a cart used, approved and issued by the city or the city's contractor for the collection of recyclable materials. 
    Refuse shall mean all solid wastes, including garbage or trash. 
    Refuse cart shall mean any a cart used, approved, and issued by the city or the city's contractor for the collection of refuse. 
    Trash shall mean rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans, paper bags, boxes, glass, newspapers, magazines, and other such paper products, grass, shrubs, flowers, yard cleanings, grass clippings, leaves, and tree trimmings; not to include dirt, concrete, tile, plaster, rocks, and other such substances, and including handbills except when such handbills are distributed in a manner prescribed by the city council and with written permission from the city manager certifying conformity with the outline requirements of the council. 
(Code 1995, § 6.601; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § I, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § I, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 32-20. - Depositing garbage and trash on streets or vacant lots prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, haul, throw or deposit any garbage, handbills, trash, dirt, concrete, rocks, brick, plaster, tile, stagnant water, or dead animals into, upon, or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, parkway, street, in the window, door handle or under the windshield wiper of an automobile, or vacant lot, or upon any public or private premises within the corporate limits of the city. In the event handbills are distributed, they must be distributed in a manner prescribed by the city council and with written permission from the city manager certifying conformity with the outlined requirements of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 6.602) 
State Law reference- Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 
Sec. 32-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § II, adopted Aug. 26, 2010, repealed § 32-21, which pertained to "sanitation superintendent; employment; duties generally" and derived from: Code 1995, § 6.603. 
Sec. 32-22. - Residential refuse. 
(a)  Cart requirements. The city or its contractor will provide every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any residential premises, a refuse cart. When, in the discretion of the city manager or his designee, the refuse cart is no longer serviceable, it shall be replaced. In cases of abuse or neglect, the customer will be charged a replacement fee equal to the cost of the refuse cart. 
(1)  Refuse carts shall be kept clean and free from accumulations of any substance remaining attached to the inside of carts which would attract or promote the breeding of mosquitoes or other insects. 
(2)  Excess refuse may be stored in one or more containers placed directly adjacent to the refuse container. 
(b)  Manner of disposal. It shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises to place the daily accumulations of refuse in the refuse cart described in subsection (a) herein. It shall be the duty of every person placing garbage or trash in refuse carts to eliminate as far as possible all water and liquid from such refuse. Refuse shall be placed in carts in such a way that no cart which is to be loaded hydraulically shall weigh more than 80 pounds. 
(c)  Excess refuse. If the accumulation of refuse will not fit within a refuse cart, customers may place a limited amount of refuse next to the refuse cart that meets the requirements below. Leaves and grass clippings shall be placed in a container, and where possible, other excess refuse should be placed in a container. Excess refuse such as tree limbs, cardboard boxes, and scrap lumber that cannot be placed in a refuse cart or container, shall be neatly stacked and tied in a bundle not exceeding four feet in length, width, or height. Each container or bundle shall not exceed 40 pounds. No more than seven containers and/or bundles may be placed at the curb per collection day. 
(d)  Collection by city. The city or its contractor will collect refuse from residential customers once weekly and it shall be the duty of any person owning, occupying, managing, operating, leasing or renting any residential premises to place the refuse carts at the curb on the street prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day established for collection, but no earlier than 7:00 a.m. the day prior to the established collection day. Refuse containers shall be removed no later than 7:00 p.m. on the day after the collection day. 
(e)  Storage of containers. Refuse containers shall be stored behind the front building wall of the residential structure when not placed out for collection. 
(f)  Recycling containers. The requirements set forth in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section pertaining to refuse containers, shall also apply to recycling containers. 
(Code 1995, § 6.604; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § III, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. O-2016-3539, § I, 7-14-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § II, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 32-23. - Commercial refuse. 
(a)  Containers. For nonresidential customers, either the customer or its refuse collection contractor shall provide containers suitable for dumping by mechanical means. Containers will be placed on private premises at locations agreed between the owner or occupant and the commercial refuse collection contractor; provided, however, no such container shall be placed: 1) within 15 feet of the boundary of any abutting property with a SF (Single-family) or TF (Two-family) zoning designation; or 2) in any front, rear or side yard abutting to a street. The city will not be responsible for damages to paved surfaces on private property caused by commercial refuse collection trucks. Sufficient containers will be placed to accommodate the refuse from each business. Adjacent small businesses may share containers. 
(b)  Manner of disposal. All refuse from business and commercial establishments shall be placed in the containers. No refuse shall be left outside the containers. All garbage shall be drained before placing in containers. All packing boxes larger than two cubic feet must be flattened before placing in containers. No manure, building materials, rocks, dirt or dead animals shall be placed in the containers. 
(c)  Collection. Refuse containers shall not be placed out for collection earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the business day prior to the established collection day and shall be moved from the collection site no later than 7:00 a.m. the day after the collection day. For the purposes of this section, a business day shall be defined as any day the City of Round Rock offices are open for business. 
(d)  Recycling containers. The requirements in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section pertaining to refuse containers shall also apply to recycling containers. 
(Code 1995, § 6.605; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § IV, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. G-11-01-27-13B1, § XXXIX, 1-27-2011; Ord. No. O-2016-3539, § II, 7-14-2016) 
Sec. 32-24. - Pilfering from carts and containers, etc. 
    Pilfering or scattering contents of refuse carts or containers, or meddling with refuse carts or containers in any way, is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 6.606; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § III, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 32-25. - Collection by other than city restricted. 
(a)  Franchise required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting refuse from commercial establishments within the city unless he shall have been issued a franchise therefor which is in force and effect. The franchise fee shall be ten percent of gross revenues and payable quarterly. 
(b)  Exception. This subsection does not prohibit a person occupying, managing, or operating any premises from transporting and disposing of refuse from his own premises provided that such refuse is transported and disposed of in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.607; Ord. No. 2601, 11-12-1992) 
Sec. 32-26. - Excessive accumulation. 
    Businesses which produce excessive accumulations of refuse may be excluded from the service provided by the city. Such accumulations shall be removed and disposed of by the owner or person in charge of same, provided that the owner or person in charge shall secure from the city sanitation department a written permit for removal and disposal of same. Said permit shall be issued only after said sanitation superintendent has satisfied himself that the permittee is capable of complying with the requirements of this section. The permit may be revoked by the city sanitation superintendent when deemed necessary to protect the public welfare. 
(Code 1995, § 6.608) 
Sec. 32-27. - Incineration. 
    Any person who occupies, operates, or manages any premises within the city may incinerate refuse on his premises provided that the method of incineration is such that smoke emission falls within the limits prescribed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Open burning of refuse or burning of refuse in barrels, pits, or other open or screened containers is prohibited, except as permitted by section 16-89. 
(Code 1995, § 6.609) 
Sec. 32-28. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Small animals. Dogs, cats, or any other small dead animal shall not be placed in refuse carts or containers. The animal warden of the city will remove such small dead animal, upon notice to do so. 
(b)  Heavy animals. Heavy dead animals, such as horses, cows, and mules, shall be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having charge of same and by burial at some location as approved by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 6.610; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § IV, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 32-29. - Disposal of bulky, heavy materials. 
(a)  Size restrictions. Heavy accumulation such as brush, broken concrete, ashes, appliances, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, any excess refuse exceeding the limits of section 32-22 above, and other bulky materials, shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or persons controlling same. 
(b)  Disposition of waste from building operations. Rock, dirt, concrete, brick, tile, plaster, waste, scrap building materials, or other trash resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property, or resulting from sizable amounts of trees, brush, and debris cleared from property in preparation for construction, will not be removed by the city. The owner will have such debris removed at his own expense. 
(c)  Wastes from tree trimming operations. It shall be the duty of any person employing, engaging, or otherwise paying a contractor, student, professional tree trimmer, or any other person, to trim and prune his trees or shrubs, to have the trimmings and debris removed at the owner's expense. The city will not remove trimmings and debris created by such persons as regular service. 
(d)  Brush collection by city's contractor. Upon the request of an owner or occupant of a residence or business, the city's contractor may pick up tree trimmings and/or brush from such owner or occupant of a residence or business. The owner will be responsible for the expense of removing such brush. 
(Code 1995, § 6.611; Ord. No. 709, 8-23-1979; Ord. No. 2567, 2-27-1992; Ord. No. G-07-07-12-10B1, § I, 7-12-2007; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § V, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 32-30. - Disposal of animal wastes, waste oil and industrial waste. 
    Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and other animal or fowl pens, waste oils from garages or filling stations, and solid industrial waste materials shall be removed and disposed of by the person controlling same in the manner and by the method directed by the sanitation superintendent. 
(Code 1995, § 6.612) 
Sec. 32-31. - Transportation of refuse. 
    The operator of any vehicle hauling refuse shall not allow refuse to blow or fall out of the vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 6.613; Ord. No. 709, 8-23-1979) 
Sec. 32-32. - Hazardous wastes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection by the sanitation department any materials classified as hazardous by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1995, § 6.614; Ord. No. 762, 9-11-1980) 
Sec. 32-33. - Garbage collection service charges. 
(a)  Residential. 
(1)  A sanitation charge for the collection of refuse and for city-wide recycling services shall be made for each occupied residence within the city, whether or not any refuse is deposited for collection for such occupied residence during any month and whether or not the residence utilizes the city-wide recycling services during any month. For multiple housing units, up to and including five units, the sanitation charge shall be applied for each dwelling unit, regardless of the number of water meters. 
(2)  The residential charge for the collection of refuse and for recycling services shall be $19.37 per month. 
The amended residential charge for refuse and recycling services set forth above shall apply to bills for the collection of refuse and for recycling services issued March 13, 2019 and thereafter. 
(3)  Except as provided below, on and after June 10, 1993, the garbage rate discount for head of household residents 65 years of age and older will be discontinued. All head of household residents 65 years of age and older actually receiving said discounts prior to June 10, 1993, shall continue to receive said discounts as stated in this section, so long as they re-apply for said discounts before October 30 of each year. For residential service located within the corporate limits where the head of household has attained the age of 65, and if said resident head of household was receiving garbage rate discounts prior to June 10, 1993, and if said resident head of household re-applies for said discount between October 1 and October 30 of each year, said head of household shall be entitled to a discount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time from the residential sanitation charge. In order to be entitled to said discount, the head of house shall make a sworn application therefor and present proof of age. It shall be a violation of this Code for anyone to make a false statement on such application, or to receive such discount without being eligible therefor. Each month a discount is unlawfully received shall be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  Commercial. A sanitation charge for the collection of refuse from all business, commercial, retail, industrial, and manufacturing establishments shall be made when such collection service is provided by the city or its contractor. The charge shall include furnishing containers for refuse. Multiple house units having more than five housing units shall be considered commercial customers. The sanitation charge for commercial refuse collection shall be set by the contractor providing said service. 
(c)  Outside city limits. The above garbage collection rates shall apply to all users located within the corporate limits of the city. All users located outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay 11/2 times the rate set forth above. 
(Code 1995, § 6.615; Ord. No. 522, 1-26-1978; Ord. No. 2207, 11-26-1985; Ord. No. 2549, 9-26-1991; Ord. No. G-93-06-10-8G, 6-10-1993; Ord. No. G-93-12-09-9A, 12-9-1993; Ord. No. G-94-09-22-9C, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. G-97-02-13-9A, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. G-00-01-27-12B1, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. G-04-11-09-9B1, 11-9-2004; Ord. No. G-08-06-12-9C1, § I, 6-12-2008; Ord. No. G-09-09-24-10B1, 9-24-2009; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § V, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. G-11-10-06-10A1, § I, 10-6-2011; Ord. No. G-13-12-19-E2, § I, 12-19-2013; Ord. No. O-2018-5096, §§ I, II, 2-8-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IV, 9-27-2018; Ord. No. O-2019-0097, §§ I, II, 2-28-2019) 
Sec. 32-34. - Recycling. 
(a)  The city or its contractor will provide recycling carts to every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any residential premises for the purpose of separating and storing recyclable materials for collection. When in the discretion of the city manager or his designee, the recycling cart is no longer serviceable, it shall be replaced. In cases of abuse or neglect, the customer will be charged a replacement fee equal to the cost of the recycling cart. 
(b)  The city shall collect recyclable materials from residential customers once every other week and it shall be the duty of any person owning, occupying, managing, operating, leasing or renting any residential premises to place the recycling cart at the curb on the street prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day established for collection. 
(c)  Recyclable materials shall be limited to the following: office paper; newsprint; magazines and catalogs; aluminum, steel and tin containers, glass bottles and containers, HDPE and PET plastic bottles #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, #6, #7; and household paper products to include junk mail, envelopes, cereal boxes, cardboard, boxboard and telephone books. 
(Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A1, § VI, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. O-2017-4778, § VI, 9-28-2017) 
Chapter 34 - SPECIAL EVENTS, BLOCK PARTIES AND PARADES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, adopted July 14, 2011, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 34-19-34-46, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1995, §§ 1.3401-1.3428; and Ord. No. G-05-02-24-8B1, adopted Feb. 24, 2005. 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a special event permit. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a special event permit is granted pursuant to this article. 
    Special event means a planned temporary aggregation of people or attractions for a common purpose, including but not limited to, street fairs, arts and crafts shows, carnivals, circuses, rallies, public entertainments, or other similar events or attractions, that: 
(1)  Are conducted primarily outdoors; and 
(2)  Interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(3)  Require special city services, including but not limited to, street closure, provisions of barricades, special parking arrangements, special electrical services or special police services. 
    Special event permit means the written approval from the city manager for a special event. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-20. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-21. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with the city manager upon forms provided by the city, which shall be accompanied with an application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. In appropriate circumstances, the city manager shall have the authority to lower or waive the fee. 
(b)  The city manager shall ensure that other licenses and permits, restrictions, regulations, fees for the city services, safeguards or other conditions deemed necessary by individual city departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a special event be requested, submitted and approved before the special event permit is granted, e.g., health permit applications; agreement with the police department for police coverage; agreement with the public works department regarding costs associated with street closures; agreement with the parks and recreation department for the use of any park facilities. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-22. - Filing period. 
(a)  Applications for a special event permit shall be filed not less than 45 days before the special event is to begin. 
(b)  Late applications, where good cause is shown and subject to the standards promulgated in section 34-24, may be considered when filed after the deadline prescribed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-23. - Contents of application. 
    The application for a special event permit shall set forth as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person seeking to conduct the special event; 
(2)  If the special event is to be held for or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and name, address, telephone number, and email address of the authorized representatives of such organization; 
(3)  If the special event is to be held by or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file a written statement from that other person showing authority to make the application; 
(4)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person who will be the special event chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(5)  The proposed location of parking areas and the number of spaces provided for the special event; 
(6)  The approximate number of people who will be attending, the approximate number of people attending at peak times, including event staff and performers, if any, and, if applicable, the number and types of animals and vehicles which will constitute such special event; 
(7)  The location, size and number of stages, seating, tents, awnings, canopies, food service booths, first aid stations, portable restrooms or other temporary structures shall be shown; 
(8)  If food or beverages will be served or sold, include copies of any licenses or permits issued by the appropriate agencies for such vendors; 
(9)  The number, size, material and location of any planned signage shall be included; 
(10)  When loudspeakers will be used, the location and orientation of those speakers shall be shown; 
(11)  The dates and times the special event will start and terminate; 
(12)  The time at which on-site activities in preparation for the special event will begin; 
(13)  The proposed location of entrances and exits and a plan of evacuation in case of emergency; 
(14)  If any portion of the special event is to be held on private property, including parking, written permission for the holding of the special event or parking from the owner of the property or his authorized representative; 
(15)  Copies of permits and agreements with all county officials or state agencies shall be included with the application for a special event permit; 
(16)  If required as set forth in section 34-41, a copy of a certificate of insurance that complies with the requirements set forth in such section; 
(17)  If required as set forth in section 34-43, a copy of the surety bond that complies with the requirements set forth in such section; and 
(18)  Any other information which the city manager shall find necessary under the standards for issuance. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-24. - Standards for issuance. 
    A special event permit will be issued if, upon review, the city manager finds that the applicant has secured the police services, if any, required under section 34-44; all applicable fees have been paid; and that the special event will be conducted in such a way that: 
(1)  It will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near its location or route; 
(2)  It will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the special event location or line of movement and the adjacent areas as to unduly interfere with the normal protection for the city; 
(3)  It will not require the diversion of so great a number of fire protection or emergency medical services (EMS) personnel so as to unduly interfere with the provision of these services to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the special event and adjacent areas; 
(4)  It will not unduly interfere with the efficient response movement of firefighting equipment and services en route to a fire; 
(5)  The concentration of people, animals, and vehicles at assembly points and during the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire, EMS, and police services to areas near such special event; 
(6)  It is not likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(7)  There will be adequate sanitation and other required health facilities made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; and 
(8)  There are sufficient parking places on the site of the special event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected to be parked in accordance with section 34-29 or the applicant has made adequate arrangements for off-site parking and transfer of attendees. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-25. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  The city manager may deny a special event permit if: 
(1)  The special event will conflict in time and location with another special event, parade or assembly for which a permit has already been granted; 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with or the special event will violate an ordinance of the city or any other applicable law; 
(3)  The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of violating this article, has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding 12 months, or has failed to pay any additional costs assessed by the city for a previous special event within the previous two years; 
(5)  The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by this article or another city ordinance or by state law; 
(6)  The special event, in the opinion of one or more city departmental directors, would unduly hinder or compromise the delivery or performance of normal services, including previously scheduled construction or maintenance services, or emergency services, or constitutes a public threat; 
(7)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to provide any required insurance or surety bonds that may be required under this article; 
(8)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional costs as may be required by the city manager; 
(9)  The applicant fails to submit a complete application or fails to provide any additional information requested by the city manager; or 
(10)  The proposed date or time for the special event or the location of the special event or parking for such special event would unduly interfere or disrupt the educational activities of a school when such school is in session. 
(b)  A special event permit shall be revoked upon the following conditions: 
(1)  In the event that the police chief, fire chief, director of utilities, other city officials or their designated representatives find that any of the provisions of this section, another city ordinance, or state law is being violated, they shall immediately notify the city manager, and the special event permit issued hereunder shall be revoked; 
(2)  When, in the judgment of the above named officials, a violation exists which requires immediate abatement, they shall have authority to revoke a special event permit in the absence or unavailability of the city manager; or 
(3)  The applicant made or permitted to be made a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event permit. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-26. - Notice of denial; appeals. 
    The city manager shall act upon a complete application for a special event permit within 15 days after the filing thereof. If the city manager does not approve the application, he shall mail to applicant a notice of this action stating the reasons for the denial of the application. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city secretary within five days after receipt of the notice of denial. The city council shall hear the appeal as soon as practicable and its decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-27. - Permit to be maintained on-premises. 
    The special event permit shall be maintained at all times on the premises, and shall be made available to any police officer or other authorized city employee or representative. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-28. - Notice to abutting property owners. 
    The city manager shall have authority to require that permittee send notices of the special event to abutting property owners when, in the city manager's judgment, the special event is of a scope and nature that will impact those owners. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-29. - Applicant parking requirements. 
(a)  An applicant shall submit evidence that sufficient parking will be available to accommodate the projected number of users with a ten percent surplus. The number of spaces deemed sufficient will be determined by the nature of the event, number and age of people attending, including event staff, participants and performers during peak times. If said parking is to be on private property adjacent to the special event, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of said property through ownership, lease, license, or other property interest must be provided. When the location is not an established parking area, a plan shall be submitted which will show how the needed parking will be achieved and arranged. The number of parking spaces and layout of parking area, including aisle widths, size of parking spaces and whether parking attendants will be provided, shall be included in the submittal. 
(b)  When adequate parking is not available at or immediately adjacent to the site of the special event, off-site parking may be used. Plans shall be submitted which will show how off-site parking and transfer of attendees will be accomplished. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-30. - City authority over parking. 
    The city shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary as determined by the police department, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof adjacent to the site of the special event. The city shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-31. - Amusement rides. 
    Rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall conform to the statutory rules and regulations set forth in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2151, designated the Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-32. - Hours of operation. 
    A special event may be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily. The police department shall be responsible for enforcing this provision. The city manager may waive the time limit on certain special events when good cause is demonstrated by the applicant. Appeals of time limit restrictions may be made under section 34-26. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-33. - Tents and temporary structures. 
    Any special event which includes the use of a stage, seating, tent, canopy, or other temporary structure shall meet the requirements of the city's fire code and building code except that a separate permit is not required when a special event permit has been obtained. Fire lanes for emergency equipment must be provided and the site prepared in a manner so as not to be a fire hazard as determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-34. - Food and beverage service. 
    Where food or beverage service is provided or sold, said operation shall be in compliance with all provisions of the food and food establishment ordinances of the city, as well as all other applicable state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-35. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Portable type sanitary facilities must be provided on the premises as determined to be necessary by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-36. - Animal waste. 
    Waste from animals used in any such special event shall be removed daily from the grounds. Should animals be kept within the city limits at night, they shall be kept not less than 300 feet from any developed residential or commercial districts. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-37. - Water usage and disposal of wastewater. 
(a)  Any special event or related activity desiring use of water from the city water system must coordinate with the utilities department to obtain a temporary meter. Deposit for the meter and payment for water used shall be in accordance with ordinances of the city. 
(b)  An applicant shall submit a plan for the disposal of wastewater and the plan shall be approved by the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-38. - Waste collection and solid waste dumpster. 
    An applicant shall make appropriate arrangements for the collection of all waste resulting from such special event, and commercial solid waste dumpsters must be provided on site at all outdoor special events. An applicant shall make arrangements for the provision of such dumpsters with a commercial solid waste disposal company currently having a franchise agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-39. - Loudspeakers. 
    During the special event, the permit holder shall comply with all applicable noise regulations of the city as set forth in chapter 14, article VIII of this Code. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-40. - Signage. 
    Signage used in accordance with the special event shall comply with the sign regulations of the city under the provisions for promotional sign pursuant to section 30-19. Signs advertising the special event or directing potential customers to the special event site are expressly prohibited in the city rights-of-way (see section 30-13). 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. G-13-03-14-F2, § II, 3-14-2013) 
Sec. 34-41. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  When a special event is partially or fully contained on the city rights-of-way, the applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the city manager with a certificate of insurance complying with standards established by the city's risk manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the right to lower, waive, or increase the public liability insurance limits based upon the type of special event, equipment, machinery, location, number of people or animals involved and other pertinent factors or risks associated with the special event. 
(c)  An applicant shall have the right to show cause why the insurance requirement should be reduced or waived, and to present such request to the city manager. Upon receipt of such request, the city manager shall consult with the city's risk manager or his designee. The city manager shall respond to an applicant's request for lower insurance or waiver within five days from date of request. 
(d)  If a mutually agreeable insurance limit cannot be agreed upon, the application shall be considered denied. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-42. - Indemnification. 
    When a special event or parking attendant to such special event is partially or fully contained on city property, an applicant shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the special event. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-43. - Surety bond. 
(a)  When a special event is partially or fully contained on city property, a surety bond shall be deposited with the city in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned that no damage will be done to the city property, streets, sewers, trees, or adjoining property and that no paper, litter, or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the city property, streets or upon any private property by the applicant. The surety bond shall be returned to the permittee within ten days after said special event permit expires upon certification by the city manager that all conditions of this article have been complied with. Should actual costs for policing and cleaning not exceed this amount, the remainder shall be refunded to the permittee by the city. In the event that actual costs exceed this amount, the permittee shall pay such additional sum to the city within ten days from the date of notification. If that amount is not paid, no future permits shall be issued to the same permittee for a period not to exceed two years. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy against the permittee in addition to the bond. The applicant shall have the right to show evidence why the bond should be lowered or waived by the city manager. Appeals shall be heard by the city council in accordance with provisions of section 34-26. 
(b)  When a special event is fully contained on private property, a sum in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be deposited with the city conditioned that no paper, litter, or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the site of the special event. The deposit shall be returned to the permittee within ten days after the special event permit expires upon certification by the city manager that all conditions of this article have been complied with. Should actual costs for cleaning not exceed this amount, the remainder shall be reimbursed to the permittee by the city. In the event that actual costs exceed this amount, the permittee shall pay such additional sum to the city within ten days from the date of notification. If that amount is not paid, no future special event permits shall be issued to the same permittee for a period not to exceed two years. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy against the permittee in addition to the deposit. The applicant shall have the right to show evidence why the deposit should be lowered or waived to the city manager. Appeals shall be heard by the city council in accordance with provisions of section 34-26. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-44. - Police services; additional costs. 
(a)  The chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police services are reasonably necessary for the special event for traffic control and public safety. The chief of police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the special event, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the special event. If additional police services for the special event are deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the applicant for the special event permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police services deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(b)  In the event the city manager determines, upon a review of the application, that a special event may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities, the city manager shall so notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant and the city manager shall agree upon the cost of policing, and cleaning, and the closure of roads, and the applicant shall pay that amount to the city upon application. Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional costs to the city incurred as a result of the special event within five days of the date upon which the city informs the permittee of the amount of such additional costs. Should the permittee not pay such additional costs, no future special event permits shall be issued to the same permittee for a period not to exceed two years. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy against the permittee for recovery of such additional costs. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-45. - Offenses and penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he commences or holds a special event without a special event permit or with a special event permit that has expired or been revoked. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section. 
(c)  It is hereby determined that this section governs fire safety and public health and, therefore, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty as provided for in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-46. - Application of article; exemptions. 
(a)  All special events, except those set forth in subsection (b) of this section, must conform to all applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  The following events are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Events which are officially sponsored by the city; 
(2)  An event wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the event and which holds a certificate of occupancy for such use including adequate parking; 
(3)  Funeral processions; 
(4)  Block parties as defined in section 34-66; and 
(5)  Parades, as defined in section 34-92. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C2, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Secs. 34-47-34-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BLOCK PARTIES 

Sec. 34-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person who has filed an application for a street closure permit. 
    Block party means a festive gathering on a local residential street requiring a closure of a street, or portion thereof, to vehicular traffic, and the use of the street for the festivity including barbecues, picnics, music or games. 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Street closure permit means written approval from the chief authorizing closure of a street. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3501) 
Sec. 34-67. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a block party without first having obtained a street closure permit from the chief. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3502) 
Sec. 34-68. - Application; fee; filing period; petition. 
(a)  All persons seeking a street closure permit shall file an application with the chief upon forms provided by the city, which shall be accompanied with an application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. In appropriate circumstances, the chief shall have the authority to lower or waive the fee. 
(b)  Applications for a street closure permit shall be filed not less than 15 days prior to the desired closure. 
(c)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and location of the residential street to be closed; 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of persons requesting and desiring the street closure; and 
(3)  The date and time for the street closure; block parties must be held between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  Included with the application shall be a petition, on forms furnished by the city, which shall contain the signatures of 75 percent of adult owners or residents of the property abutting that portion of the street to be closed, indicating their consent to the proposed street closure. For purposes of computing the above percentage, each lot or property parcel shall have only one vote. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3503) 
Sec. 34-69. - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon submission, validation, and approval of the application and petition for street closure permit and receipt the of application fee, the chief, subject to section 34-70, shall issue a permit. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3504) 
Sec. 34-70. - Denial of permit, appeal. 
    The chief shall act upon a complete application for a street closure permit within seven days after the filing of the application. The chief may deny a street closure permit if in his opinion the closure of the street would cause significant disruption of the delivery of city or emergency services, a significant hardship to the citizens or a threat to public safety. If the chief denies the street closure permit, he shall mail the applicant a notice of this action stating the reasons for the denial of the street closure permit. The applicant may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city secretary within five days after receipt of the notice of denial. The city council shall hear the appeal as soon as practicable and its decision shall be final. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3505) 
Sec. 34-71. - Duration of permit. 
    The street closure permit granted under the terms of this article shall not exceed six hours. Another street closure permit shall not be granted for the same location until at least 90 days have elapsed from the expiration of the previous street closure permit. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3506) 
Sec. 34-72. - Barricades. 
    The chief shall make arrangements with the street department to furnish and place barricades at the designated location at the appropriate time. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3507) 
Sec. 34-73. - Revocation of permit. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the chief, the chief of police, or their designees from revoking a street closure permit at any time before or during the block party in the interest of public safety, health or welfare of the community as a whole. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3508) 
Sec. 34-74. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense under this article if he: 
(1)  Commences or holds a private closure without a street closure permit issued by the chief or with a street closure permit that has expired or been revoked; or 
(2)  Fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section or other ordinances or laws of the city or the state. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(Code 1995, § 1.3509) 
Secs. 34-75-34-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, adopted July 14, 2011, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 34-92-34-111, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1995, §§ 1.3601-1.3620. 

Sec. 34-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a parade permit. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police or his designated representative. 
    Free speech rights means expressive activity protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, provided that such activity is the primary purpose of the parade. 
    Parade means any assembly, march, demonstration, procession or motorcade upon public streets within the city consisting of three or more persons, animals, or vehicles (or any combination thereof) with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon public streets. 
    Parade permit means written approval from the chief of police or his designated representative for a parade. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a parade permit is granted pursuant to this article. 
    Public street means the entire width of the publicly owned right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-93. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, and will not interfere with the normal movement of traffic. 
(3)  A government agency acting within the scope of its function. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-94. - Filing period. 
(a)  Except as provided below, an application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 30 days, nor more than 90 days before the proposed parade date. 
(b)  Late applications, where good cause is shown and subject to the standards promulgated in section 34-96, may be considered when filed after the deadline prescribed herein. 
(c)  An application for a parade, the primary purpose of which is to express free speech rights, may be submitted not less than five days before the proposed parade date. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-95. - Application for permit. 
(a)  A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the city, which shall be accompanied with an application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. In appropriate circumstances, the city manager shall have the authority to lower or waive the fee. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is to be held for or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the name and address of the authorized representative of such organization; 
(3)  If the parade is to be held by or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file a written statement from that other person showing authority to make the application; 
(4)  If the parade's primary purpose is to express free speech rights, a detail description of the purpose of the parade; 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(6)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(7)  The time when such parade will start and terminate, including the time at which units of the parade will arrive in assembly area. Parades may be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily; 
(8)  The location by streets of the proposed parade route, the assembly area, the initial starting point and the disbanding area for the parade. If the assembly area, starting point and/or disbanding areas are located on private property, the applicant shall submit written permission for the holding of the activity from the owner or his authorized representative of the property; 
(9)  The proposed location for parking area. If the parking area is located on private property, the applicant shall submit written permission from the owner or his authorized representative for allowing parking on the property; 
(10)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be used; 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade will arrive at the assembly area; 
(12)  The interval of space to be maintained between units in the parade; 
(13)  The approximate number of participants in the parade and, if applicable, the number and types of animals and vehicles or floats (including maximum height and length) which will constitute such parade; 
(14)  Any sanitation facilities which may be needed to keep the parade route and assembly areas clean and free from debris and waste; 
(15)  A description of any public facilities or equipment needed for the parade, including first aid stations or portable restrooms; 
(16)  Copies of permits and agreements will all city departments other than the police department shall be included with the application for the parade permit; and 
(17)  Any other information which the chief of police shall find necessary under the standards for issuance, hereinafter set forth in section 34-96. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-96. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    A parade permit will be issued if, upon review of the application, the chief of police finds that: 
(1)  The parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic near its route; 
(2)  The parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the parade and the adjacent areas, including parking areas, as to prevent normal police protection of the city; 
(3)  The parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of fire protection or emergency medical services (EMS) personnel so as to prevent these services to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed parade route and adjacent areas; 
(4)  The concentration of people, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with fire and police protection of, or EMS services to, areas near such parade and assembly area; 
(5)  The parade will not interfere with the efficient response movement of firefighting equipment and services en route to a fire; 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays en route; 
(7)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(8)  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; 
(9)  There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected to be used in the parade or the applicant has made adequate arrangements for off-site parking and transfer of attendees and participants; and 
(10)  The applicant has secured the police services, if any, required under section 34-110. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-97. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting and ending time, including assembly time and cleanup time; 
(2)  Minimum and maximum speed; 
(3)  A description of the parade route and any assembly or disbanding areas; 
(4)  Maximum and minimum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; and 
(6)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-98. - Applicant parking requirements. 
(a)  Applicant shall submit evidence that sufficient parking will be available to accommodate the projected number of participants and attendees with a ten percent surplus. If said parking is to be on private property adjacent to the parade, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of said property through ownership, lease, license, or other property interest must be provided. When the location is not an established parking area, a plan shall be submitted which will show how the needed parking will be achieved and arranged. The number of parking spaces and layout of parking area, including aisle widths, size of parking spaces and whether parking attendants will be provided, shall be included in the submittal. 
(b)  When adequate parking is not available at or immediately adjacent to the site of the parade route, off-site parking may be used. Plans shall be submitted which will show how off-site parking and transfer of attendees will be accomplished. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-99. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee shall comply with all parade permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-100. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police may deny a parade permit if: 
(1)  The parade will conflict in time and location with another parade or other special event for which a permit has already been granted; 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with or the parade will violate an ordinance of the city or any other applicable law; 
(3)  The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a parade permit; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of violating this article or has had a parade permit revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
(5)  The applicant has previously failed to pay previous parade fees or police protection charges; 
(6)  The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by this article or another city ordinance or by state law; 
(7)  The parade, in the opinion of one or more city departmental directors, would severely hinder or compromise the delivery or performance of normal services, including previously scheduled construction or maintenance services, or emergency services or constitutes a public threat; 
(8)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional costs as may be required by the chief of police; 
(9)  The applicant fails to submit a complete application or fails to provide any additional information requested by the chief of police; or 
(10)  The proposed date or time for the parade or the location of the parade or parking for such parade would substantially interfere or disrupt the educational activities of a school when such school is in session. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to deny or revoke a parade permit issued hereunder for failure to meet the standards for issuance as set forth in section 34-96. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-101. - Notice of rejection; appeal to city council or city manager. 
(a)  The chief of police shall act upon an application for a parade permit within seven days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police does not approve the application, he shall mail to the applicant a notice of this action stating the reasons for the denial of parade permit within three days after the date of the denial. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The council shall hear the appeal as soon as practicable and its decision shall be final. 
(b)  Where the primary purpose of the parade is the expression of free speech rights, the application shall be granted or denied by the chief of police within 48 hours of receipt of the application. After a decision, the chief of police shall immediately notify the applicant orally and the city manager and city attorney in writing of the decision. If the decision is for denial of the permit, the applicant may, within 24 hours after receipt of said decision, appeal to the city manager, presenting facts why the denial should be reversed. The city manager shall make every effort to hear the appeal as soon as possible, and shall render a written decision to the applicant no more than 24 hours after the time of the appeal hearing. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-102. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the parade on a date, time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-103. - Tents and temporary structures. 
    Any parade which includes the use of a stage, seating, tent, canopy, or other temporary structure shall meet the requirements of the city's fire code and building code except that a separate permit is not required when a parade permit has been obtained. Fire lanes for emergency equipment must be provided and the site prepared in a manner so as not to be a fire hazard as determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-104. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Portable type sanitary facilities may be required if determined to be necessary by the chief of police, and an applicant shall be responsible for securing such facilities. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-105. - Animal waste. 
    Waste from animals used in any such parade shall be removed immediately following the completion of such parade. Should animals be kept within the city limits at night, they shall be kept not less than 300 feet from any developed residential or commercial districts. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-106. - Water usage and disposal of wastewater. 
(a)  Any parade or related activity desiring use of water from the city water system must coordinate with the utilities department to obtain a temporary meter. Deposit for the meter and payment for water used shall be in accordance with ordinances of the city. 
(b)  An applicant shall submit a plan for the disposal of wastewater and the plan shall be approved by the utilities department. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-107. - Waste collection and solid waste dumpster. 
    An applicant shall be required to make arrangements for the collection of all waste resulting from such parade, and commercial solid waste dumpsters may be required if determined to be necessary by the chief of police. If required, an applicant shall make arrangements for the provision of such dumpsters with a commercial solid waste disposal company currently having a franchise agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-108. - Loudspeakers. 
    When loudspeakers will be used in conjunction with the parade, the location and orientation of speakers shall be indicated along with the planned hours of use. Speakers which are positioned so as not to adversely affect an adjacent residential district may be used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when a parade permit has been obtained. The chief of police may modify the time limit for use of such speakers when good cause is demonstrated by the applicant. Any use of loudspeakers other than described shall first obtain the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-109. - City authority over parking. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the parade route by posting signs to such effect. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of the parking restrictions. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-110. - Police services; costs. 
(a)  The chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent police services are reasonably necessary for the parade for traffic control and public safety. The chief of police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the parade, the number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If additional police services for the parade are deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the applicant for the parade permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police services deemed necessary by the chief of police. All police services shall be provided by the Round Rock Police Department unless prior written approval is given by the chief of police for the use of outside agencies. 
(b)  In the event the chief of police determines, upon a review of the application, that a parade may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities, the chief of police shall so notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a parade permit, the applicant and the chief of police shall agree upon the cost of policing and cleaning and the closure of roads, and the applicant shall pay that amount to the city upon application. Prior to the issuance of a parade permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional costs to the city within five days of the date upon which the city informs the applicant of the amount of such additional costs. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Sec. 34-111. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense under this article if he: 
(1)  Stages, presents, or conducts any parade without first having obtained a permit as herein provided; 
(2)  Participates in a parade for which the person knows a permit has not been granted; 
(3)  Knowingly fails to comply with any condition of the parade permit; 
(4)  Rides, drives, or causes to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless specifically authorized by the parade permit; 
(5)  Hampers, obstructs, impedes or interferes with the parade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, or for the safety and welfare of the general public; or 
(6)  Drives between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. G-11-07-14-10C3, § I, 7-14-2011) 
Secs. 34-112-34-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FILM INDUSTRY PRODUCTION 

Sec. 34-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected neighborhood means an area that is affected by film industry production, the boundaries of which are determined by the city manager upon issuance of a film industry production permit. 
    Affected resident means an owner, tenant or resident of property within an affected neighborhood. 
    Film industry production means the creation or production of moving images, including but not limited to, film, video and digital images, for use in movies, television, commercials, game design, video and digital interactive media, electronic media, and/or other media format, and related activities that: 
(1)  Are conducted primarily outdoors; and 
(2)  Interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(3)  Require special city services, including but not limited to, street closure, stages, special parking arrangements, special electrical services, special police services or protection, or use of city buildings or property. 
    Film industry production permit means the written approval from the city manager for film industry production. 
    Producer means a person that has filed a written application for a film industry production permit, or the designated representative of such producer. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-131. - City manager authority. 
(a)  The city manager may authorize the use of any city street, right-of-way, park, land, public building, the Round Rock, Texas name, trademarks or logos, and city equipment or personnel for use for film industry production. The city manager may require that any or all of the conditions or remuneration specified in the film industry production permit be met as a prerequisite to such use, and may require a security or damage deposit in an amount as determined by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager may prohibit, or order the cessation of, all film industry production if the city manager determines that such activities are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  City personnel may inspect all structures, devices and equipment to be used in connection with film industry production at all times, as directed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 32-132. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Prior to filing an application for a film industry production permit, the person seeking such permit must contact the city manager to discuss the specific requirements for such film industry production. 
(b)  A person seeking a film industry production permit shall file an application with the city manager upon forms provided by the city, which shall be accompanied with an application fee of $50.00. In appropriate circumstances, the city manager shall have the authority to lower or waive the fee. Such application must be submitted within the following time frames: 
(1)  An application for a feature film must be submitted a minimum of ten days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial activity related to the film industry production. 
(2)  An application for commercials, episodic television or other media must be submitted a minimum of five days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial activity related to the film industry production. 
(3)  If a person intends to conduct film industry production at more than one location or on more than one date, all such locations and dates must be indicated in the application for a film industry production permit and such permit shall apply only to the dates and locations so indicated. 
(4)  The city manager shall ensure that other licenses and permits, restrictions, regulations, fees for the city services, safeguards or other conditions deemed necessary by individual city departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a film industry production be requested, submitted and approved before the film industry production permit is granted; e.g., health permit application; agreement with the police department for police coverage; agreement with the public works department regarding costs associated with street closures; agreement with the parks and recreation department for the use of any park facilities. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-133. - Use of city equipment and personnel. 
(a)  A producer shall pay for the costs of any police, fire, public works, or other city personnel assigned to the project, whether specifically requested by the producer or not. Remuneration rates for the use of any city equipment, including but not limited to, police cars and fire equipment, shall be established on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city manager. The producer shall pay all invoices for such costs promptly upon receipt of an invoice from the city. The city manager may require an advance deposit for the use of city equipment. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to stipulate additional fire or police requirements, and level of staffing for same, at any time during a film industry production if it is determined to be in the best interest of public safety, health and welfare, which cost shall be borne by the producer. Off-duty police officers and firefighters shall be paid by the producer at a rate not less than 11/2 times their hourly rate based on their rank. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-134. - Fees for use of city property. 
(a)  The producer shall reimburse the city for use of city property, including but not limited to, city streets, rights-of-way, parks, land, and public buildings according to the following rate schedule: 
Activity Cost per calendar day Total or disruptive use during regular operating hours of a public building, park, right-of-way or public area $500.00 Partial nondisruptive use of a public building, park, right-of-way or public area $250.00 Total closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way, including parking lots and on-street parking $50.00 per block Partial closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way, including parking lots and on-street parking $25.00 per block Use of city parking lots, parking areas and city streets for the purpose of parking film trailers, buses, catering trucks and other large vehicles $50.00 per block or lot  
(b)  The city shall have full control over city property used for film industry production, as well as control over the hours and general location of film industry production. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-135. - Special equipment and vehicles. 
(a)  The producer shall provide a report in the application for a film industry production permit listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during film industry production, including proposed hours of use and proposed parking locations. All such use and parking, including but not limited to, on-street parking or use of public parking lots, must be approved before issuance of a film industry production permit. 
(b)  The use of exterior lighting, power generators, or any other equipment that produces noise or light must be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-136. - Hours of production activities. 
(a)  Film industry production is limited to the following hours: 
(1)  Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Saturday, Sunday and holidays: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(b)  Hours of film industry production may vary from those above only if the producer has obtained written permission of the city manager for different hours and has provided notice of such hours to the affected residents. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-137. - Notification to affected residents. 
(a)  The producer shall provide a written description and a schedule of the film industry production to the affected residents. 
(b)  The producer shall make a good faith effort to notify affected residents of the film industry production activities impacting an affected neighborhood and shall submit a report noting the comments of such affected residents. Such report shall be submitted with the application for a film industry production permit and shall include the signatures, addresses and telephone numbers of the affected residents. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-138. - Insurance, liability and indemnity. 
(a)  The producer shall attach to the application for a film industry production permit a certificate of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury and property damage with a $5,000,000.00 umbrella and automobile liability, if applicable, in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00, including bodily injury and property damage. 
(b)  The producer shall pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or private property, resulting from, or in connection with, the film industry production, and restore the property to its original condition prior to the production, or to better than original condition. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-139. - Agreement required. 
    If a film industry production requires the use of any city property, equipment or personnel, the producer shall enter into an agreement with the city regarding such use and any other matters pertaining to the film industry production. Such agreement shall provide that the producer indemnifies and holds harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the film industry production. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-140. - Denial of a permit application. 
    The city manager may deny an application for a film industry production permit if: 
(1)  The film industry production will conflict in time and location with another film industry production, special event, parade or assembly for which a permit has already been granted; 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with, or the film industry production will violate, an ordinance of the city or any other applicable law; 
(3)  The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a film industry production permit; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of violating this article, has had a film industry production permit revoked within the preceding 12 months, or has failed to pay any additional costs assessed by the city for a previous film industry production within the previous two years; 
(5)  The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by this article or another city ordinance or by state law; 
(6)  The film industry production, in the opinion of one or more city departmental directors, would unduly hinder or compromise the delivery or performance of normal services, including previously scheduled construction or maintenance services, or emergency services, or constitutes a public threat; 
(7)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to provide any required insurance or surety bonds that may be required under this article; 
(8)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional costs as may be required by the city manager; 
(9)  The applicant fails to submit a complete application or fails to provide any additional information requested by the city manager; 
(10)  The proposed date or time for the film industry production or the location of the film industry production or parking for such film industry production would unduly interfere or disrupt the educational activities of a school when such school is in session; or 
(11)  The city manager determines, in his/her sole discretion, that the film industry production would be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Round Rock, Texas for any reason. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-141. - Revocation of a film industry production permit. 
    A film industry production permit shall be revoked upon any of the following conditions: 
(1)  In the event that the police chief, fire chief, director of utilities, other city officials or their designated representatives find that any of the provisions of this article, another city ordinance, or state law is being violated, they shall immediately notify the city manager, and the film industry production permit issued hereunder shall be revoked; 
(2)  When, in the judgment of the above-named officials, a violation exists which requires immediate abatement, they shall have authority to revoke a film industry production permit in the absence or unavailability of the city manager; or 
(3)  The applicant made or permitted to be made a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a film industry production permit. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Sec. 34-142. - Offenses and penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she commences or conducts film industry production without a film industry production permit or with a film industry production permit that has expired or been revoked. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(c)  It is hereby determined that this article governs fire safety and public health and, therefore, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalty as provided for in section 1-9 of the City of Round Rock Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9C1, § I, 6-9-2011) 
Secs. 34-143-34-165. - Reserved. 
Chapter 38 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Property tax code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-19. - Homestead tax exemption for the elderly and for the disabled. 
(a)  Homestead tax exemption for the elderly. From and after January 1, 1994, $22,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads as defined by law of persons who have attained the age of 65 years of age, on or before January 1 of the year for which the exemption is claimed, shall be exempted from city ad valorem tax; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(b)  Homestead tax exemption for the disabled. 
(1)  From and after January 1, 1981, $3,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads as defined by law of an individual who is disabled on or before January of the year for which the exemption is claimed shall be exempted from city ad valorem tax; provided, however, that where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created. 
(2)  As used herein, the term "disabled" shall be defined by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(m). 
(c)  Maximum homestead tax exemption. In no event shall the tax exemption on any residence homestead exceed $22,000.00. 
(Code 1995, § 1.701; Ord. No. 796, 4-9-1981; Ord. No. G-94-06-23-8A, 6-23-1994) 
State Law reference- Residence homestead, TX Const. art. VIII, § 1-b, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13. 
Sec. 38-20. - Collection of taxes. 
(a)  All taxes due the city shall be payable to the city tax collector upon receipt of the tax bill and shall be considered delinquent if not paid before February 1 of the year following the year in which imposed. Delinquent taxes shall be subject to all penalties provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.01. 
(b)  The city may contract with any competent attorney to represent the city to enforce the collection of delinquent taxes in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30. 
(1)  If the city has entered into a contract for enforcement and collection of delinquent taxes in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30, an additional penalty on delinquent taxes to defray costs of collection shall be imposed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
(2)  The amount of the additional penalty assessed to defray costs of collection shall not exceed the amount of compensation specified in the contract with the attorney to be paid in connection with the collection of delinquent taxes, which shall be set in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30(c). 
(Code 1995, § 1.702; Ord. No. G-07-11-08-GC1, § I, 11-8-2007) 
Sec. 38-21. - Goods in transit. 
    Goods in transit, as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by the 80th Texas Legislature in Regular Session, shall remain subject to taxation. 
(Ord. No. G-07-10-25-10D2, § I, 10-25-2007) 
Sec. 38-22. - Tax abatement guidelines and criteria governing reinvestment zones and tax abatement agreements. 
(a)  Authorization of abatement. 
(1)  Economic qualifications. In order for the owner of property within a reinvestment zone to be eligible to receive a tax abatement, the owner must show that the planned project will benefit the city in some or all of the following six categories: 
a.  Primary and nonprimary jobs; 
b.  Improvements to real property and/or investment in personal property; 
c.  Sales tax; 
d.  Employee payroll; 
e.  Diversity in the economic base; and 
f.  Synergy for additional economic development and/or intangible benefits to the city. 
The planned project will be awarded points in the aforesaid categories to determine whether or not it is eligible for consideration for an abatement and what level of abatement is available. The criteria for awarding points and the various levels of tax abatement available are shown in subsections (g), (h) and (i) of this section. 
(2)  Creation of new value. Abatement may be granted for real property in each year covered by an agreement only to the extent its value for that year exceeds its value for the year in which the agreement is executed. Abatement may be granted for tangible personal property located on the real property in each year covered by the agreement other than tangible personal property that was located on the real property at any time before the period covered by the agreement with the city and other than inventory and supplies. 
(3)  Agricultural exemptions denied. No tax abatement shall be granted for any real property unless and until full market value taxes have been paid for five years prior to the execution of a tax abatement agreement. 
(4)  Industrial districts. No tax abatement shall be granted for any property included in an industrial district. 
(5)  Eligible property. Tax abatement agreements may exempt from taxation a portion of the value of the real property and/or of tangible personal property located on the real property, or other property, as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312. 
(6)  Owned/leased facilities. If a leased facility is granted an abatement, the tax abatement agreement shall be signed by both the lessor and the lessee. 
(7)  Value and term of abatement. Abatement shall be granted effective on January 1 of the year following the date of execution of the tax abatement agreement. The percentage of the increase abated shall be specified in each tax abatement agreement; however, no tax abatement agreement shall exceed ten years. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Intangibles means that a business will provide indirect but important benefits to the city, such as name recognition, tourism promotion, etc. 
Primary job means a job that is available at a company for which a majority of the products or services of that company are ultimately exported to regional, statewide, national, or international markets infusing new dollars into the local economy. 
Synergism means that a business will have a mutually advantageous compatibility with other businesses in the city. 
(c)  Public hearing and approval. 
(1)  Prior to entering into any tax abatement agreement, the city may, at its option, hold a public hearing at which interested persons shall be entitled to speak for or against the approval of the tax abatement agreement. 
(2)  Before approving any tax abatement agreement, the city must find that the terms of the proposed agreement meet these guidelines and criteria and that: 
a.  There will be no substantial adverse effect on the provision of city services or on its tax base; and 
b.  The planned use of the property will not constitute a hazard to public safety, health or welfare. 
(d)  Agreement. In addition to the specific requirements of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.205, the tax abatement agreement shall include the following: 
(1)  An estimated increase to be abated and the current assessed value of property; 
(2)  A percent of increase to be abated each year; 
(3)  A commencement and expiration date of abatement; 
(4)  A proposed use of improvement, nature of construction, time schedule, map, and property description; and 
(5)  If the tax abatement is requested for a commercial or industrial project, the projected number of primary and nonprimary jobs created per year for the life of the tax abatement agreement. 
(e)  Assignment. Tax abatement agreements may be assigned to a new owner or lessee of the improvements with the written consent of the city. Any assignment shall provide that the assignee shall irrevocably and unconditionally assume all duties and obligations of the assignor as set out in the agreement. No assignment shall be approved if the assignor or assignee are indebted to the city for ad valorem taxes or other obligations. 
(f)  Amendments to guidelines. These guidelines and criteria are effective upon the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which they are derived and will remain in force for two years, at which time all reinvestment zones and tax abatement agreements created pursuant to its provisions will be reviewed by the city to determine whether the goals have been achieved. 
(g)  Criteria for eligibility for tax abatement for new business. 
  Category Points Maximum Points (1) Primary jobs 1 point per 2 jobs n/a Nonprimary jobs 1 point per 3 jobs n/a (2) Improvements to real property 1 point per $100,000.00 of new improvements to real property n/a Investment in personal property 1 point per $200,000.00 of new investment in personal property n/a (3) Projected sales tax 1 point per $500,000.00 in annual taxable sales n/a (4) Payroll 1 point per $60,000.00 in annual payroll n/a (5) Economic diversity 1 st business of its type 50 2 nd business of its type 25 3 rd business of its type 10 (6) Synergism/intangibles To be determined by city 200  
(h)  Criteria for eligibility for tax abatement for existing business. 
  Category Points Maximum Points (1) Existing primary jobs 1 point per 4 jobs Existing nonprimary jobs 1 point per 6 jobs n/a New primary jobs 1 point per 2 jobs n/a New nonprimary jobs 1 point per 3 jobs n/a (2) Improvements to real property 1 point per $100,000.00 of new improvements to real property n/a Investment in personal property 1 point per $200,000.00 of new investment in personal property n/a (3) Additional projected sales tax 1 point per $500,000.00 in additional annual taxable sales n/a (4) Payroll 1 point per $60,000.00 in additional annual payroll n/a 1 point per $120,000.00 in existing annual payroll n/a (5) Synergism/Intangibles To be determined by city 200  
(i)  Standard abatement offer. 
(1)  In order to receive an abatement, an applicant must score at least 175 points from the list of criteria. 
(2)  The standard abatement offer is one percent of abatement for each point scored. An abatement of less than 300 percent will be spread over three years. An abatement of between 300 percent and 500 percent will be spread over at least five years. An abatement of more than 500 percent will be spread over a minimum of five years, but not more than ten years. The following are examples of typical abatement offers for the three levels of scores: 
Example 1: 175 points Year 1 100% Year 2 50% Year 3 25% Total 175% Example 2: 450 points Year 1 100% Year 2 100% Year 3 100% Year 4 75% Year 5 75% Total 450% Example 3: 650 points Year 1 100% Year 2 100% Year 3 100% Year 4 75% Year 5 75% Year 6 75% Year 7 75% Year 8 50% Total 650%  
(Code 1995, § 1.704; Ord. No. G-08-02-28-10A1, § I, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. G-10-03-11-9C2, § I, 3-11-2010; Ord. No. O-2015-2251, § I, 3-12-2015) 
State Law reference- Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312. 
Secs. 38-23-38-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 321. 

Sec. 38-48. - Municipal sales tax adopted. 
    The local sales tax of one percent as authorized in the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.101, has been adopted by the voters of the city as the result of an election held for that purpose on October 7, 1967. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1201; Election, 10-7-1967) 
Sec. 38-49. - Retained on use of gas and electricity. 
    The tax authorized by the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use is hereby retained. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1202; Ord. No. 587, 3-22-1979) 
State Law reference- Residential use of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105. 
Sec. 38-50. - Additional one-half of one percent authorized to reduce property tax rate. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority granted in the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, the adoption of an additional one-half of one percent sales tax is hereby authorized. 
(b)  The adoption and collection of the additional one-half percent sales tax shall be used to reduce property taxes. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1203; Election, 8-8-1987) 
Sec. 38-51. - Telecommunication services. 
(a)  A sales and use tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunication services sold within the city. For the purposes of this article, the sale of telecommunication services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 1.1204; Ord. No. 2551, 9-12-1991) 
State Law reference- Telecommunications exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
Secs. 38-52-38-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, adopted Feb. 9, 2012, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 38-76-38-87, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1995, §§ 1.1801-1.1811. 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 

Sec. 38-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the price of, or value received for, the right to use a sleeping room, bed, or dormitory space or other sleeping facility in a hotel, and includes the price of conveniences customarily provided in connection with sleeping accommodations, including mattress, sheets, bedspreads, pillows, pillow cases, bed frames, air conditioning, electricity, lighting, water, soap, towels, wash cloths, toilet tissue, shower or bath facilities, lavatory, chairs, trash receptacles, plus any other goods or services which are not ordinarily subject to sales tax. The consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility shall not include the price of food served, nor the price of personal services rendered to the occupant which are unrelated to cleaning and readying a room for occupancy, nor any sales tax, nor occupancy tax assessed by other governmental agencies, provided that these charges are stated separately on the folio or invoice of the occupant. Charges not stated separately shall be presumed to be part of the consideration paid for occupancy of a sleeping room or sleeping facility, and shall be taxed under this article. 
    Director means the director of finance or the director's designated representative. 
    Hotel. 
(1)  The term "hotel" means any building or complex of buildings, trailer, converted railroad pullman car, or any other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, parked railroad pullman cars used for sleeping accommodations and not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory where bed space is rented, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for consideration. 
(2)  The term "hotel" does not include: 
a.  Hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes; or 
b.  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
c.  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 152.001. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarter means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. The municipal fiscal quarters are composed of the same months, but the first quarter is composed of the months of October, November and December. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-77. - Levy of tax; amount and exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. 
(b)  Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  A person described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.101, 156.103(a) or 156.103(d), as amended, is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under this article. 
(2)  A governmental entity excepted from the tax imposed by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156, as amended, under §§ 156.103(a)(l) or (a)(3) of that chapter, shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(3)  A person described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c), as amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  To receive a refund of the tax paid hereunder, the governmental entity entitled to a refund must file a refund claim form provided by the city containing the information required by the city. The governmental entity entitled to claim a refund may file only one claim form with the city for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-78. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Every person, owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by section 38-77 for the city. 
(b)  The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as hereinbelow provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the city, or files a false report with the city. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-79. - Collection procedures on purchase of hotel. 
(a)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax imposed under section 38-77 is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a receipt by the director showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate showing that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price of the hotel. 
(c)  The purchaser of the hotel may request that the director issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day after the date that he receives the request. 
(d)  If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within 60 days after the date that he receives the request, the purchaser of the hotel is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-80. - Monthly reports to the director. 
    On or before the last day of each month, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article IV shall file a report with the director for the preceding month, showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the director may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the director. The director is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article IV. The director shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation of information contained in the report. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-81. - Rules and regulations of the director; access to books and records. 
    The director shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied by section 38-77 and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by section 38-80, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-82. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if a person: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax imposed by this article; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this article; 
(3)  Fails to pay the tax when payment is due; 
(4)  Files a false report; or 
(5)  Fails to comply with this article when purchasing a hotel. 
(b)  An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section, a person shall pay five percent of the tax due as a penalty if the person fails to pay the tax or file the report as required by this article by the due date. An additional penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within 30 days from the date the tax was due. Another penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within 60 days from the date the tax was due. The penalties provided by this subsection may never be less than $5.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date the tax was due. 
(d)  In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this article. 
(e)  The director may release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due as a result of an act or omission of an employee or officer of the city. 
(f)  The director is hereby authorized to make an assessment of the tax for any period for which a person has failed to file a correct report as required in section 38-80, or failed to pay the tax imposed by section 38-77 within 30 days from the due date. The tax assessed, together with any penalties and interest shall be a prior and superior lien on all property of the hotel. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed to limit or restrict the city council's powers to release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due for delinquent hotel occupancy taxes as provided by the Texas Constitution or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-83. - Additional penalties. 
    The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed by section 38-77 and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for his cost of collecting the tax; 
(2)  Bring suit against the hotel operator for noncompliance; and/or 
(3)  Bring suit against the hotel operator seeking any other remedies provided under state law. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-84. - Additional authorization to bring suit. 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed by section 38-77, and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable, and as provided in the injunction. In addition to the amount of any tax owed to the city, the person is liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the taxes owed, if the tax has been delinquent for at least one complete municipal fiscal quarter. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-85. - Use of revenue derived from levy. 
(a)  The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by section 38-77 may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the purposes set out in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101. 
(b)  Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as delineated. Such revenue shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-86. - Allocation of revenue. 
(a)  Not less than the amount of revenue received by the city from the tax at a rate of one percent of the cost of the room shall be allocated for the purposes provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101(a)(3). 
(b)  Not more than 15 percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenue collected by the city or the amount of tax received by the city at the rate of one percent of the cost of the room, whichever is greater, may be used for the purpose provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101(a)(4). 
(c)  If the city does not allocate any hotel occupancy tax revenue for the purposes provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101(a)(1), then the city may allocate not more than 50 percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenue collected by the city for the purposes provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101(a)(5). 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-87. - Administrative requirements; accountability; keeping of records. 
(a)  The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing, in advance, the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least quarterly listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the city. 
(b)  The entity must maintain revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose, and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(c)  The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax, other than by contract as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)  A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, upon request of the city council or other authorized person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue spent for authorized purposes may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing expenditures hereinbefore authorized. If the municipality or other entity conducts an activity for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used, and such activity is a joint activity with another nonauthorized activity, then the portion of the total administrative costs of the entity for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the portion of those administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the activities for which the hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used. 
(g)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of tourism and the convention and hotel industry or the performance of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(Ord. No. G-12-02-09-9A1, § I, 2-9-2012) 
Secs. 38-88-38-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 38-100. - Definitions. 
    In this article, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Act" means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 334, as amended. 
    "Approved venue project" means the sports and community venue project that was approved by a majority of the voters voting at the election held in the city on November 8, 2011, in accordance with the Act. 
    "City" shall mean the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    "City attorney" shall mean the City Attorney of the City of Round Rock or the designated representative. 
    "Consideration" shall mean the price of, or value received for, the right to use a sleeping room, bed, or dormitory space or other sleeping facility in a hotel, and includes the price of conveniences customarily provided in connection with sleeping accommodations, including mattress, sheets, bedspreads, pillows, pillow cases, bed frames, air conditioning, electricity, lighting, water, soap, towels, wash cloths, toilet tissue, shower or bath facilities, lavatory, chairs, trash receptacles, plus any other goods or services which are not ordinarily subject to sales tax. The consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility shall not include the price of food served, nor the price of personal services rendered to the occupant which are unrelated to cleaning and readying a room for occupancy, nor any sales tax, nor occupancy tax assessed by other governmental agencies, provided that these charges are stated separately on the folio or invoice of the occupant. Charges not stated separately shall be presumed to be part of the consideration paid for occupancy of a sleeping room or sleeping facility, and shall be taxed under this article. 
    "Director" shall mean the director of finance or the director's designated representative. 
    "Hotel" shall mean any building or complex of buildings, trailer, converted railroad pullman car, or any other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, parked railroad pullman cars used for sleeping accommodations and not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory where bed space is rented, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for consideration. The term does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, as amended, that is used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 152.001. 
    "Occupancy" shall mean the use or possession of, or the exclusive right to the use or possession of a sleeping room or sleeping facility in a hotel. 
    "Occupant" shall mean any individual, corporation, governmental agency, partnership, or association that has paid a consideration for the exclusive right to use a sleeping room or sleeping facility in a hotel. 
    "Permanent resident" shall mean any occupant who has occupied or has paid for the exclusive right to occupy a particular sleeping room or rooms or sleeping facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
    "Project fund" means the fund entitled the "sports and community venue project fund," created pursuant to the resolution. 
    "Quarter" shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, and the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. The municipal fiscal quarters are composed of the same months, but the first quarter is composed of the months of October, November and December. 
    "Resolution" means the resolution adopted by the city council establishing the sports and community venue project fund. 
    "Tax" means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 334, as amended. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-101. - Tax authorized; tax rate; exceptions to tax. 
(a)  In addition to the tax levied in article IV, section 38-77, of this chapter, there is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of or consideration paid for a sleeping room or sleeping facility furnished by any hotel. 
(b)  The tax shall be equal to two percent of the total price of a sleeping room or sleeping facility, said price to include all goods and services provided by the hotel which are not ordinarily subject to sales tax. 
(c)  The following are exceptions to the tax: 
(1)  There shall be no tax on the cost of or consideration paid for occupancy of a hotel sleeping room or sleeping facility priced at less than $2.00 per day. 
(2)  The cost of or consideration paid for a hotel room or facility not ordinarily used for sleeping, such as a meeting room, is not subject to this tax. 
(3)  The cost of or consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility occupied by a permanent resident is not subject to this tax. 
(d)  The tax imposed under this section must be collected on every occupancy occurring on or after March 1, 2012, and must continue to be collected for so long as any bonds or other obligations that are issued by the city under section 334.043 of the Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 334.043), for the purpose of financing a portion of the costs of the approved venue project, and any bonds refunding or refinancing those bonds or other obligations, are outstanding and unpaid. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-102. - Use of tax revenue. 
    The revenue derived from the two percent tax imposed under this article must be deposited in the sports and community venue project tax proceeds account that is established within the project fund. Money in this account may be used as set forth in the resolution. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-103. - Exemptions and refunds. 
(a)  A person described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.101, 156,103(a) or 156.1 03(d), as amended, is exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under this article. 
(b)  A governmental entity excepted from the tax imposed by V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156, as amended, under V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.103(a)(l) or 156.103(a)(3) of that chapter shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  A person described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c), as amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(d)  To receive a refund of tax paid under this article, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim with the director on a form prescribed by the state comptroller and provided by the director. A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the director only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-104. - Collection; payment to city; fee: statement of tax purpose required. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed under this article and pay same to the city with the report in accordance with all the requirements and procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  On or before the last day of each month, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article V, shall pay the tax due on such occupancies for the preceding month. 
(c)  Each bill or other receipt for a hotel charge subject to the tax imposed by this article must contain a statement in a conspicuous location stating: 
 "The City of Round Rock requires that an additional tax of two percent (2%) be imposed on each hotel charge for the purpose of financing a venue project, consisting of the Sports and Community Venue Project approved by the voters of the City on November 8, 2011." 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-105. - Reports. 
    On or before the last day of each month, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article V, shall file a report with the director for the preceding month, showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the director may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the director. The director is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article V. The director shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation of information contained in the report. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-106. - Availability of records. 
    Each person required to collect the tax must make records available for inspection by the director. The director shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to determine the correctness of a report filed under this article or the amount of taxes due under this article. The director shall have authority to require additional information to determine the correctness of a report filed under this article or the amount of taxes due under this article. The director shall report any amount of taxes, penalty and/or interest found due to the city attorney for collection by the city. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-107. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations necessary to effectively collect the tax, penalty, and/or interest levied herein. The director is authorized to issue rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the full intent and purpose of this article concerning the information required on reports, the collection reporting periods, audits, the retention of records, the forcible seizure of records for auditing purposes, as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-108. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if a person: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax imposed by this article; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this article; 
(3)  Fails to pay the tax when payment is due; 
(4)  Files a false report; or 
(5)  Fails to comply with this article when purchasing a hotel. 
(b)  An offense committed under subsection (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under subsection (b) of this section, a person shall pay five percent of the tax due as a penalty if the person fails to pay the tax or file the report as required by this article by the due date. An additional penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within 30 days from the date the tax was due. Another penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be paid if the tax is not paid within 60 days from the date the tax was due. The penalties provided by this subsection may never be less than $5.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date the tax was due. 
(d)  In addition to the amount of any tax owed, a person is liable to the city for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this article. 
(e)  The director may release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due as a result of an act or omission of an employee or officer of the city. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to limit or restrict the city council's powers to release, relinquish, compromise and/or settle the penalty and/or interest due for delinquent hotel occupancy taxes as provided by the Texas Constitution or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-109. - Tax collection suit. 
(a)  The city attorney may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this article, the person is liable to the city for: 
(1)  Reasonable attorney's fees; 
(2)  The costs of an audit conducted under subsection (b), as determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if the tax has been delinquent for at least two complete municipal fiscal quarters at the time the audit is conducted; and 
(3)  If the tax has been delinquent for at least one complete municipal fiscal quarter, an additional penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed; and 
(4)  Interest on the delinquent taxes at the rate of ten percent per annum, as provided in section 38-108 above. 
(b)  If a person required to file a tax report under this article does not file the report as required by this article, the city attorney may determine the amount of tax due under this article by: 
(1)  Conducting an audit of each hotel in relation to which the person did not file the report as required by this article; or 
(2)  Using the tax report filed for the appropriate reporting period under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151, as amended, in relation to that hotel. 
(c)  If the person did not file a tax report under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151, as amended, for that reporting period in relation to that hotel, the city attorney may estimate the amount of tax due by using the tax reports in relation to that hotel filed during the previous calendar year under this article or V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.151, as amended. An estimate made under this subsection is prima facie evidence of the amount of tax due for that period in relation to that hotel. 
(d)  The authority to conduct an audit under this section is in addition to any other audit authority provided by state law, Charter or ordinance. 
(e)  There is not a limitation period on the time allowed to assess taxes and bring a suit to collect taxes imposed under this article. 
(f)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to other available remedies. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-110. - Tax collection on purchase of a hotel. 
(a)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the tax due until the seller provides a receipt from the director showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the director issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The director shall issue the certificate or statement not later than 60 days after receiving the request. 
(d)  If the director fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Sec. 38-111. - Enforcement. 
    The director, or his/her designee, shall enforce the terms and conditions of this article when violations occur. 
(Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § II, 1-26-2012) 
Secs. 38-112-38-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BINGO TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § I, adopted Jan. 26, 2012, amended former art. V, entitled "Bingo Tax", § 38-118, and renumbered as art. VI, as set out herein. 

Sec. 38-118. - Imposition of tax. 
    Pursuant to the Bingo Enabling Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2001, there is hereby imposed the maximum tax permitted by state law on all taxable gross receipts from the conduct of bingo games held within the city limits. 
(Code 1995, § 1.2401; Ord. No. G-12-01-26-8A1, § I, 1-26-2012) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles passengers or materials. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department of this city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.100) 
Secs. 42-20-42-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-42. - Duty of traffic division. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws; to make arrests for traffic violations; to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the transportation director and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.201; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § I, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-43. - Traffic division to investigate accidents. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1995, § 9.202) 
Sec. 42-44. - Traffic accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the transportation director in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1995, § 9.203; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § II, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-45. - Traffic accident reports. 
    The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the transportation director. 
(Code 1995, § 9.204; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § III, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-46. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police, by and with the approval of the transportation director, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The transportation director may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 9.205; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § IV, 4-10-2014) 
Secs. 42-47-42-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-66. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1995, § 9.301) 
Sec. 42-67. - Adoption of Uniform Act. 
    Title 7, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501 et seq., regulating vehicles and traffic within the state, is hereby adopted as amended, and said provisions shall be in full force and effect upon all thoroughfares, streets, roads, and alleys within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.302; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
Sec. 42-68. - Required obedience to traffic ordinance. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 9.303) 
Sec. 42-69. - Written report of accident. 
    The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall, within ten days after such accident, forward to the police department a written report of such accident or a copy of any report filed with the state department of public safety. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(Code 1995, § 9.308) 
State Law reference- Accidents and accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 550. 
Sec. 42-70. - When driver unable to report. 
    Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in section 42-69, and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, within ten days after the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
(Code 1995, § 9.309) 
Sec. 42-71. - Parking regulations enforcement. 
    In addition to police officers, other persons designated by the chief of police as parking enforcement agents are authorized to enforce ordinances found in this Code regarding the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles. Parking enforcement agents shall have the authority to issue citations and impound vehicles found to be in violation of such ordinances in the same manner as police officers. 
(Ord. No. G-10-03-25-9B1, § I(9.310), 3-25-2010) 
Secs. 42-72-42-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals and markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 544. 

Sec. 42-101. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
    The transportation director shall place and maintain official pavement markings, traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn, or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or the state traffic laws. 
(Code 1995, § 9.401; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § V, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-102. - Manual and specifications for traffic control devices. 
    All pavement markings, traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to most recent version and revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the Texas Transportation Commission, and the ordinances and specifications approved by the city council. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practical, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices heretofore erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1995, § 9.402; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § VI, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-103. - Official traffic control devices; presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1995, § 9.405) 
Sec. 42-104. - Traffic control sign inventory. 
    An inventory of all traffic control signs installed shall be maintained by the city. The inventory shall show the location of each sign, date of installation, and other pertinent information applicable to each sign. Future installations, removals, or maintenance of the traffic control devices shall be entered in the inventory as they occur. 
(Code 1995, § 9.406; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
Sec. 42-105. - Ratification of existing traffic control devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1995, § 9.407; Ord. No. 585, 2-22-1979) 
Sec. 42-106. - Right turn on red prohibited at certain intersections. 
(a)  Whenever signs are erected at intersections which prohibit right turns on a red signal, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady red signal. 
(b)  Right turns on a steady red signal shall be prohibited at the following locations: 
On Direction To Time Turn Is
Prohibited Ordinance
Number  
(Ord. No. G-09-10-22-10D1, 10-22-2009; Ord. No. O-2017-4116, § I, 1-26-2017) 
Secs. 42-107-42-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.351 et seq. 

Sec. 42-126. - General speed limits. 
(a)  All of the streets of this city, and all portions of any such streets, are hereby declared to be public streets and the driving or operating of any motor vehicle on or along any portion of any street of this city at a rate of speed that is greater than the maximum rate of speed for said portion of said street, as fixed by this section and the schedules contained herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The use of the word "speeding" shall be sufficient to designate the said offense, and shall mean that a motor vehicle has been driven upon a public street, at a greater rate of speed than that fixed by city ordinance for the street and for the zone thereof that such motor vehicle was so being driven upon, if zoned. 
(b)  In prosecution under this section for offense of speeding, the complaint, if in other respects sufficient in form, shall as to the portion thereof seeking to acknowledge the offense, be sufficient if it in substance alleges that the defendant did while driving a motor vehicle in said city commit the offense of "speeding." 
(Code 1995, § 9.501; Ord. No. 957, 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 42-127. - Specified speed limits. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city except as this section, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this section when signs are in place giving notice thereof. The maximum speed limit shall be set forth upon those streets or portions thereof as follows: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number Anderson, westbound Mays Summit 755, 8-14-1980; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Aten Loop Harrell Parkway County Road 113 2464, 3-8-1990; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Bayland Street east and westbound Provident Lane Mills Meadow G-96-04-11-12B, 4-11-1996; G-00-01-27-2D2, 1-27-2000; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Chisholm Trail north and southbound FM 620 Sam Bass Road 2197, 9-26-1985; 
2228, 4-24-1986 Cushing north and southbound Gattis School Road Logan Street 755, 8-14-1980; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Deerfoot Drive east and westbound Burnet Street Entrance Lake Creek Park 755, 8-14-1980; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Double File eastbound Sunrise Road Wilderness Path 2215, 2-13-1986 Dove Haven Drive north and southbound Quail Creek Road Entrance of Lake Creek Park 755, 8-14-1980; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Frontier Drive north and southbound Lasso Drive Chisholm Valley 2004, 5-26-1983; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Harrell Parkway East Palm Valley Boulevard A point 300' south of the centerline of Chandler Creek 2464, 3-8-1990; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Harrell Parkway A point 280' north of centerline of Chandler Creek County Road 113 2464, 3-8-1990; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Harrell Parkway A point 300' south of the centerline of Chandler Creek A point 280' north of the centerline of Chandler Creek 2464, 3-8-1990; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Lee Street north and southbound A point 350' north of its intersection with Anderson Avenue The center of Brush Creek 2457, 2-8-1990; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Main Street (eastbound) Mays Street Sheppard Street G-94-06-23-8B, 6-23-1994 Main Street (westbound) Sheppard Street Mays Street G-94-06-23-8B, 6-23-1994 Mills Meadow north and southbound Bayland Street London Road G-96-04-11-12B, 4-11-1996; G-00-01-27-12D2, 1-27-2000; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Nash Street north and southbound 275' west of Mandell Street 195' southeast of Bellview Avenue 2228, 4-24-1986; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Nicole Circle Bowman Road Braddock Lane 2116, 5-24-1984; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Park Lane For its full length 2422, 7-27-1989; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Provident Lane north and southbound Wroxton Way A point 502' north of Wayne Drive G-96-04-11-12B, 4-11-1996; G-00-01-27-12D2, 1-27-2000; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Summit Street north and southbound The center of Brushy Creek Its intersection with Vista Avenue 2457, 2-8-1990; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Vintage Drive For its entire length G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012 Walten Way For its entire length 2464, 3-8-1990; G-12-10-11-F2, 10-11-2012  
(4)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) northbound Milepoint 12.274 Milepoint 11.668 2320, 2-11-1988 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) southbound Milepoint 11.668 Milepoint 12.274 2320, 2-11-1988 East Horizon Boulevard U.S. 81-Greenhill Drive 675' east of the east intersection of Greenhill and East Horizon Boulevard 2234, 5-22-1986 Greenhill east and westbound West intersection of East Horizon and Greenhill East intersection of East Horizon and Greenhill 2234, 5-22-1986 Hampton Lane (NE) Windy Park Drive 525' west of Windy Park Drive 2241, 7-10-1986 Williamson Drive 
eastbound East of IH-35 frontage road Nottinghamhill Road 2211, 12-12-1985 Williamson Drive 
westbound West of Nottinghambill Road IH-35 frontage Road 2211, 12-12-1985 Windy Park Drive northbound Gattis School 101' south of Parkfield Circle 2241, 7-10-1986 Windy Park Drive southbound Gattis School Road 101' south of Parkfield Circle 2241, 7-10-1986  
(5)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number Bowman Road east and westbound Highway 81 County Road 115 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) northbound Milepoint 13.585 Milepoint 13.289 2320, 2-11-1988 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) southbound Milepoint 13.289 Milepoint 13.585 2320, 2-11-1988 Chisholm Trail north and southbound Sam Bass Road City Limits 755, 8-14-1980 Chisholm Trail Road 100 LF north of Industrial Boulevard Sam Bass Road O-2014-1168, 3-13-2014 Deepwood Drive north and southbound FM Highway 620 360' north of Oakridge Drive 2372, 11-22-1988 Dell Way Greenlawn Boulevard South Mays G-05-04-14-13A2, 4-14-2005; G-05-07-28-10D2, 7-28-2005 FM Highway 620 (Round Rock Avenue) eastbound Milepoint 9.982 Milepoint 10.309 777, 12-23-1980 FM Highway 620 (Round Rock Avenue) westbound Milepoint 10.309 Milepoint 9.982 777, 12-23-1980 Forest Creek Drive east and westbound Rusk Road Red Bud Lane G-12-10-11-F3, 10-11-2012 Gattis School Road east and westbound Greenlawn Boulevard City Limits 2004, 5-26-1983 Gattis School Road east and westbound South Mays Street A point 150' feet east of Surrey Drive 2534, § III, 5-23-1991 Greenlawn Boulevard north and southbound Gattis School Road A point 185' south of its intersection with Stratford Drive G-97-03-13-9A, 3-13-1997 Hesters Crossing east and westbound IH-35 southbound frontage road A point 200' west of Kouri Avenue G-01-09-13-14F3, 9-13-2001 Kenney Fort Boulevard Joe DiMaggio 500 LF south of Joe DiMaggio O-2014-1170, 3-13-2014 Mays Street 
north and southbound Sunset Drive West Nash Street G-11-11-10-9D2 
11-10-2011 Meister Lane 
(both directions) Gattis School Road SH 45 westbound Frontage Road G-10-08-26-9A4, 8-26-2010 North Mays Street 
(both directions) Old Settlers 
Boulevard Paloma Drive G-11-07-28-11A1, 
7-28-2011 RM 620 (east and westbound) IH-35 East Frontage Road (mile point 10.825) Mays Street (mile point 11.200) G-09-04-09-10C1 
4-9-2009 Sam Bass Road east and westbound IH35 City Limits 755, 8-14-1980 Sunrise Road (County Road 115) north and southbound U.S. Highway 79 East Old Settlers Boulevard 2076, 11-10-1983; 
G-97-09-25-12C, 9-25-1997; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 U.S. 79 eastbound IH 35 at Milepoint 7.692 232' east of N. Mays Street at Milepoint 7.333 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016 U.S. 79 westbound 232' east of N. Mays Street at Milepoint 7.333 IH 35 at Milepoint 7.692 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016  
(6)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number Business loop 35 (East Old Settlers Boulevard) east and westbound Mays Street Milepoint 10.000 2333, 4-14-1988; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) northbound Milepoint 11.668 Milepoint 11.251 2320, 2-11-1988 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) north and southbound Milepoint 12.274 Milepoint 13.289 2334, 4-14-1988 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) southbound Milepoint 11.251 Milepoint 11.668 2320, 2-11-1988 Creek Bend Drive (both directions) FM 3406 West End Place G-07-11-20-10A1, § I, 11-8-2007 Dell Center Boulevard north and southbound Greenlawn Boulevard 0.518 miles east of IH 35 East Frontage Road G-98-02-12-12D, 2-12-1998 Double Creek Drive Gattis School Road Sweetgum Lane G-07-04-26-11C2, 4-26-2007 FM Highway 620 Station 490+00 Station 509+29.81 763, 9-11-1980 FM Highway 620 westbound Station 509+29.81 Station 490+00 763, 9-11-1980 FM Highway 620 westbound Milepoint 9.845 Milepoint 9.982 777, 12-23-1980 FM Highway 620 westbound Milepoint 9.982 Milepoint 9.845 777, 12-23-1980 Forest Creek Drive east and westbound Double Creek Drive Rusk Road G-00-01-27-12D3, 1-27-2000 Gattis School Road east and westbound A point 150' feet east of Surrey Drive A point 100' east of Double Creek Drive 2534, 5-23-1991 Greenlawn Boulevard north and southbound A point 185' south of its intersection with Stratford Drive Louis Henna Boulevard 2562, 1-23-1992; G-97-03-13-9A, 3-13-1997 McNeil Road east and westbound East abutment of the bridge crossing Lake Creek A point 400' west of Oakridge Drive 2503, 9-27-1990 Old Settlers Boulevard (east and westbound) North Mays Street A point 1000' east of Lamar Boulevard 2306, 11-12-1987; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997; 
G-00-01-27-12D1, 1-27-2000 Parker Drive both directions F.M. 1325 IH-35 West Frontage Road G-98-05-14-9A2, 5-14-1998 Smyers Lane 
(both directions) 250LF north of RM 620 100 LF west of Wyoming Springs Drive O-2014-1552, 7-10-2014 Sunrise Road north and southbound East Old Settlers Boulevard A point 508' north of its intersection with Lake Drive G-97-09-25-12C, 9-25-1997; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Wyoming Springs Drive (both directions) R.M. 620 980' north of Park Valley Boulevard G-00-01-27-12D3, 1-27-2000  
(7)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number A. W. Grimes Boulevard (both directions) U.S. 79 Old Settlers Boulevard G-08-09-11-10A1 
9-11-2008 A. W. Grimes Boulevard north and southbound Gattis School Road Louis Henna Boulevard G-03-06-12-9C3, 6-12-2003 A. W. Grimes Boulevard north and southbound Gattis School Road Lake Creek G-05-02-10-11A1, 2-10-2005 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) northbound Milepoint 11.251 East Old Settlers Boulevard 2320, 2-11-1988; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Business Loop 35 (Mays Street) southbound East Old Settlers Boulevard Milepoint 11.251 2320, 2-11-1988; 
G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Chisholm Trail Road FM 3406 100 LF north of Industrial Boulevard O-2014-1168, 3-13-2014 Dell Center Boulevard north and southbound IH 35 East Frontage Road 0.518 miles east of IH 35 East Frontage Road G-98-02-12-12D, 2-12-1998 Double Creek Drive north and southbound Gattis School Road Louis Henna Boulevard G-00-04-27-11E3, 4-27-2000 East Frontage Road of IH-35 South City Limit at Milepoint 2.948 Milepoint 3.279 2149, 2-14-1985 FM Hwy. 620 Station 466+00 Station 490+60 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 FM Hwy. 620 westbound Station 490+00 Station 466+00 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 Gattis School Road east and westbound A point 100' east of Double Creek Drive City Limits 2534, 5-23-1991 Greenlawn Boulevard IH 35 Frontage Road Louis Henna Boulevard G-11-11-10-9D1 
11-10-2011 Hesters Crossing County Road 172 A point 200' west of Kouri Avenue G-01-09-13-14F3, 9-13-2001 High Country Boulevard north and southbound Gattis School Road City Limits (0.402 miles south of Gattis School Road) G-98-02-12-12C, 2-12-1998 IH 35 crossover eastbound Station 26.68.72 Station 11.47.3 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 IH 35 crossover westbound Station 11.47.3 Station 26.68.72 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 IH 35 East Frontage Road northbound Station 1436+10 Station 1411+25.4 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 IH 35 East Frontage Road southbound Station 1411+25.4 Station 1436+00 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 IH 35 West Frontage Road northbound Station 1436+00 Station 1395+00 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 IH 35 West Frontage Road southbound Station 1395+00 Station 1436+00 755, 8-14-1980; 
2228, 4-24-1986; 
2251, 9-25-1986; 
2256, 11-13-1986 Loop 384 (May Street/Business U.S. Hwy. 81) northbound Station 151+00 Station 198+00 2149, 2-14-1985 Loop 384 (May Street/Business U.S. Hwy. 81) southbound Station 198+00 Station 151+00 2149, 2-14-1985 Mays Street 
north and southbound Northwest Drive Sunset Drive G-11-11-10-9D2 
11-10-2011 McNeil Road east and westbound A point 400' west of Oakridge Drive City Limits 2503, 9-27-1990 Old Settlers Boulevard east and westbound A point 1,000' east of Lamar Boulevard A point 750' east of Sunrise Road G-00-01-27-12D1, 1-27-2000 Old Settlers Boulevard east and westbound A point 750' east of Sunrise Road A. W. Grimes Boulevard G-05-03-24-11C3, 3-24-2005 Old Settlers Boulevard east and westbound A. W. Grimes Boulevard Red Bud Lane G-05-03-24-11C4, 3-24-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007 Red Bud Lane (both directions) U.S. 79 Gattis School Road O-2014-1551 
7-10-2014 RM 620 (east and westbound) 644' east of Deep Wood Drive (milepoint 9.910) IH-35 East Frontage Road (milepoint 10.825) G-09-04-09-10C1 
4-9-2009 University Boulevard east and westbound IH-35 Sunrise Road 2370, 11-22-1988; 
G-03-10-09-12B1, 10-9-2003; 
G-06-01-26-9B1, 1-26-2006 U.S. 79 eastbound 232' east of N. Mays Street at Milepoint 7.333 A.W. Grimes Boulevard at Milepoint 5.812 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016 U.S. 79 westbound A.W. Grimes Boulevard at Milepoint 5.812 232' east of N. Mays Street at Milepoint 7.333 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016 West Frontage Road of IH-35 Milepoint 3.279 South City Limit at Milepoint 2.948 2149, 2-14-1985  
(8)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number A. W. Grimes Boulevard northbound Milepoint 7.065 Milepoint 6.739 2444, 12-28-1989; 
G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 A. W. Grimes Boulevard southbound Milepoint 6.739 Milepoint 7.065 2444, 12-28-1989; 
G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 East Frontage Road of IH-35 Milepoint 0.516 Milepoint 3.279 2543, 8-8-1991 F.M. 1325 (northbound) Milepoint 0.848 Milepoint 0.553 G-09-03-26-9B2 
3-26-2009 F.M. 1325 (southbound) Milepoint 0.553 Milepoint 0.848 G-09-03-26-9B2 
3-26-2009 F.M. 3406 east and westbound Milepoint 5.139 (IH-35 West Frontage Road) Milepoint 7.092 (City Limit line west of IH-35) G-02-03-26-8A3, 3-26-2002; 
G-03-09-11-9C2, 9-11-2003 Kenney Fort Boulevard 500 LF south of Joe DiMaggio Forest Creek O-2014-1170, 3-13-2014 SH-45 Frontage Roads (Louis Henna Boulevard) east and westbound La Frontera Boulevard Donnell Drive O-2014-1362, 5-8-2014 Sunrise Road north and southbound A point 508' north of its intersection with Lake Drive University Boulevard G-97-09-25-12C, 9-25-1997; 
G-06-01-26-9B1, 1-26-2006 West Frontage Road of IH-35 Milepoint 3.217 Milepoint 0.259 2543, 8-8-1991  
(9)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number A. W. Grimes Boulevard northbound Milepoint 6.739 Milepoint 6.571 G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 A. W. Grimes Boulevard northbound Milepoint 8.437 Milepoint 7.065 2444, 12-28-1989; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 A. W. Grimes Boulevard southbound Milepoint 6.571 Milepoint 6.739 G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 A. W. Grimes Boulevard southbound Milepoint 7.065 Milepoint 8.437 G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007 East Frontage Road of IH-35 Milepoint 3.279 at Milepoint 6.876 North City Limit 2543, 8-8-1991 East Frontage Road of IH-35 South City Limit at Milepoint 2.845 Milepoint 0.516 2543, 8-8-1991 IH-35 Frontage Road 
northbound Milepoint 02.405 Milepoint 03.989 G-11-01-13-9C1, 
1-13-2011 IH-35 Frontage Road 
southbound Milepoint 03.989 Milepoint 02.405 G-11-01-13-9C1, 
1-13-2011 Ranch Road 620 eastbound City Limits Station 466+00 2317, 1-28-1988 Ranch Road 620 westbound Station 466+00 City Limits 2317, 1-28-1988 SH-45 Frontage Roads (Louis Henna Boulevard) east and westbound Western city limits La Frontera Boulevard O-2014-1362, 5-8-2014 University Boulevard east and westbound IH-35 City Limits 2370, 11-22-1988; 
G-06-01-26-9B1, 1-26-2006 U.S. Hwy. 79 eastbound A.W. Grimes Boulevard at Milepoint 5.812 158' east of Red Bud Lane at Milepoint 3.142 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016 U.S. Hwy. 79 westbound 158' east of Red Bud Lane at Milepoint 3.142 A.W. Grimes Boulevard at Milepoint 5.812 2251, 9-25-1986; O-2016-3831, 10-27-2016 West Frontage Road of IH-35 Milepoint 0.259 at Milepoint 2.845 South City Limit 2543, 8-8-1991 West Frontage Road of IH-35 North City Limit at Milepoint 6.876 Milepoint 3.217 2543, 8-8-1991  
(10)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number IH-35 Frontage Road 
northbound Milepoint 03.989 Milepoint 06.884 G-11-01-13-9C1, 
1-13-2011 IH-35 Frontage Road 
southbound Milepoint 06.884 Milepoint 03.989 G-11-01-13-9C1, 
1-13-2011  
(11)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 65 miles per hour along the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number IH-35 (Main Lanes) northbound South City Limit North City Limit 2316, 1-14-1988 IH-35 (Main Lanes) southbound North City Limit South City Limit 2316, 1-14-1988  
(12)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be ten miles per hour along the following alleys: 
On From To Ordinance Number The Public Alley between Greenlawn Boulevard and Southwestern Trail southbound Zephyr Lane Stratford Drive Code 1995, § 9.502; 
G-07-11-20-10A1, § I, 11-8-2007  
(Code 1995, § 9.502; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. 763, 9-11-1980; Ord. No. 777, 12-23-1980; Ord. No. 2004, 5-26-1983; Ord. No. 2076, 11-10-1983; Ord. No. 2116, 5-24-1984; Ord. No. 2149, 2-14-1985; Ord. No. 2197, 9-26-1985; Ord. No. 2211, 12-12-1985; Ord. No. 2215, 2-13-1986; Ord. No. 2228, 4-24-1986; Ord. No. 2234, 5-22-1986; Ord. No. 2241, 7-10-1986; Ord. No. 2251, 9-25-1986; Ord. No. 2256, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. 2306, 11-12-1987; Ord. No. 2309, 11-24-1987; Ord. No. 2316, 1-14-1988; Ord. No. 2317, 1-28-1988; Ord. No. 2320, 2-11-1988; Ord. No. 2333, 4-14-1988; Ord. No. 2334, 4-14-1988; Ord. No. 2320, 2-11-1988; Ord. No. 2370, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. 2372, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. 2422, 7-27-1989; Ord. No. 2444, 12-28-1989; Ord. No. 2457, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 2464, 3-8-1990; Ord. No. 2503, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2534, 5-23-1991; Ord. No. 2543, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 2562, 1-23-1992; Ord. No. G-94-06-23-8B, 6-23-1994; Ord. No. G-96-04-11-12B, 4-11-1996; Ord. No. G-97-03-13-9A, 3-13-1997; Ord. No. G-97-09-25-12C, 9-25-1997; Ord. No. G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. G-98-02-12-12C, 2-12-1998; Ord. No. G-98-02-12-12D, 2-12-1998; Ord. No. G-98-05-14-9A2, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. G-00-01-27-12D1, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. G-00-01-27-12D2, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. G-00-01-27-12D3, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. G-00-04-27-11E3, 4-27-2000; Ord. No. G-01-09-13-14F3, 9-13-2001; Ord. No. G-02-03-26-8A3, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. G-02-09-26-10C1, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. G-02-09-26-10C2, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. G-03-06-12-9C3, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. G-03-09-11-9C2, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. G-03-10-09-12B1, 10-9-2003; Ord. No. G-05-02-10-11A1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. G-05-03-24-11C3, 3-24-2005; Ord. No. G-05-03-24-11C4, 3-24-2005; Ord. No. G-05-04-14-13A2, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. G-05-07-28-10D2, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. G-06-01-26-9B1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. G-06-08-10-9C2, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; Ord. No. G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. G-07-04-26-11C2, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; Ord. No. G-07-11-20-10A1, § I, 11-8-2007; Ord. No. G-08-09-11-10A1, § I, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. G-09-03-26-9B2, § I, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. G-09-04-09-10C1, §§ I, II, 4-9-2009; Ord. No. G-09-04-09-10C2, § I, 4-2-2009; Ord. No. G-10-08-26-9A4, § I, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. G-11-01-13-9C1, §§ I-III, 1-13-2011; Ord. No. G-11-07-28-11A1, § I, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. G-11-11-10-9D1, § I, 11-10-2011; Ord. No. G-11-11-10-9D2, §§ I, II, 11-10-2011; Ord. No. G-12-10-11-F2, §§ I-III, 10-11-2012; Ord. No. G-12-10-11-F3, § I, 10-11-2012; Ord. No. G13-10-24-F2, § I, 10-24-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-1168, §§ I, II, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1170, §§ I, II, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1362, §§ I-IV, 5-8-2014; Ord. No. O2014-1551, §§ I, II, 7-10-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1552, § I, 7-10-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1630, § II, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. O-2016-3831, §§ I-III, 10-27-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to alter speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356. 
Sec. 42-128. - School zones. 
    As authorized by state law, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city hereby declares and determines that certain speed regulations shall be applicable in school zones, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed so shown below when signs are posted with the hours of operation, or when a sign is posted with a flashing light giving notice thereof. Those streets and zone boundaries described in the following tables are declared to be school zones for the purpose of this section: 
(1)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour during the listed times along the following streets: 
Street From To Speed Zone Times Ordinance
Number Anderson Avenue Mays Street Lee Street 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Bayland Street Provident Lane 200' east of Mills Meadow Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Behrens Parkway Stonecreek Drive Goldenoak Circle 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Bluffstone Drive 200' west of CR 117 CR 117 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Bowman Road 200' west of Sunrise Road Sunrise Road 8:00-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Chaparral Drive Woods Boulevard Blackjack Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 a.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Chisholm Valley Drive 130' east of Christopher Avenue 250' east of St. Williams Street 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Creek Bend Boulevard 200' north of Plantation Drive 200' south of Sam Bass Road 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2; O-2017-4119 Cushing Drive 200' south of School Days Lane 160' south of Twin Ridge Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Dalea Street 50' east of GoldenOak Circle 50' west of Portulaca Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Deep Wood Drive 200' north of St. Williams Ave 200' south of Creekview Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Eagles Nest Street 50' south of Terra Street University Boulevard 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Fernspring Drive Via Sonoma Trail Lake Forest Drive 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Forest Creek Drive 260' east of St. Andrews Drive 200' east of Harvey Penick Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Forest Creek Drive 200' west of Lake Forest Drive 200' east of Lake Forest Drive 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Gattis School Road 200' west of Surrey Drive 150' east of Surrey Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 GoldenOak Circle Behrens Parkway 350' east of Wyoming Springs Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Gulf Way 200' west of Casa Blanca Cove 1,275' east of Sandy Brook Drive 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Harvey Penick Drive Forest Creek Drive 600' south of Forest Creek Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Lawnmont Drive 250' south of School Days Lane 375' north of School Days Lane 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Logan Street 205' east of South Mays Street 300' east of Cushing Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Mays Street (Business Loop 35) Milepoint 11.981 Milepoint 11.833 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Meister Lane 200' north of Tall Rider Lane 200' south of Harvester Lane 8:35-9:10 a.m. 
4:15-4:50 p.m. O-2018-5779; O-2018-5866 Mills Meadow Drive Bayland Street 200' north of London Road 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Lee Street Anderson Avenue 350' north of West Anderson Avenue 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Oakridge Drive 475' west of Deep Wood Drive 450' east of Creekmont Drive 8:00-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Orion Street 106' south of Terra Street University Boulevard 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Provident Lane 205' north of Bayland Street 200' south of Melbourne Lane 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Round Rock Ranch Boulevard 150' north of its western intersection with Gattis School Road Pecos Valley Cove 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Sam Bass Road 200' east of Creek Bend Boulevard 200' west of Creek Bend Boulevard 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Satellite View 110' east of Orion Street 220' west of Eagles Nest Street 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 School Days Lane Lawnmont Drive Cushing Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 St. Williams Avenue Deep Wood Drive 200'south of Parkview Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Stone Oak Drive 150' south of Mangrove Cave Court 150' north of Windhill Loop 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Sunrise Road 100' south of Mesa Park Drive 50' south of Greenfield Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Sunrise Road 200' north of Bowman Road 160' south of Ridgeline Drive 8:00-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Thompson Trail 50' west of its south intersection with A.W. Grimes 50' west of its north intersection with A.W. Grimes 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Tiger Trail Sunrise Road 200' east of Sunrise Road 8:00-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Vial Sonoma Trail 200' north of Gattis School Road 1730' north of Gattis School Road 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Woods Boulevard Chaparral Drive 200' west of Chaparral Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2 Wyoming Springs Drive 200' south of Behrens Parkway 200' north of Goldenoak Circle 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2; 
O-2015-2374  
(2)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour during the listed times along the following streets: 
Street From To Speed Zone Times Ordinance
Number Gattis School Road 400' west of Via Sonoma Trail 300' east of Via Sonoma Trail 7:15-8:30 a.m. 
2:45-4:00 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2  
(3)  The maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour during the listed times along the following streets: 
Street From To Speed Zone Times Ordinance
Number FM 3406 850' east of Plantation Drive 400' west of Plantation Drive 7:15-7:45 a.m. 
2:45-3:15 p.m. G-12-07-26-F2; O-2015-2374; O-2016-3832  
(Ord. No. G-12-07-26-F2, § I, 7-26-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2374, § I, 4-23-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3832, § I, 10-27-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-4119, § I, 2-9-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5779, § I, 9-13-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § V, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-129. - Temporary construction speed zones. 
(a)  During construction of SH 45, the temporary maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour on Louis Henna Boulevard from County Road 170 to Donnell Drive. This temporary speed limit shall expire upon completion of SH 45 from County Road 170 to Donnell Drive, and the maximum prima facie speed limit shall thereafter be 55 miles per hour. 
(b)  During construction of Old Settlers Boulevard, the temporary maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour on Old Settlers Boulevard from Bluffs Landing Way to Brenda Lane. This temporary speed limit shall expire upon completion of Old Settlers Boulevard from Bluffs Landing Way to Brenda Lane, and the maximum prima facie speed limit shall thereafter be 45 miles per hour. 
(c)  During construction of Red Bud Lane, the temporary maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour on Red Bud Lane from U.S. 79 to Country Drive. This temporary speed limit shall expire upon completion of Red Bud Lane from U.S. 79 to Country Drive, and the maximum prima facie speed limit shall thereafter be 40 miles per hour. 
(d)  During construction of the ramp reversals for the TxDOT Mobility 35 Corridor Project ("project"), the temporary maximum prima facie speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour on a portion of the IH-35 southbound frontage road from RM 1431 to FM 3406. This temporary speed limit shall expire upon completion of the project, and the maximum prima facie speed limit shall thereafter be 60 miles per hour. 
(e)  During construction of the TxDOT Mobility 35 Corridor, specifically, for the bridge replacement and intersection improvements of FM 3406 ("project"), the temporary maximum prima facie speed limit on a portion of the IH-35 northbound and southbound frontage roads north of FM 3406 from mile point 4.227 to 3.989 shall be reduced from 60 miles per hour to 50 miles per hour; and on a portion of the IH-35 northbound and southbound frontage roads south of FM 3406 from mile point 3.989 to 3.420 shall be reduced from 55 miles per hour to 50 miles per hour. These temporary speed limits shall expire upon completion of the project. 
(Code 1995, § 9.504; Ord. No. G-04-07-08-8D2, 7-8-2004; Ord. No. G-09-09-24-10A2, 9-24-2009; Ord. No. G-09-11-24-7A1, § I, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. G-10-02-25-9A1, § I, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 2016-3423, § I, 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3608, § I, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 42-130-42-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TURNING MOVEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Turning and signals for stopping and turning, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.101 et seq. 

Sec. 42-157. - Authority to place devices altering normal course of turns. 
    The transportation director is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1995, § 9.601; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § VII, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-158. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The transportation director is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs. 
(Code 1995, § 9.602; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § VIII, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-159. - Specific turning restrictions. 
    The following turning restrictions have been specifically approved by ordinances: 
(1)  Left turns from the north bound lane of U.S. Highway 81 (Loop 384) onto Bagdad Street are prohibited. 
(2)  The following intersections are to be controlled with right turn only signs oriented as follows: 
On At Its Intersection With Bagdad Avenue (east and west bound) U.S. 81 (South Mays)  
(3)  Whenever authorized signs are erected giving notice thereof, all vehicles leaving the parking area situated on the school property at Robertson Elementary School must turn right when entering Bayland Street. This restriction on turning shall be effective only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when Robertson Elementary School is in session. 
(4)  Left turns from the westbound lane of University Boulevard are prohibited from its intersection with Mays Street to 400 feet west of Mays Street. 
(Code 1995, § 9.603; Ord. No. 778, 12-23-1980; Ord. No. 2127, 7-26-1984; Ord. No. G-96-04-11-12D, 4-11-1996; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10C2, § I, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2016-3414, § II, 5-12-2016) 
Sec. 42-160. - Obedience to no-turn signs. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1995, § 9.604) 
Sec. 42-161. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 9.605) 
Secs. 42-162-42-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

Sec. 42-191. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the transportation director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 9.701; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § IX, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-192. - One-way streets and alleys designated. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in the following schedule, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. When properly posted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the following streets: 
On From To Ordinance Number West Anderson Avenue (westbound only) Summit Mays 755, 8-14-1980; 2248, 9-11-1986 West IH-35 Frontage Road (southbound only) FM 3406 Sunset Drive 959, 5-27-1982 East IH-35 Frontage Road (northbound only) Sunset Drive Loop 384 Interchange 959, 5-27-1982 Nash Street (westbound only) South Mays Street Mandell Street 2285, 5-14-1987 Cougar Lane (southbound) Deepwood Drive Oakridge Drive 2374, 11-22-1988 West IH-35 Frontage Road (southbound only) Sunset Drive FM 1325 2382, 12-22-1988 East IH-35 Frontage Road (northbound only) County Road 170 Sunset Drive 2382, 12-22-1988 West IH-35 Frontage Road (southbound only) FM 1325 City Limits 2392, 2-9-1989 West IH-35 Frontage Road (northbound only) City Limits FM 1325 2392, 2-9-1989 Park Lane (Southerly Branch) (eastbound only) 2025' east of its intersection with Burnet Street A point 2175 feet east of its intersection with Burnet Street 2423, 7-27-1989 Park Lane (Northerly Branch) (westbound only) 2025' east of its intersection with Burnet Street A point 2150 feet east of its intersection with Burnet Street 2423, 7-27-1989 The Public Alley between Greenlawn Boulevard and Southwestern Trail (southbound) Zephyr Lane Stratford Drive Code 1995, § 9.702; 2540, 7-25-1991  
(Code 1995, § 9.702; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. 959, 5-27-1982; Ord. No. 2248, 9-11-1986; Ord. No. 2285, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2374, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. 2382, 12-22-1988; Ord. No. 2392, 2-9-1989; Ord. No. 2423, 7-27-1989; Ord. No. 2540, 7-25-1991) 
Secs. 42-193-42-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-223. - Stop and yield intersections. 
    The city council may by ordinance designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. In addition, the city council may designate that traffic on any street shall yield to traffic on an intersecting street. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the transportation director shall supervise the erection and maintenance of stop signs or yield signs as specified by the city council and maintain an inventory of such signs. Ordinances designating stop and yield intersections have not been included in this Code and are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 9.800; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B1, § I, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B2, § I, 11-23-2010; Ord. NO. G-11-04-28-11A1, § I, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. G-12-06-14-F2, § I, 6-14-2012; Ord. No. G-12-09-13-F2, § I, 9-13-2012; Ord. No. G-12-11-20-F2, § I, 11-20-2012; Ord. No. G-13-02-14-E2, § I, 2-14-2013; Ord. No. G-13-09-12-E2, § I, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E4, § I, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. G-13-11-26-E5, § I, 11-26-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-1167, § I, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1169, § I, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § X, 4-10-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-2795, § I, 9-24-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3177, § I, 2-11-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-4187, § I, 3-9-2017; Ord. No. O-2017-4719, § I, 9-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-224. - Traffic signal controlled intersections. 
    The city council may designate, by ordinance or agreement with the state department of highways and public transportation, intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electronic traffic control lights or signals. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the transportation director shall supervise the erection and maintenance of traffic control signals or lights as specified by the state or city council and maintain an inventory of such signs. Ordinances and agreements designating traffic signal controlled intersections have not been included in this Code and are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 9.900; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § XI, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-225. - Crosswalks, safety zones, and traffic lanes. 
    The transportation director is hereby authorized to supervise the designation and maintenance, by appropriate devices, markings or lines upon the surface of the roadway, of crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; to supervise the establishment of safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and to supervise the marking of lanes for traffic on the street pavement at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and state law. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1000; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § XII, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-226. - Obstruction of intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1100) 
Sec. 42-227. - Drivers in a procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1300) 
Sec. 42-228. - Unlawful riding. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1400) 
Sec. 42-229. - Pedestrians required to cross at right angles. 
    Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic control devices, pedestrians shall cross a street or roadway at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1500) 
Secs. 42-230-42-251. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, mopeds and play vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 551. 

Sec. 42-252. - Bicycle parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1602; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
Sec. 42-253. - Riding bicycles, roller skates and skateboards on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or other similar device upon a sidewalk within an area zoned for C-1, C-1a and C-2 (commercial use) as defined in this Code. 
(b)  No person shall roller skate, ride a skateboard or bicycle in a reckless manner on any public sidewalk. No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skate or bicycle on a sidewalk without exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skateboard or roller skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(c)  No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or other similar device within city-owned parking garages within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1603; Ord. No. 2354, 8-25-1988) 
Secs. 42-254-42-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - TRUCK TRAFFIC 

Sec. 42-285. - Operation prohibited within city limits; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any truck or tractor-trailer combination which has dual or tandem rear axles on any street, roadway, or highway or segment of such street, roadway, or highway within the city limits when such street is marked with a sign prohibiting through truck traffic; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to trucks being used to make deliveries or pick ups from a residence or business located on said street or street segment. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, through truck traffic shall be prohibited upon those streets or portions of streets as follows: 
On From To Ordinance Number Aten Loop County Road 113 Harrell Parkway G-94-10-13-9A, 10-13-1994 Bluffstone Drive County Road 117 Old Settlers Boulevard O-2016-3214, 2-25-2016 Chamberlain Drive Old Settlers Boulevard Clinton Place O-2016-3214, 2-25-2016 Chandler Creek Boulevard A.W. Grimes Kenney Fort Boulevard O-2019-0103, 2-28-2019 Chisholm Valley Drive east and westbound IH 35 West Frontage County Road 172 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Chisholm Trail north and southbound FM 620 Sam Bass Road 2197, 9-26-1985 Deep Wood Drive northbound McNeil Road Oakridge Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Deepwood Drive McNeil Road FM 620 2375, 11-22-1988 Deerfoot Drive South Burnet Street Ridge Crest Drive G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999 East Austin Avenue east and westbound North Mays North Georgetown Street 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 East Liberty Avenue east and westbound North Mays North Georgetown Street 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 East Logan Street South Mays Street Greenlawn Boulevard G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999 East Main Street east and westbound Mays The east end of East Main Street 2216, 2-27-1986 East Mesa Park Drive east and westbound Sunrise Road Provident Lane 2121, 6-14-1984; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Egger Drive north and southbound Bowman Road U.S. Hwy. 79 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Falcon Drive Wyoming Springs Drive Oakwood Boulevard Code 1995, § 9.1700; G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008 Greenlawn Boulevard Gattis School Road East Logan Street G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999 Harrell Parkway U.S. Hwy. 79 County Road 113 G-94-10-13-9A, 10-13-1994 Lampasas Bagdad Fannin 2204, 10-24-1985 Logan Drive/Sycamore Trail A. W. Grimes Boulevard Willow Way 
(East Intersection) O-2014-1176, 3-27-2014 Marshall Trail County Road 117 Clinton Place O-2016-3214, 2-25-2016 North Georgetown Street north and southbound U.S. Hwy. 79 East Main Street 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 North Georgetown Street northbound U.S. Hwy. 79 West Mesa Park Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Oaklands Drive RM 620 Falcon Drive Code 1995, § 9.1700; G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008 Oakridge Drive northbound McNeil Road Deep Wood Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Oakwood Boulevard RM 620 Falcon Drive Code 1995, § 9.1700; G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008 Old Settlers Boulevard A. W. Grimes Boulevard Red Bud Lane Code 1995, § 9.1700; G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008 Pauling Lane Red Bud Lane Butler Way O-2016-3214, 2-25-2016 Provident Lane north and southbound U.S. Hwy. 79 Wayne Drive 2121, 6-14-1984; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Red Bud Lane U.S. Hwy. 79 Gattis School Road Code 1995, § 9.1700; G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008 Red Bud Lane U.S. Hwy. 79 Gattis School Road G-05-04-28-9A1, 4-28-2005 Ridge Crest Drive Deerfoot Drive East Logan Street G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999 Robb Lane southbound Bowman Road Karolyn Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Round Rock West Drive Bluff Drive South Lake Creek Drive 2377, 11-22-1988; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Settlers Park Loop Its eastern intersection with Old Settlers Boulevard Its western intersection with Old Settlers Boulevard O-2016-3214, 2-25-2016 Sheppard Bagdad Fannin South Burnet Street Bagdad Avenue Deerfoot Drive G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999 South Creek Boulevard Gattis School Road Logan Drive O-2014-1176, 3-27-2014 St. William Avenue northbound McNeil Road Deep Wood Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 St. Williams Street southbound McNeil Road Chisholm Valley Drive 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Sweetgum Lane to Mimosa Trail and then on Mimosa Trail Double Creek Drive Logan Drive O-2014-1176, 3-27-2014 Wayne Drive east and westbound Sunrise Road Provident Lane 2121, 6-14-1984; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 West Mesa Park Drive north and southbound Bowman Road Sunrise Road 2075, 11-10-1983; G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997 Willow Way A. W. Grimes Boulevard Sycamore Trail 
(East Intersection) O-2014-1176, 3-27-2014 Winding Way High Country Boulevard Eastern edge of city limits O-2014-1376, 5-22-2014  
(Code 1995, § 9.1700; Ord. No. 2075, 11-10-1983; Ord. No. 2121, 6-14-1984; Ord. No. 2197, 9-26-1985; Ord. No. 2204, 10-24-1985; Ord. No. 2216, 2-27-1986; Ord. No. 2375, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. 2377, 11-22-1988; Ord. No. G-94-10-13-9A, 10-13-1994; Ord. No. G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. G-99-04-08-10B1, 4-8-1999; Ord. No. G-05-04-28-9A1, 4-28-2005; Ord. No. G-05-11-22-8B2, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. G-06-10-12-10A1, 10-12-2006; Ord. No. G-07-04-26-11B1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. G-07-06-28-10C9, 6-28-2007; Ord. No. G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; Ord. No. G-08-02-14-8B1, § I, 2-14-2008; Ord. No. G-08-04-10-10A1, § I, 4-10-2008; Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11C1, § I, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. O-2014-1176, § I, 3-27-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1376, § I, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. O-2016-3214, § I, 2-25-2016; Ord. No. O-2019-0103, § I, 2-28-2019) 
Secs. 42-286-42-303. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PARKING REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 

Sec. 42-304. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1801) 
Sec. 42-305. - Regulations imposing time limit on parking not exclusive. 
    The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1802) 
Sec. 42-306. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty of the director of planning to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1803) 
Sec. 42-307. - Prima facie evidence of violation by owner. 
    In any case when a person shall have been charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on said street where parking of a vehicle is prohibited, or with parking such vehicle on said street in a manner which violates the manner of parking a vehicle as designated, or with parking such vehicle for a length of time in excess of that allowed in the space where such vehicle was parked, proof that said vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by said owner, but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that said vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1804) 
Sec. 42-308. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The director of planning shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway and public transportation commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(b)  On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1805) 
Sec. 42-309. - Curb loading zones. 
(a)  The director of planning is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1806; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
Sec. 42-310. - Parking for the disabled. 
(a)  The city council may designate parking spaces or parking areas on property owned or controlled by the city, which shall be for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. A person who owns or controls private property used for parking may designate one or more parking spaces or areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. Parking spaces or areas designated by the city or a private property owner must be designated in compliance with and conform to the identification and marking standards adopted by the commissioner of licensing and regulation under 16 Tex. Admin. Code § 68.100. V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.011, related to offenses for parking in spaces reserved for disabled persons, applies to parking spaces on private property that have been designated in compliance with the identification and marking standards adopted by the commissioner of licensing and regulation. 
(b)  Parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting disabled persons shall be situated at the locations as hereinafter set forth: 
In front of City Hall: One parking space. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1807; Ord. No. 2074, 11-10-1983; Ord. No. G-96-04-25-9B, 4-25-1996) 
Sec. 42-311. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1808) 
Sec. 42-312. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1809) 
Sec. 42-313. - Parking on street for sale, washing, or repairing. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale, or washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1810; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
Sec. 42-314. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
    The director of planning is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking on either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1811; Ord. No. 939, 2-11-1982) 
Sec. 42-315. - Parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The transportation director is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 1,000 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1812; Ord. No. O-2014-1309, § XIII, 4-10-2014) 
Sec. 42-316. - Fire zones. 
    No person shall park a vehicle in those areas marked "Fire Zone" upon any of the following streets: 
    The alleys running in east-west direction between Mays and Sheppard Streets and Bagdad and Liberty Streets. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1814; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
Sec. 42-317. - Parking long vehicles and trailers on streets restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or motor vehicle/trailer combination which is in excess of 20 feet in length on any residential street for a period in excess of five minutes; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to motor vehicles or motor vehicle/trailer combinations being used to make deliveries or pickups from any residence, as long as the motor vehicle or motor vehicle/trailer combination is not left unattended for a period in excess of five minutes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle, or motor vehicle/trailer combination which is in excess of 20 feet in length on any public street between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park a trailer which is not attached to a motor vehicle on any public street. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1815; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. 2296, 9-10-1987; Ord. No. G-96-10-24-9A, 10-24-1996) 
Sec. 42-318. - Parking prohibited in certain designated locations. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, on the designated streets listed in this section. 
(b)  Any such vehicle or trailer parked in such prohibited area shall be a nuisance per se and shall be deemed to be a traffic and public safety hazard. Any vehicle or trailer parked in violation of this section may be removed by a police officer or at his or her direction and retained until such time as any towing and storage fees are paid; provided however, that the prohibited parking area shall be posted with an official sign giving notice of the prohibition and of the fact that such area is a tow away zone. 
(c)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets: 
(1)  Main Avenue between Mays Street and Lampasas. Any person or persons parking an automobile or other motor vehicle on Main Avenue between Mays Street and Lampasas Street in the city shall park said automobile or other motor vehicle only in designated parking spaces, and shall not take up more than one such parking space, and shall not permit the wheels of any such automobile or other motor vehicle to occupy any part of more than one such parking space. No such motor vehicles shall at any time be double parked on Main Avenue between Mays Street and Lampasas Street in the city. 
(2)  U.S. Hwy. 79. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, from that area lying in the highway right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 79 beginning at a point marking the intersection of IH 35 and said U.S. Hwy. 79 to a point marking the intersection of U.S. Hwy. 79 and Loop 384 (State Highway 81), all being located in the corporate limits in the city. 
(Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
(3)  I.H. 35 and Business Highway 81. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park a passenger car, light truck, truck, tractor truck, or any other motor driven vehicle, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, within that area lying in the highway or shoulder on the east side of the I.H. 35 east frontage road, north of Business Highway 81, from centerline station 1231+65 southerly to centerline station 1238+00, and on the west side of Business Highway 81 from centerline station 180+40, 84 feet south of the centerline of Braddock Lane, northerly to centerline station 182+75, 151 feet north of the centerline of Braddock Lane, all being located in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
(4)  Main Avenue between Lampasas and Sheppard Streets. No person shall park an automobile or other motor vehicle in the center of the portion of Main Avenue between Lampasas Street and Sheppard Street at any time, or at any other place on Main Avenue between Lampasas Street and Sheppard Street, except in designated parking spaces along the curb on the north and south sides of Main Avenue between Lampasas Street and Sheppard Street, and shall not at any time occupy more than one of such designated parking spaces, and shall not at any time double park any such automobile or other motor vehicle on said Main Avenue between Lampasas Street and Sheppard Street. 
(5)  Provident Lane. East side of Provident Lane from East Mesa Park Drive to driveway entrance of Vic Robinson School. 
(Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980) 
(6)  Braddock Lane. On both sides of Braddock Lane from its intersection with U.S. Highway 81 to its intersection with Nicole Circle. 
(Ord. No. 970, 9-23-1982; Ord. No. G-94-01-13-8B, 1-13-1994) 
(7)  Windy Park Drive, Breezy Lane, Whirlwind Trace and Stratford Drive. 
a.  Windy Park Drive from the south right-of-way line of Gattis School Road to the south right-of-way line of Breezy Lane. 
b.  Breezy Lane from the west right-of-way line of Windy Park Drive to the east right-of-way line of Whirlwind Trace. 
c.  Whirlwind Trace from the north right-of-way line of Breezy Lane to the south right-of-way line of Stratford Drive. 
d.  Stratford Drive from the east right-of-way line of Whirlwind Trace to the east right-of-way line of Greenlawn Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 2243, 8-14-1986) 
(8)  Cushing Drive. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, on the west side of Cushing Drive from Gattis School Road to Logan Street, or on the east side of Cushing Drive from the intersection of Logan Street south to a point 154 feet south of the centerline of Logan Street, or on the east side of Cushing Drive from the intersection of Gattis School Road north to a point 15 feet north of the northwest corner of Lot 7, Block A, Cushing Park Subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2281, 4-23-1987; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996) 
(9)  Alleys Between Main and Bagdad and Main and Liberty. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle of any nature or a trailer within any portion of the following alleys except for the purpose of loading or unloading freight to adjacent businesses: 
a.  Alley between Main Street and Bagdad Street and Mays Street to Lampasas Street; 
b.  Alley between Main Street and Liberty Street from Mays Street to Lampasas Street; 
c.  Alley between Main Street and Liberty Street from Lampasas Street to Sheppard Street; and 
d.  Alley between Main Street and Bagdad Street from Lampasas Street to Sheppard Street. 
(Ord. No. 2347, 8-11-1988) 
(10)  On both sides of Harrell Parkway from its intersection with Old Settlers Boulevard to its intersection with U.S. Highway 79. 
(Ord. No. 2470, 4-26-1990) 
(11)  On both sides of Old Austin Rock Road from its intersection with McNeil Road to its intersection with Carlin Cove. 
(Ord. No. 2571, 4-23-1992; Ord. No. G-97-03-27-10B, 3-27-1997) 
(12)  On the north side of Logan Street from South Mays Street to Mandell Street. 
(13)  On the west side of Mandell Street from its southern end to Logan Street. 
(Ord. No. G-93-09-23-9D, 9-23-1993) 
(14)  On the west side of Wonder Drive from its intersection with Sam Bass Road to its intersection with Ledbetter Street. 
(Ord. No. G-94-01-13-8B, 1-13-1994; Ord. No. G-95-03-09-9D, 3-9-1995) 
(15)  On the west side of North Lake Creek Drive from Round Rock Avenue to Lakewood Lane, and on the west side of South Lake Creek Drive from Lakewood Lane to Glenda Drive. 
(Ord. No. G-96-07-25-9B, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997) 
(16)  On both sides of Forest Creek Drive from Red Bud Lane to the east line of the Forest Creek Elementary Subdivision. 
(Ord. No. G-96-08-08-9C, 8-8-1996) 
(17)  Deep Wood Drive. 
a.  On the east side of Deep Wood Drive from Dragon Drive north to Round Rock Avenue (FM 620). 
b.  On the west side of Deep Wood Drive from its most westerly intersection with Oakridge Drive north to Round Rock Avenue (FM 620). 
(Ord. No. G-96-12-12-9A, 12-12-1996) 
(18)  On both sides of Carlin Cove from its intersection with Old Austin Rock Road easterly to the end of Carlin Cove. 
(Ord. No. G-97-03-27-10B, 3-27-1997) 
(19)  West Liberty Avenue. 
a.  On the north side of West Liberty Avenue from its intersection with North Mays Street to a point 165 feet west of the centerline of North Mays Street; 
b.  On the south side of West Liberty Avenue from its intersection with North Mays Street to a point 275 feet west of the centerline of North Mays Street; and 
c.  On the south side of West Liberty Avenue from a point 400 feet west of the centerline of North Mays Street to its intersection with Round Rock Avenue. 
(Ord. No. G-97-04-10-13B, 4-10-1997) 
(20)  Jarrett Way and Michael Angelo Way. 
a.  On the east side of Jarrett Way from its intersection with Michael Angelo Way to a point 430 feet north of the centerline of Michael Angelo Way; and 
b.  On the north side of Michael Angelo Way from a point 250 feet east of the centerline of Jarrett Way to the intersection with Jarrett Way. 
(Ord. No. G-97-06-26-9A, 6-26-1997) 
(21)  South Creek Drive. On both sides of South Creek Drive from Juniper Trail to Gattis School Road. 
(Ord. No. G-99-03-11-13B1, 3-11-1999) 
(22)  Anderson Avenue. On the north side of Anderson Avenue from a point 448 feet west of Brown Street to a point 513 feet west of Brown Street, from Monday through Friday only. 
(Ord. No. G-99-04-22-9B1, 4-22-1999) 
(23)  Round Rock Ranch Boulevard. On Round Rock Ranch Boulevard from its intersection with Gattis School Road to a point 300 feet north of Gattis School Road. 
(Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11D1, 3-22-2001) 
(24)  Lamar Drive between Old Settlers Boulevard and Commerce Boulevard. 
a.  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, on the east side of Lamar Drive between Old Settlers Boulevard and Commerce Boulevard. 
b.  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, on the west side of Lamar Drive from its intersection with Old Settlers Boulevard to 190 feet south of Old Settlers Boulevard. 
c.  Any such vehicle or trailer parked in such prohibited area shall be a nuisance per se and shall deemed to be a traffic and public safety hazard. Any vehicle or trailer parked in violation of this section may be removed by a police officer or at his direction and retained until such time as any towing and storage fees are paid; provided, however, that the prohibited parking area shall be posted with an official sign giving notice of the prohibition and of the fact that such area is a tow-away zone. 
(Ord. No. G-01-09-27-14B1, 9-27-2001) 
(25)  South Industrial Boulevard. On both sides of South Industrial Boulevard from 115 feet east of the centerline of West Industrial Boulevard to the corner of West Industrial Boulevard. 
(26)  West Industrial Boulevard. On both sides of West Industrial Boulevard from 90 feet south of the centerline of South Industrial Boulevard to 145 feet north of the centerline of South Industrial Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. G-02-01-24-8C1, 1-24-2002) 
(27)  Red Bud Lane. On the west side of Red Bud Lane from 200 feet north of CR 123 to 200 feet south of CR 123. 
(Ord. No. G-03-02-13-12A1, 2-13-2003) 
(28)  Bagdad Avenue. On the north side of West Bagdad Avenue from South Brown Street to 65 feet west of South Brown Street. 
(Ord. No. G-03-06-12-9C2, 6-12-2003) 
(29)  Sundance Parkway. On both sides of Sundance Parkway from La Fronera Boulevard to Hesters Crossing Road. 
(Ord. No. G-05-02-10-11A2, 2-10-2005) 
(30)  Fernspring Drive. On both sides of Fernspring Drive from Via Sonoma Trail to Lake Forest Drive. 
(31)  Park Valley Drive. 
a.  On the north side of Park Valley Drive from Wyoming Springs Drive to Oakwood Boulevard; and 
b.  On the south side of Park Valley Drive from Wyoming Springs Drive to 1,220 feet east of Wyoming Springs Drive. 
(32)  Hermitage Drive. On both sides of Hermitage Drive from Sam Bass Road to 200 feet north of Sam Bass Road. 
(33)  Tiger Trail from Sunrise Road to 130 feet west of Buckeye Lane. 
a.  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, or automobile, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, on both sides of Tiger Trail from Sunrise Road to 130 feet west of Buckeye Lane. 
b.  Any such vehicle or trailer parked in such prohibited area shall be a nuisance per se and shall deemed to be a traffic and public safety hazard. Any vehicle or trailer parked in violation of this section may be removed by a police officer or at his direction and retained until such time as any towing and storage fees are paid; provided, however, that the prohibited parking area shall be posted with an official sign giving notice of the prohibition and of the fact that such area is a tow away zone. 
(34)  Aten Loop. On both sides of Aten Loop from its intersection with Harrell Parkway to its intersection with Old Settlers Boulevard. 
(35)  TC Oatts Lane. On both sides of TC Oatts Lane from its intersection with Aten Loop to its intersection with Red Bud Lane. 
(36)  Whitlow Way. On both sides of Whitlow Way from its intersection with Harrell Parkway to the terminus of Whitlow Way. 
(37)  Lake Creek Drive. Lake Creek Drive from RM 620 to 115 feet south of Lakewood Lane. 
(38)  On the west side of Eagles Nest Street from University Boulevard to 300 feet south of University Boulevard. 
(39)  On the east side of Orion Street from University Boulevard to 300 feet south of University Boulevard. 
(40)  Via Sonoma Trail. On both sides of Via Sonoma Trail from 200 feet north of Gattis School Road to 1,730 feet north of Gattis School Road. 
(41)  Stone Oak Drive. On the west side of Stone Oak Drive from Upper Passage Lane to Top Rock Lane. 
(42)  Creek Ridge Boulevard. On both sides of Creek Ridge Boulevard, beginning at its intersection with A. W. Grimes Boulevard and extending easterly for 175 feet. 
(43)  Chisholm Valley Drive. On both sides of Chisholm Valley Drive from its intersection with Christopher Avenue to its intersection with Tamra Court. 
(44)  School Days Lane. On both sides of School Days Lane from Cushing Drive to 150 feet east of Cushing Drive. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1816; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. 970, 9-23-1982; Ord. No. 2243, 8-14-1986; Ord. No. 2281, 4-23-1987; Ord. No. 2347, 8-11-1988; Ord. No. 2470, 4-26-1990; Ord. No. 2571, 4-23-1992; Ord. No. G-93-09-23-9D, 9-23-1993; Ord. No. G-94-01-13-8B, 1-13-1994; Ord. No. G-94-01-13-8C, 1-13-1994; Ord. No. G-95-03-09-9D, 3-9-1995; Ord. No. G-96-03-28-12G, 3-28-1996; Ord. No. G-96-07-25-9B, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. G-96-08-08-9C, 8-8-1996; Ord. No. G-96-12-12-9A, 12-12-1996; Ord. No. G-97-03-27-10B, 3-27-1997; Ord. No. G-97-04-10-13B, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. G-97-06-26-9A, 6-26-1997; Ord. No. G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. G-99-03-11-13B1, 3-11-1999; Ord. No. G-99-04-22-9B1, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. G-01-03-22-11D1, 3-22-2001; Ord. No. G-01-09-27-14B1, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. G-02-01-24-8C1, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. G-03-02-13-12A1, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. G-03-06-12-9C2, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. G-05-02-10-11A2, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. G-05-06-23-13D1, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. G-08-06-26-9A1, § I, 6-26-2008; Ord. No. G-08-06-26-9A2, § I, 6-26-2008; Ord. No. G-09-03-26-9B1, § I, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. G-09-04-09-10C4, § I, 4-9-2009; Ord. No. G-09-05-28-11E2, §§ I-IV, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. G-11-01-27-13A2, § I, 1-27-2011; Ord. No. G-11-11-10-9D3, §§ I, II, 11-10-2011; Ord. No. 12-01-12-9A1, §§ I-III, 1-12-2012; Ord. No. G-12-04-12-10C1, § I, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2014-1237, § I, 4-10-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1753, § I, 9-25-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-4587, § I, 7-27-2017) 
Sec. 42-319. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
(a)  Two-hour limit zones. 
(1)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows: 
On Main Street from Mays Street to Sheppard Street. 
(2)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows: 
a.  On both sides of Westwood Drive. 
b.  On both sides of Lakewood Lane. 
c.  On both sides of Bonwood Drive. 
(b)  School parking zones. 
(1)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day that Robertson Elementary School is in session, upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows: 
On both sides of Bayland Drive from Provident Lane to the eastern-most access driveway of the Robertson Elementary School parking area situated adjacent to Bayland Street. 
(2)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day that Fern Bluff Elementary School is in session, on Falcon Drive from Wyoming Springs Drive to Quail Lane. 
(3)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. on any day that Old Town Elementary School is in session, on a portion of Plantation Drive (southbound) from FM 3406 to 632 feet south of FM 3406. 
(4)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. on any day that Old Town Elementary School is in session, on Plantation Cove. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1817; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. G-94-01-13-8A, 1-13-1994; Ord. No. G-95-04-13-10A, 4-13-1995; Ord. No. G-96-04-11-12C, 4-11-1996; Ord. No. G-97-11-13-9D, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. G-01-08-09-12D4, 8-9-2001; Ord. No. G-01-12-20-9B2, 12-20-2001; Ord. No. G-05-03-10-13B3, 3-10-2005; Ord. No. G-06-06-22-9D1, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. G-11-01-13-9C2, § I, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 42-320. - Lake Creek Residential Parking District. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director of planning means the Director of Planning of the City of Round Rock, Texas, or his designee. 
Lake Creek Residential Parking District means the area comprised of the following public streets and all residential lots abutting or immediately adjacent to said streets: Westwood Drive, Lakewood Lane, Bonwood Drive, Glenda Drive, Lake Creek Drive from 115 feet south of Lakewood Lane to Round Rock West Drive. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any public street in the Lake Creek Residential Parking District between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays, Monday through Friday, without displaying a valid residential parking district permit or a valid temporary visitor's permit. 
(2)  An individual commits an offense if he displays a permit issued pursuant to this section on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if he falsely represents himself as being eligible for a residential parking district permit or a temporary visitor's permit, submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a permit. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any vehicle parked in a residential parking district, during times when parking is restricted and without displaying a valid permit issued under this section, may be issued a citation or be subject to immediate towing and impoundment. 
(2)  A person who commits any other violation against the provisions of this section is subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-9. 
(d)  Exceptions. The terms of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Motor vehicles that are parked in a driveway, parking lot, or other authorized and appropriate area designed for parking motor vehicles; 
(2)  The residential parking district shall not be effective between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays that Round Rock High School is not in session; 
(3)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily while the operator or a passenger is making deliveries to a location within the residential parking district; 
(4)  Motor vehicles that are used in transporting individuals, equipment, and goods necessary for making improvements and repairs, providing labor, and performing other services at a location within the residential parking district; 
(5)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily for loading or unloading passengers or goods; or 
(6)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily for necessary emergency repairs. 
(e)  Residential parking district permits. 
(1)  All residents of a designated residential parking district who register with the director of the department of planning, or his designee, shall be issued, free of charge, one permit for each motor vehicle owned and kept by the resident at the premises located within the residential parking district. The residential parking permits must be placed in the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Each permit issued to a resident will be assigned to a specific vehicle, and will only be valid for the particular vehicle to which it is assigned. No permit may be transferred to any other individual or used for a different vehicle other than the one to which the permit is assigned. 
(3)  All residents applying for a permit or permits must use the application developed by the director of planning. 
(4)  The director shall, upon receiving a completed application, issue a residential parking district permit to any individual that is eligible for the permit. An individual is eligible to obtain a permit if the individual: 
a.  Owns a motor vehicle; 
b.  Resides within the residential parking district; and 
c.  Has no outstanding parking citations issued by the city. 
(5)  The individual's application for a permit must contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and Texas Driver's License number of the owner of the motor vehicle to be parked in the residential parking district; 
b.  The make, model, registration and license plate number of the motor vehicle to be parked in the residential parking district; and 
c.  Any other information the director of planning determines to be necessary to the enforcement and administration of the terms of this section. 
(6)  The applicant for a permit must submit the following information at the time application is made for a residential parking district permit: 
a.  A valid Texas Motor Vehicle Registration for the motor vehicle which is the subject of the permit application; and 
b.  A valid Texas Driver's License of the applicant showing the applicant's current home address, or a residential utility bill acceptable to the director of planning showing the applicant's home address. 
(f)  Temporary visitor parking district permits. 
(1)  Two temporary visitor permits will automatically be issued, free of charge, for each residential lot situated within the Lake Creek Residential Parking District. These permits will be valid on any date during the year. 
(2)  Additional temporary visitor permits shall be issued, free of charge, for persons visiting in the area, at the written request of any person living within the Lake Creek Residential Parking District. These temporary visitor permits shall be valid only on the dates noted on the permit. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  When a motor vehicle is parked in a residential parking district during times when parking is restricted, the permit must be conspicuously displayed on the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  A permit issued pursuant to this section, and properly displayed, authorizes the permittee's vehicle to be parked in a residential parking district when otherwise prohibited by this section. A permit does not authorize the permittee's motor vehicle to be parked in a manner or location that is prohibited or otherwise governed by regulations, ordinances, statutes, or laws other than provided for in this section. 
(3)  A permit is not transferable from one motor vehicle to another. 
(4)  A lost or stolen permit may be replaced. The permittee must submit a signed affidavit stating that the permit was lost or stolen and not transferred to another vehicle, nor given or conveyed to another individual. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1818; Ord. No. G-95-07-27-10B, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. G-96-07-25-9A, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. G-97-10-09-9D, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. G-11-01-27-13A3, § I, 1-27-2011) 
Sec. 42-321. - Plantation Cove Residential Parking District. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director of planning means the Director of Planning of the City of Round Rock, Texas, or his designee. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Plantation Cove Residential Parking District means the area comprised of Plantation Cove and all residential lots abutting or immediately adjacent to Plantation Cove. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any public street in the Plantation Cove Residential Parking District between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays, Monday through Friday, without displaying a valid residential parking district permit or a valid temporary visitor's permit. 
(2)  An individual commits an offense if he displays a permit issued pursuant to this section on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if he falsely represents himself as being eligible for a residential parking district permit or a temporary visitor' permit, submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a permit. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any vehicle parked in a residential parking district, during times when parking is restricted and without displaying a valid permit issued under this section, may be issued a citation or be subject to immediate towing and impoundment. 
(2)  A person who commits any other violation against the provisions of this section is subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-9. 
(d)  Defenses. The terms of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Motor vehicles that are parked in a driveway, parking lot, or other authorized and appropriate area designed for parking motor vehicles; 
(2)  The residential parking district shall not be effective on weekdays that Old Town Elementary School is not in session; 
(3)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily while the operator or a passenger is making deliveries to a location within the residential parking district; 
(4)  Motor vehicles that are used in transporting individuals, equipment, and goods necessary for making improvements and repairs, providing labor, and performing other services at a location within the residential parking district; 
(5)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily for loading or unloading passengers or goods; or 
(6)  Motor vehicles that are stopped temporarily for necessary emergency repairs. 
(e)  Residential parking district permits. 
(1)  All residents of a designated residential parking district who register with the director of the department of planning, or his designee, shall be issued, free of charge, one permit for each motor vehicle owned and kept by the resident at the premises located within the residential parking district. The residential parking permits must be placed in the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Each permit issued to a resident will be assigned to a specific vehicle, and will only be valid for the particular vehicle to which it is assigned. No permit may be transferred to any other individual or used for a different vehicle other than the one to which the permit is assigned. 
(3)  All residents applying for a permit or permits must use the application developed by the director of planning. 
(4)  The director shall, upon receiving a completed application, issue a residential parking district permit to any individual that is eligible for the permit. An individual is eligible to obtain a permit if the individual: 
a.  Owns a motor vehicle; 
b.  Resides within the residential parking district; and 
c.  Has no outstanding parking citations issued by the city. 
(5)  The individual's application for a permit must contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and Texas driver's license number of the owner of the motor vehicle to be parked in the residential parking district; 
b.  The make, model, registration, and license plate number of the motor vehicle to be parked in the residential parking district; and 
c.  Any other information the director of planning determines to be necessary to the enforcement and administration of the terms of this section. 
(6)  The applicant for a permit must submit the following information at the time application is made for a residential parking district permit: 
a.  A valid Texas motor vehicle registration for the motor vehicle which is the subject of the permit application; and 
b.  A valid Texas driver's license of the applicant showing the applicant's current home address, or a residential utility bill acceptable to the director of planning showing the applicant's home address. 
(f)  Temporary visitor parking district permits. 
(1)  Two temporary visitor permits will automatically be issued, free of charge, for each residential lot situated within the Plantation Cove Residential Parking District. These permits will be valid on any date during the year. 
(2)  Additional temporary visitor permits shall be issued, free of charge, for persons visiting in the area, at the written request of any person living within the Plantation Cove Residential Parking District. These temporary visitor permits shall be valid only on the dates noted on the permit. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  When a motor vehicle is parked in a residential parking district during times when parking is restricted, the permit must be conspicuously displayed on the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  A permit issued pursuant to this section, and properly displayed, authorizes the permittee's vehicle to be parked in a residential parking district when otherwise prohibited by this section. A permit does not authorize the permittee's motor vehicle to be parked in a manner or location that is prohibited or otherwise governed by regulations, ordinances, statutes, or laws other than provided for in this section. 
(3)  A permit is not transferable from one motor vehicle to another. 
(4)  A lost or stolen permit may be replaced. The permittee must submit a signed affidavit stating that the permit was lost or stolen and not transferred to another vehicle, nor given or conveyed to another individual. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1819; Ord. No. G-07-02-08-10A1, 2-8-2007) 
Sec. 42-322. - Vehicle parking on residential lots. 
(a)  Title, purpose and scope. 
(1)  It is hereby declared that the purpose and intent of this section is to regulate, control and limit public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances as herein set forth that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public, and that adversely affect community appearance, orderly development and property values. 
(2)  This section shall apply to all residential lots located in the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, this section shall not apply to lots prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  If any other ordinance of the city conflicts with this section and the standards and regulations established herein, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Corner lot means a residential lot located at the intersection of two streets. 
Design and Construction Standards Transportation Criteria Manual or DACS means the Design and Construction Standards Transportation Criteria Manual, as adopted or amended from time to time by the city council. 
Driveway means a private, continuous driving surface providing ingress and egress for vehicles from an garage or carport to an adjacent street, alley or other improved public way, which may also serve as an off-street parking area. 
Improved driveway means a driveway consisting of a continuous improved surface constructed in accordance with the DACS. 
Improved surface means a continuous area used for the movement or parking of vehicles that is constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick, pavers or other equivalent materials approved by the city engineer prior to installation, but not including gravel or crushed stone. 
Park means to stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for any period of time. 
Rear yard means the area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building wall. For a corner lot, the rear yard includes that portion of the residential lot which is the deepest area of the lot lying between the building wall and the property line and is not contained within the street yard. 
Residential lot means any lot in a residential zoning district, as identified in section 46-132, with the exception of the multifamily zoning districts. 
Side yard means the area between a side lot line and the side building wall, and extending from the front building wall to the rear building wall. 
Street yard means the area of a lot which lies between the property line adjacent to street or right-of-way and the building wall, and as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street. 
Unimproved driveway means a private continuous surface providing ingress and egress for vehicles from an off-street parking area, garage or carport to an adjacent street, alley or other improved public way that is constructed with gravel, crushed stone, or other equivalent material approved by the city engineer. 
Unimproved parking area means any portion of a residential lot that is used for off-street parking of vehicles that is constructed with gravel, crushed stone, or other equivalent material approved by the city engineer. 
Unimproved surface means any part of a residential lot that is not either an improved surface, unimproved driveway, or unimproved parking area. 
Vehicle means any and every motorized or non-motorized device in, upon or by which a person, persons, or property is or may be transported, drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway and shall include but is not limited to any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motor house, farm machinery, motorcycle, scooter, moped, all-terrain vehicle, boat, boat trailer, aircraft, golf cart, go-cart, trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, camper, camper shell, wheeled towing frame, semi-tractor, semi-tractor trailer, truck bed mounted on a chassis, mobile home, and recreational vehicle. This definition does not include nonmotorized bicycles, small engine lawnmowers and devices of similar scale. 
(c)  General vehicle parking regulations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of any residential lot or the owner of a vehicle to park or to permit the parking of a vehicle on an unimproved surface, unimproved driveway, or unimproved parking area in the street yard or side yard of any residential lot. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of any residential lot or owner of any vehicle to park or permit the parking of any vehicle in the rear yard unless said vehicle is screened in the manner stated in subsection 46-196(b)(3). The aforesaid screening shall not be required in the rear yard for vehicles parked on an improved driveway. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution if a vehicle is parked on an unimproved surface if site construction, building improvements, or landscaping activities require parking of said vehicle on said unimproved surface. The vehicle shall be removed from the unimproved surface within 72 hours of the completion of the portion of the project requiring said parking. 
(4)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for the parking of vehicles at an existing residence on an unimproved driveway or unimproved parking area where such unimproved driveway or unimproved parking area existed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived; however, the existing unimproved driveway or unimproved parking area shall be maintained in a fashion that will support vehicular traffic, not allow grass, weeds or other vegetation to grow in the unimproved driveway or unimproved parking area. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalty for violation of this section. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section or any amendment thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Illegally parked vehicles declared a public nuisance; duty of property owners; unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
(1)  Illegally parked vehicles are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city and state by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement as set out hereunder. 
(2)  The owner or occupant of any real property within the city shall keep such property free of and shall not permit or suffer the presence of illegally parked vehicles on such property. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any illegally parked vehicle by the chief of police or his delegate pursuant to this subsection. 
(f)  Visible notice to abate nuisance. 
(1)  At the time an illegally parked vehicle is located by the chief of police on either occupied or unoccupied private property, a visible notice, brightly colored but of a color different from that used for notices of abandoned and junked vehicles, shall be securely affixed to such vehicle. Such notice shall: 
a.  State that the vehicle is a public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within 72 hours from the date on such notice. 
b.  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle is an illegally parked vehicle as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of said 72-hour period. 
c.  Shall state that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said 72-hour period, it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is an illegally parked vehicle as defined under this section. 
d.  Shall state the date and hour that it was affixed. 
(2)  Affixing the notice set out herein shall not be a condition or requirement precedent to any proceeding or official action to abate such public nuisance and such proceeding or action shall not be rendered void or voidable nor in any way affected by failure to affix the visible notice prescribed herein. 
(g)  Public hearing; finding and orders of judge. 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which an illegally parked vehicle is located may, within 72 hours after service of a notice to abate said nuisance, request of the clerk of the municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of the bond, that a date and a time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle is an illegally parked vehicle. 
(2)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before such court, as set out herein, and shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the vehicle is an illegally parked vehicle and in violation of this section. At the hearing, the vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be illegally parked. Such hearing shall not be criminal in nature and shall be as summary as due process and orderly procedure allows. Rules of evidence as in civil suits shall be followed. Upon finding that such vehicle is in violation of this section, the judge of such court shall order such defendant to remove and abate such nuisance within 72 hours, the same being a reasonable time. If the defendant shall fail and refuse, within such 72 hours, to abate or remove the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order directing the chief of police to have the same removed, and the chief of police or his delegate shall take possession of such illegally parked vehicle and remove it from the premises. Such order shall include a description of the vehicle, and the current identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(3)  Notice of any hearing set under this section shall be delivered to the chief of police. 
(h)  Notice to Texas Department of Transportation. Notice shall be given to the Texas Department of Transportation that an illegally parked vehicle has been impounded within five days after the removal of the illegally parked vehicle as provided in this section, identifying the vehicle or part thereof impounded. 
(i)  Disposition of impounded illegally parked vehicles. The chief of police or his delegate shall dispose of all impounded illegally parked vehicles in such manner as the city manager may designate, consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrap yard or demolisher. 
(Ord. No. G-07-07-27-14B4, § I, 9-27-2007; Ord. No. G-12-10-11-H4, § XV, 10-11-2012) 
Sec. 42-323. - Parking adjacent to fire stations. 
    The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of the entrance for the following fire stations is prohibited: Fire Stations 1, 2, 3 and 7. 
(Ord. No. G-09-03-26-9B1, § II(9.1821), 3-26-2009) 
Secs. 42-324-42-349. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PLANTS AND OBJECTS INTERFERING WITH TRAFFIC 

Sec. 42-350. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curb line means the boundary of that portion of any street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Object means every sign, advertisement, container, or display item of any type or form, portable or fixed, which is not authorized by state law or city ordinance. 
    Plant means any hedge, bush, shrub, vine, palm, or other vegetation, except trees. 
    Property line means the boundary line of any street, which line marks the division between the street area and the property abutting upon the same. 
    Street means the entire width of every way or place of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, riders of animals, and drivers of vehicles while using any street for the purpose of travel. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1901) 
Sec. 42-351. - Plants higher than three feet prohibited near street corners. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any plant having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at points 35 feet from the street corner intersection of the lines. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1902) 
Sec. 42-352. - Plants higher than three feet prohibited in sidewalk areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any corner lot in the city to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained, any plant having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that area which lies between the property lines of such corner lot and the curb lines of streets abutting such property lines and which area extends for a distance of 50 feet back from the intersection of the curb lines of such abutting streets. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1903) 
Sec. 42-353. - Placing or maintaining in sidewalk areas so as to prohibit free passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any lot in the city to place, maintain, or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tree, plant, or object, on or in the area between the property line thereof and the curb line of any street abutting such property line in such a way as to obstruct the free passage on and use of that area by the public. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1904) 
Sec. 42-354. - Placing near fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any property in the city to place, maintain, or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained thereon, any tree, plant, or object within five feet of any fire hydrant in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1905) 
Sec. 42-355. - Minimum clearance of trees in sidewalk areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the city to maintain or permit limbs of trees growing thereon to overhang or grow above the area between his property line and the curb line of any abutting street, unless such limbs and all branches and foliage thereon are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at the nearest curb line. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1906) 
Sec. 42-356. - Correction of violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any property upon which any violation of sections 42-351 through 42-355 exists to correct such condition as constitutes a violation of these subsections within ten days after serving such notice, and, if such condition is not corrected or remedied or caused to be corrected or remedied by such person by the end of such ten days' notice, the director of planning is hereby authorized and directed to cause the tree or plant or part thereof constituting such violation to be so trimmed, pruned, or removed as to eliminate the prohibited condition. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1907) 
Sec. 42-357. - Authority of director of planning to trim, remove, etc. 
    The director of planning is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, any trees or plants found between the opposite curb lines in any street in the city and to trim branches, limbs, or foliage of any tree or plant which overhangs or grows above the area which lies between the opposite curb lines of any street, so as to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at the curb line and so as to be graduated toward the center of the street to a clearance of 12 feet above the street level at the center of the street. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1908) 
Sec. 42-358. - Certain fences prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or replace, or cause to be constructed or replaced, any fence having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at points 35 feet from the street corner intersection of the property lines. 
(Code 1995, § 9.1909; Ord. No. 755, 8-14-1980; Ord. No. 1193, 4-24-1986) 
Secs. 42-359-42-389. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MOTOR VEHICLE IDLING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Idling of motor vehicle while using sleeper berth, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.0191. 

Sec. 42-390. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial passenger transportation means a mode of transportation provided by a bus or motorcoach designed to accommodate more than ten passengers, including the operator, for compensation, and that is powered by a primary propulsion engine and does not include railroad, light rail or taxicabs. 
    Idle means the operation of an engine in the operating mode where the engine is not engaged in gear, where the engine operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer for when the accelerator is fully released, and there is no load on the engine. 
    Mechanical operations means the use of electrical tools or equipment in construction, maintenance, or repair of facilities. 
    Passenger transit operations means regional mode of public transportation that is funded through a portion of sales tax for such region being served. 
    Primary propulsion engine means a gasoline or diesel-fueled internal combustion engine attached to a motor vehicle that provides the power to propel the motor vehicle into motion and maintain motion. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2301) 
Sec. 42-391. - Applicability. 
    This article applies during the period from April 1 through October 31 of each year. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2302) 
Sec. 42-392. - Idling prohibited. 
    No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle to idle for more than five consecutive minutes when the motor vehicle is not in motion. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2303) 
Sec. 42-393. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  The following constitute affirmative defenses to prosecution under this division: 
(1)  The motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000 pounds or less; 
(2)  The motor vehicle is/was forced to remain motionless because of traffic conditions over which the operator has no control; 
(3)  The motor vehicle is being used by the United States military, national guard, or reserve forces, or as an emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle; 
(4)  The primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle provides a power source necessary for mechanical operation, not including propulsion and passenger compartment heating or air conditioning; 
(5)  The primary propulsion engine of the motor vehicle is being operated for maintenance or diagnostic purposes; 
(6)  The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle is being operated solely to defrost a windshield; 
(7)  The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle is being used to supply heat or air conditioning necessary for passenger comfort/safety in those motor vehicles intended for commercial or public passenger transportation, or passenger transit operations, in which case idling up to a maximum of 30 minutes is allowed; 
(8)  The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle is used for passenger transit operations, in which case idling up to a maximum of 30 minutes is allowed; 
(9)  The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle is being used to provide air conditioning or heating necessary for employee health or safety while the employee is using the vehicle to perform an essential job function related to roadway construction or maintenance; 
(10)  The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle is being used as airport ground support equipment; 
(11)  The owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to a person that operates the vehicle and is not employed by the owner. 
(b)  Burden of proof. For any violation of this division, the person seeking to establish an affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of this idling ordinance was caused by one of the affirmative defenses allowed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 9.2304; Ord. No. G-08-10-09-7B1, § I, 10-9-2008) 
Secs. 42-394-42-414. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-415. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires. Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires. 
    Department means the police department of the City of Round Rock or its designated agent. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle means a self propelled device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The term does not include: a device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; manufactured housing as defined by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1201; an electric bicycle; or an electric personal assistive mobility device as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.201. 
    Notice of violation means a notice mailed to a person identified as having violated this division and that complies with the content requirements set out in section 42-417(d). A notice of violation is not a criminal citation. 
    Owner or registered owner means the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
    Photographic traffic signal enforcement system means a system that consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal and that is capable of producing at least two recorded images of the license plate attached to the front or rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic control signal. 
    Recorded image means a photographic or digital image that depicts the front or rear of a motor vehicle. 
    Traffic control signal means a manual, electric, or mechanical device that alternately directs traffic to stop and to proceed. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10F1, § I(9.2401), 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-08-08-14-7A1, § I(9.2401), 8-14-2008) 
Sec. 42-416. - Violation. 
(a)  The city has found and determined that the creation of dangerous intersections by motorists running red lights is a serious public safety concern. When a vehicle proceeds into an intersection when the traffic control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal, the public safety of vehicle operators and pedestrians alike is implicated, the efficiency of traffic control and traffic flow efforts are reduced, and the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond at the expense of the taxpayers is increased. 
(b)  A violation under this section occurs when a motor vehicle, facing only a steady red signal displayed by an electrically operated traffic control signal, fails to stop at a clearly marked stop line and, if not turning, to remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. In absence of a stop line, the vehicle must stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. After stopping, standing until the intersection may be entered safely, and yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully in an adjacent crosswalk and other traffic lawfully using the intersection, the motor vehicle may turn right or may turn left if the intersecting streets are both one-way streets and a left turn is permissible. The owner of the motor vehicle is liable for a violation of this division unless the presumption established under section 42-418(f)(3) is rebutted as provided therein or an affirmative defense listed in section 42-418(h) is proved. 
(c)  The penalty for committing a violation under this division is a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty will be assessed. The imposition of a civil penalty under this division is not a conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(d)  The civil penalty for which the owner is liable is $75.00. 
(e)  A person who fails to pay a civil penalty within the time set forth in this division is additionally liable for a late-payment fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10F1, § I(9.2402), 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-08-08-14-7A1, § I(9.2402), 8-14-2008) 
Sec. 42-417. - Administration and enforcement of photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this division. 
(b)  All enforcement records, including a recorded image resulting from a photographic traffic enforcement system, are confidential to the extent allowed by state law. 
(c)  To impose a civil penalty under this division, the department, not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred, must mail or cause to be mailed a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty. The notice of violation shall be mailed to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the state department of transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the state department of transportation. 
(d)  A notice of violation must contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image of the violation limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
(8)  The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty and a statement that the person incurs a late penalty if the penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
(9)  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; 
(10)  A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty; 
(11)  Information explaining to the person: 
a.  The right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in an administrative adjudication hearing; 
b.  The manner and time in which the civil penalty may be contested; 
c.  Failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the person's right to appeal the imposition of the penalty; 
d.  Failure to appear at a requested administrative hearing is an admission of liability and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 42-419; 
e.  Failure to pay the civil penalty in a timely manner may result in the imposition of a late payment fee of $25.00. 
(12)  A statement that informs the person of the presumption, the evidence required to rebut the presumption and the duty imposed on persons who are in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles as contained in section 42-418(f)(3); 
(13)  A statement that if the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the owner, an arrest warrant may not be issued for the owner and the imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the owner's driving records; and 
(14)  Any other information the department deems necessary. 
(e)  No civil penalty may be imposed if the department determines that the motorist was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d) for the same incident recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(f)  No notice of violation may be issued if the quality of the image captured by the system is so inferior as to prohibit positive identification of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation. 
(g)  A notice of violation under this division is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice was mailed. All notices will be mailed U.S. First Class Mail. 
(h)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may issue a warning notice to the owner. 
(i)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty and any other fees or penalties assessed under this division if the person liable fails to remit payment in a timely manner. 
(j)  Failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the person's right to appeal the imposition of the penalty. 
(k)  When a payment of the civil penalty and any late payment fee or other costs is made by a credit or debit card, an additional cost in the amount of two percent of the total payment shall be assessed and must be paid. By submitting such a payment, the person consents to the cost being assessed. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10F1, § I(9.2403), 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-08-08-14-7A1, § I(9.2403), 8-14-2008) 
Sec. 42-418. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this division may contest the imposition of a civil penalty by filing a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing within the time provided by the notice. The time provided by the notice may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(b)  The department will notify the person of the date and time of the hearing within ten business days of the receipt of the request for an administrative hearing. 
(c)  The administrative adjudication hearing will be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents to the extent necessary to fulfill the obligations of that office. 
(d)  The civil penalty may not be assessed if: 
(1)  After the hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability; or 
(2)  Within the time prescribed in the notice of violation, the person against whom the civil penalty is to be assessed submits the proof described in subsection (f)(3) of this section. 
(e)  A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative adjudication and fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing must pay the civil penalty and the costs within ten days after the date of the hearing. 
(f)  Standard of proof and certain presumptions. 
(1)  The standard of proof at the administrative adjudication hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(2)  The state department of transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record and is admissible as evidence in the hearing. 
(3)  It is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person. If, at the time of the violation, the motor vehicle was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, this presumption is rebutted by evidence establishing the vehicle was at that time: 
a.  Being test driven by another person who is not an employee of the owner; 
b.  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or 
c.  Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation. 
The presentation of such evidence must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under this division, or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail to the city at the address specified in the notice of violation. 
If this presumption is rebutted by the evidence submitted above, a civil penalty may not be imposed on the owner of the vehicle if the owner is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or the person named in the notice of violation if the vehicle was not owned by that person at the time of the violation. 
Additionally, if, at the time of the violation, the motor vehicle was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the city the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide this information not later than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation and the city may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(4)  The reliability of the photographic traffic control signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city, or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(5)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the applicable recorded image is: 
a.  Admissible in a proceeding under this division; and 
b.  Evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything else in this division, a person who fails to timely pay the amount of a civil penalty or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if: 
(1)  The person submits a written request for the hearing to the designated hearing officer, accompanied by an affidavit that attests to the date on which the person received the notice of violation; and 
(2)  The written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within the same number of days after the date the person received the notice of violation as specified under section 42-417(d)(8). 
(h)  Affirmative defenses. The following, if proved by a preponderance of the evidence, are affirmative defenses to liability under this division: 
(1)  The traffic control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently visible to an ordinarily observant person. 
(2)  The operator of the vehicle was acting in compliance with a lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(3)  The operator of the vehicle was part of a funeral procession. 
(4)  The operator of the vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle. 
(5)  The vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 546 and the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter. 
(6)  The vehicle was stolen and was being operated by someone other than the owner of the vehicle and without the owner's effective consent and the owner has filed an official report of the incident with the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(7)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was stolen and being displayed on a vehicle other than the vehicle for which it was issued and the owner has filed an official report of the incident with the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(8)  The vehicle was leased or rented under a written contract and the leasing or rental company provides the affidavit, testimony or declaration as required by subsection (f)(3) of this section. 
(9)  The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation and the person who received the notice provides the affidavit, testimony or declaration as required by subsection (f)(3) of this section. 
(10)  The owner was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d) recorded by the photographic traffic enforcement system. 
(i)  Finding of hearing officer. 
(1)  At the conclusion of the administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer. 
(2)  A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is liable. If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(3)  A finding of liability or a finding of no liability entered under this section may: 
a.  Be filed with the city secretary; and 
b.  Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques. 
(j)  Failure to appear at a requested administrative hearing is an admission of liability and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 42-419. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10F1, § I(9.2405), 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-08-08-14-7A1, § I(9.2404), 8-14-2008) 
Sec. 42-419. - Appeals from administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal that determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed with the Round Rock Municipal Court. 
(b)  The petition must be: 
(1)  Filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty; and 
(2)  Accompanied by payment of the costs required by law for the court. 
(c)  The court clerk shall schedule or cause to be scheduled a hearing and notify or caused to be notified the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal. 
(e)  An appeal under this division shall be determined by the court by trial de novo. 
(f)  The provisions of sections 42-418(f) and 42-418(h) apply to the hearing. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the judge shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil hearing. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the judge. 
(h)  A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is liable. If the judge enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(i)  A person who is found liable after the hearing must pay the civil penalty and the costs within ten days after the date of the hearing at the address specified in the notice of violation. 
(j)  A person who files an appeal petition and fails to appear at the scheduled time and place of the hearing thereby admits liability and must pay the civil penalty specified by the judge within ten days after the scheduled date of the hearing at the address specified in the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-13-10F1, § I(9.2406), 9-13-2007; Ord. No. G-08-08-14-7A1, § I(9.2405), 8-14-2008) 
Secs. 42-420-42-436. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REPAIR OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS 

Sec. 42-437. - Prohibition. 
    No person shall repair a motor vehicle on a public street located within the city limits unless such repair is for the sole purpose of immediately removing such vehicle from the street. The presence of a vehicle under repair on a public street is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 6.701) 
Sec. 42-438. - Notice to remove. 
    If any nuisance exists in accordance with section 42-437, a notice in writing shall be placed on the vehicle under repair, notifying the owner of said vehicle of the existence of said nuisance and requesting its removal within 24 hours after the posting of said notice. Said notice shall contain the request for removal within the above-specified time and said notice shall advise that upon failure to remove, the city shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal and subsequent storage to be levied against the owner of said vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 6.702) 
Sec. 42-439. - Removal of vehicle. 
    If the nuisance described in section 42-437 has not been remedied in a timely fashion, the city shall have the right to remove the vehicle from the street. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the city to remove said vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 6.703) 
Sec. 42-440. - Notice of removal. 
    Within 48 hours of the removal of said vehicle, the city shall give notice to the registered owner of said vehicle, if known, that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of section 42-437. The notice shall give the location where the vehicle is stored and the costs incurred by the city for removal. 
(Code 1995, § 6.704) 
Sec. 42-441. - Disposition of vehicles. 
    Upon removing a vehicle under the provision of section 42-439, the chief of police shall after ten days cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle is appraised at $75.00 or less, the chief of police shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. The chief of police, after complying with the above, may summarily dispose of the vehicle. If the vehicle is appraised at over $75.00, the chief of police shall give notice to the last known registered owner of the vehicle, and shall give public notice of said public sale not less than twenty days before the date of the proposed sale. 
(Code 1995, § 6.705) 
Sec. 42-442. - Public sale. 
    The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which is to be given to the purchaser, and a copy thereof to be filed with the city secretary. 
(Code 1995, § 6.706) 
Sec. 42-443. - Redemption of impounded vehicle. 
    The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this article may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the city of such sum as the chief of police may determine and fix for the actual and reasonable expense of removal and storage and any other reasonable expenses incurred by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 6.707) 
Secs. 42-444-42-469. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, adopted Aug. 11, 2016, amended art. IV in its entirety, with the exception of §§ 42-470 and 42-471 which remain as codified, to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 42-472-42-493, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1995; and Ord. No. G-03-08-28-9A1, adopted Aug. 28, 2003. 
State Law reference- Texas Towing Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2308; tow truck regulation by political subdivision, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2308.201; vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303; automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 396; accidents and accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 550; authority of governor to have wreckage removed in disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.023; theft of wrecked motor vehicle, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.03; motor carrier registration, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 643; salvage vehicle dealers, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2302. 

Sec. 42-470. - Purpose. 
    The proper and safe functioning of the wrecker business has a critical impact on the safety and welfare of the public since it involves the use of the public streets of the city, often in circumstances necessitating prompt removal of dangerous obstructions to traffic. Therefore, the privilege of any person to engage in the wrecker business in the city shall be subject to regulation in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1995, § 4.301) 
Sec. 42-471. - Compliance with state law. 
    Any person operating a tow truck and/or wrecker shall comply with all applicable state laws. A failure to comply with applicable state laws is a violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 4.302) 
Sec. 42-472. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident or collision means any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled. 
    Chief of police means the Chief of Police for the City of Round Rock or the person designated by him to act in his stead for the purposes of this article. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. This does not include motor-assisted bicycles as defined by the laws of the state. 
    Owner means any person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle, or has the legal right of possession thereof. This does not include any person who has gained possession of a motor vehicle only as a result of wrecker services performed. 
    Repossession means a tow made by or on behalf of a lien holder taking possession of collateral. 
    Tow truck means a motor vehicle, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including but not limited to, motor vehicles, but not including devices moved only by human power, or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
    Wrecker shall have the same definition as tow truck. 
    Wrecker business means the business of towing vehicles not belonging to the wrecker company on a public street within the incorporated limits of the city for compensation, or with the expectation of compensation, including but not limited to, compensation for towing, storage and repair. It does not include towing a vehicle to a point outside the city when the owner requests that it be towed to a point outside the city, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
    Wrecker company means any person engaged in the wrecker business. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-473. - Procedures for notifying wrecker services. 
    In any circumstance in which a vehicle or other object is so located on a public street as to constitute a hazard or obstacle, or to interfere with traffic, or in the event a stolen vehicle is found or in any other circumstance in which a police officer in the course of his duty directs the removal of a vehicle from or to any location, any police officer may require its removal at the owner's expense, by any practicable means, including but not limited to, use of a wrecker selected by the owner, or failing that, selected at the police officer's discretion. If owner selects a wrecker, the wrecker must arrive to remove the vehicle within 30 minutes from the initial request. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-474. - Unlawful for police to influence selection. 
    It shall be unlawful for a police officer to directly or indirectly recommend to any person the name of any wrecker company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer, or automobile club engaged in the wrecker business; nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer or automobile club. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-475. - Parking of wrecker at the scene of a collision. 
    Whenever a wrecker arrives at the place where a motor vehicle has been disabled by an accident, the wrecker driver shall park his wrecker as close to the street curb as possible and otherwise place it in such a manner as not to interfere with traffic. The wrecker driver shall not park the wrecker within a distance of 50 feet from a wrecked or disabled vehicle, unless permitted to do so by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-476. - Wrecker drivers to obey orders of police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any wrecker arriving at the place where any accident has occurred or an abandoned vehicle is located to disobey any lawful order given them by any police officer of the city investigating such accident or to interfere in any manner with such officer in the performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-477. - Duty to remove debris. 
    It shall be the duty of each wrecker that removes a wrecked, damaged or disabled vehicle from the place where an accident has occurred to clear and remove from the street any and all fluids, debris, parts or glass accumulated as a result of the accident from the street. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-478. - Solicitation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wrecker company or its employees to solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, for wrecker business involving any vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, selling, or purchasing such vehicle. Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business or of the presence of any wrecker, whether or not certified or identified under the provisions of this article, except a wrecker called pursuant to the provisions of this article, at or near the scene or site of a collision on any public street in the city after the wreck occurs and prior to removal of all disabled or damaged vehicles shall be prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-479. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street within the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department or by a party involved in the collision; provided, however, that the prohibition of this subsection shall not be applicable when such actions are necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in a collision. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow truck in the city, unless it is equipped as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-480. - Removal of motor vehicles from private property. 
    The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle from private property under this article shall notify the city police department within 30 minutes of such removal. The information to be provided in such notification shall include: 
(1)  The date, time and location of the removal; 
(2)  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
(3)  The name of the certificate holder which performed the removal; and 
(4)  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 42-481. - Repossession of vehicles. 
    The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle for the purpose of repossessing the vehicle shall be required to do the following: 
(1)  Contact the police department prior to making such repossession; and 
(2)  Present a written notice from the lien holder requesting such repossession which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name of owner of said vehicle; 
b.  Date, time and location of the removal; 
c.  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
d.  The name of the certificate holder which is to perform the removal; and 
e.  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3671, § I, 8-11-2016) 
Secs. 42-482-42-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ROADWAY IMPACT FEES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, adopted Mar. 14, 2019, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, § 42-500, pertained to simialr subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. G-11-06-09-9A1, § 1, adopted June 9, 2011. 

Sec. 42-500. - Short title. 
    This article V shall be known and cited as the Round Rock Roadway Impact Fees. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-501. - Purpose. 
    This article V is intended to ensure the provision of adequate roadway facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-502. - Authority. 
    This article V is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395 and the city Charter. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize all powers and procedures authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, or other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this article. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-503. - Definitions. 
    Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article. 
    Capital improvement means a roadway facility with a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city (including the city's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system). "Capital improvement" includes a newly constructed roadway facility or the expansion of an existing roadway facility necessary to serve new development. 
    City means the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    Credit means an amount equal to: 
(1)  That portion of ad valorem tax revenues generated by new service units during the program period that is used for the payment of improvements, including the payment of debt, that are included in the capital improvements plan; or 
(2)  In the alternative, a credit equal to 50 percent of the total projected cost of implementing the roadway improvements plan. 
(Credit is not to be confused with offset which is defined below.) 
    Development unit(s) is the expression of the size of each land use planned within a particular development and is used to compute the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application. 
    Final plat approval means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and the plat has been released for filing with the county. This term applies to both original plats and replats. 
    Final plat recordation means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions precedent to recording an approved final plat in the county, including the final completion of and acceptance by the city of any infrastructure or other improvements required by the subdivision ordinance or any other ordinance and the plat is filed for record with the county clerk's office. 
    Land use assumptions means and includes a description of the service areas and the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, in each service area over a ten-year period upon which the roadway improvements plan is based. The land use assumptions are set out in the most recently updated land use assumptions for roadway impact fees adopted by resolution of the city council as amended from time to time. 
    Land use vehicle-mile equivalency tables or LUVMET are tables set forth in subsection 42-505(c) that provide the standardized measure of consumption or use of roadway facilities attributable to a new development based on the land use category of the development and historical data and trends applicable to the city during the previous ten years. The LUVMET recognizes and expresses the magnitude of the transportation demand created by different land use categories within a particular development and allow different uses of land to more accurately bear the cost and expense of the impacts generated by such uses. The LUVMET expresses the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application as "vehicle miles (per development unit)." 
    Maximum assessible roadway impact fees mean the fees set out in Schedule 42-505(a). 
    New development means a project involving the subdivision of land and/or the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements, measured by an increase in the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with the county of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision ordinance or the issuance of a building permit. 
    Offset or offsets means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of a system facility agreed to or required by the city as a condition of development approval, pursuant to rules herein established or pursuant to city council-approved administrative guidelines which value shall be credited on an actual cost basis against roadway facilities impact fees otherwise due from the development. (Offset is not to be confused with "credit", which is defined above.) 
    Recoup means to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously installed or caused to be installed. 
    Roadway means any freeway, expressway or arterial or collector streets or roads designated in the city's adopted master thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. The term includes the city's share of costs for roadways designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system. 
    Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting or curbs. "Roadway facility" also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway officially enumerated in the federal or state highway system. "Roadway facility" includes the city's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system, including local matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the establishment of curbs, gutters, drainage appurtenances, and rights-of-way. "Roadway facility" excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
    Roadway impact fee means a charge or assessment imposed by the city, as set forth in subsection 42-505(b), against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to the new development. "Impact fees" or "roadway impact fees" do not include road escrow payments for site-related facilities imposed under facility agreements in existence on the 1st day of January, 2020. The term also does not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of drainage facilities, streets, sidewalks, or curbs if the dedication or construction is required by the subdivision ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to the new development. 
    Roadway improvements plan identifies the capital improvements or facility expansions and associated costs for each roadway service area that are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development within the service area, for a period not to exceed ten years, which capital improvements are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of roadway impact fees pursuant to this article. The roadway improvements plan and land use assumptions were adopted by resolution of the city council, and may be amended from time to time. 
    Roadway service area means the geographic area(s) within the city's corporate limits, which do not exceed six miles and within which geographic area(s) roadway impact fees for capital improvements will be collected for new development occurring within such area, and within which fees so collected will be expended for those capital improvements identified in the roadway improvements plan to be located within the roadway service area. "Roadway service area" does not include any land outside the city limits. 
    Service unit means one vehicle mile of travel in the afternoon peak hour of traffic and is also referred to as a "vehicle mile." 
    Service unit equivalent means the amount of capacity created by contribution of a capital improvement on behalf of a new development, expressed in vehicle miles. 
    Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is constructed for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway facilities to serve the new development and which is not included in the roadway improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under the subdivision, and/or other applicable, regulations. 
    System facility means a capital improvement which is designated in the roadway improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. A system facility may include a capital improvement which is located off-site, within, or on and along the perimeter of the new development site. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-504. - Service areas and applicability. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into three roadway service areas as shown on the official roadway service area map. The official roadway service area map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The official roadway service area map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk and bearing the seal of the City of Round Rock under the following words: 
  "This is to certify that this is the official roadway service area map referred to in section 42-504 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2010." 
(b)  The provisions of this article apply to all new development within the service areas described above. The provisions of this article apply uniformly within each roadway service area. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-505. - Roadway impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  The maximum assessable roadway impact fee per service unit for each roadway service area shall be as set forth in the table below: 
Schedule 42-505 (a)
MAXIMUM ASSESSABLE ROADWAY IMPACT FEE PER SERVICE UNIT 
Service Area A $2,678.00 Service Area B $2,933.00 Service Area C $2,511.00  
(b)  The roadway impact fee per service unit for all service areas shall be adopted, assessed, and collected in three phases as set forth below: 
(1)  Phase 1: Effective January 1, 2020: 
a.  For all property with a recorded plat dated before January 1, 2020, the roadway impact fees will be assessed as set forth below, but there will be no roadway impact fees charged for any building permit application dated before January 1, 2021: 
1.  Residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $753.00 
2.  Non-residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $502.00 
b.  For all property with a recorded plat dated before January 1, 2020, roadway impact fees assessed above will be charged for any building permit application dated on or after January 1, 2021, as follows: 
1.  Residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $753.00 
2.  Non-residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $502.00 
c.  For all property with a recorded plat dated after January 1, 2020, but before January 1, 2022, roadway impact fees will be assessed at final plat recordation, and will be charged as follows: 
1.  Residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $753.00 
2.  Non-residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $502.00 
(2)  Phase 2: Effective January 1, 2022: 
For all property with a recorded plat dated on or after January 1, 2022, but before January 1, 2024, roadway impact fees will be assessed at final plat recordation, and will be charged as follows: 
1.  Residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $1,130.00 
2.  Non-residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $628.00 
(3)  Phase 3: Effective January 1, 2024: 
For all property with a recorded plat dated on or after January 1, 2024, roadway impact fee will be assessed at final plat recordation, and will be charged as follows: 
1.  Residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $1,507.00 per 
2.  Non-residential land uses (per service unit) ..... $753.00 
(c)  The land use vehicle-mile equivalency tables are set forth below: 
Schedule 42-505 (c)
Land Use Vehicle-Mile Equivalency Table ("LUMET") 
Land Use Category ITE Land Use Code Development Unit Trip Gen Rate (PM) Pass-by Rate Pass-by Source Trip Rate Trip Length (mi) Adj. For O-D Adj. Trip Length (mi) Max Trip Length (mi) Veh. Mi Per Dev. Unit PORT AND TERMINAL  Truck Terminal 030 1,000 SF GFA 1.87 1.87 10.70 50% 5.35 5.35 10.00 INDUSTRIAL  General Light Industrial 110 1,000 SF GFA 0.63 0.63 12.89 50% 6.45 6.00 3.78  Industrial Park 130 1,000 SF GFA 0.40 0.40 12.89 50% 6.45 6.00 2.40  Manufacturing 140 1,000 SF GFA 0.67 0.67 12.89 50% 6.45 6.00 4.02  Warehousing 150 1,000 SF GFA 0.19 0.19 12.89 50% 6.45 6.00 1.14  Mini-Warehouse 151 1,000 SF GFA 0.17 0.17 12.89 50% 6.45 6.00 1.02 RESIDENTIAL  Single-Family Detached Housing 210 Dwelling Unit 0.99 0.99 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 4.26  Multifamily Housing 
(Low-Rise) 220 Dwelling Unit 0.56 0.56 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 2.41  Multifamily Housing 
(Mid-Rise) 221 Dwelling Unit 0.44 0.44 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.89  Multifamily Housing 
(High-Rise) 222 Dwelling Unit 0.36 0.36 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.55  Mobile Home Park/Manufactured Home 240 Dwelling Unit 0.46 0.46 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.98  Senior Adult Housing-Detached 251 Dwelling Unit 0.30 0.30 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.29  Senior Adult Housing-Attached 252 Dwelling Unit 0.26 0.26 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.12  Assisted Living 254 Beds 0.26 0.26 8.59 50% 4.30 4.30 1.12 LODGING  Hotel 310 Room 0.60 0.60 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 1.63  Motel/Other Lodging 
Facilities 320 Room 0.38 0.38 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 1.03 RECREATIONAL  Golf Driving Range 432 Tee 1.25 1.25 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 3.98  Golf Course 430 Acre 0.28 0.28 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 0.89  Recreational Community Center 495 1,000 SF GFA 2.31 2.31 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 7.35  Ice Skating Rink 465 1,000 SF GFA 1.33 1.33 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 4.23  Miniature Golf Course 431 Hole 0.33 0.33 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 1.05  Multiplex Movie Theater 445 Screens 13.73 13.73 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 43.66  Racquet/Tennis Club 491 Court 3.82 3.82 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 12.15 INSTITUTIONAL  Church 560 1,000 SF GFA 0.49 0.49 6.30 50% 3.15 3.15 1.54  Day Care Center 565 1,000 SF GFA 11.12 44% B 6.23 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 10.59  Primary/Middle School (1-8) 522 Students 0.17 0.17 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 0.29  High School 530 Students 0.14 0.14 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 0.24  Junior/Community College 540 Students 0.11 0.11 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 0.19  University/College 550 Students 0.15 0.15 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 0.26 MEDICAL  Clinic 630 1,000 SF GFA 3.28 3.28 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 11.09  Hospital 610 1,000 SF GFA 0.97 0.97 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 3.28  Nursing Home 620 Beds 0.22 0.22 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 0.74  Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic 640 1,000 SF GFA 3.53 30% B 2.47 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 8.35 OFFICE  Corporate Headquarters Building 714 1,000 SF GFA 0.60 0.60 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 2.03  General Office Building 710 1,000 SF GFA 1.15 1.15 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 3.89  Medical-Dental Office Building 720 1,000 SF GFA 3.46 3.46 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 11.69  Single Tenant Office 
Building 715 1,000 SF GFA 1.71 1.71 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 5.78  Office Park 750 1,000 SF GFA 1.07 1.07 6.76 50% 3.38 3.38 3.62 COMMERCIAL  Automobile Related  Automobile Care Center 942 1,000 SF GFA 3.11 40% B 1.87 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 5.07  Automobile Parts Sales 843 1,000 SF GFA 4.91 43% A 2.80 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 7.59  Gasoline/Service Station 944 Vehicle Fueling Position 14.03 42% A 8.14 1.20 50% 0.60 0.60 4.88  Gasoline/Service Station w/Conv. Market and Car Wash 945 Vehicle Fueling Position 13.99 56% B 6.16 1.20 50% 0.60 0.60 3.70  New Car Sales 841 1,000 SF GFA 2.43 20% B 1.94 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 5.26  Quick Lubrication Vehicle Shop 941 Servicing 
Positions 4.85 40% B 2.91 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 7.89  Self-Service Car Wash 947 Stall 5.54 40% B 3.32 1.20 50% 0.60 0.60 1.99  Tire Store 848 1,000 SF GFA 3.98 28% A 2.87 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 7.78  Dining  Fast-Food Restaurant with Drive-Thru Window 934 1,000 SF GFA 32.67 50% A 16.34 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 27.78  Fast-Food Restaurant without Drive-Thru Window 933 1,000 SF GFA 28.34 50% B 14.17 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 24.09  High Turnover (Sit-Down) Restaurant 932 1,000 SF GFA 9.77 43% A 5.57 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 15.09  Quality Restaurant 931 1,000 SF GFA 7.80 44% A 4.37 5.41 50% 2.71 2.71 11.84  Coffee/Donut Shop with Drive-Thru Window 937 1,000 SF GFA 43.38 70% A 13.01 1.20 50% 0.60 0.60 7.81  Other Retail  Free-Standing Store 815 1,000 SF GFA 4.83 30% C 3.38 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 10.75  Nursery (Garden Center) 817 1,000 SF GFA 6.94 30% B 4.86 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 15.45  Home Improvement Superstore 862 1,000 SF GFA 2.33 48% A 1.21 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 3.85  Pharmacy/Drug store w/o Drive-Thru Window 880 1,000 SF GFA 8.51 53% A 4.00 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 12.72  Pharmacy/Drug store w/Drive-Thru Window 881 1,000 SF GFA 10.29 49% A 5.25 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 16.70  Shopping Center 820 1,000 SF GLA 3.81 34% A 2.51 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 7.98  Supermarket 850 1,000 SF GFA 9.24 36% A 5.91 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 18.79  Toy/Children's Superstore 864 1,000 SF GFA 5.00 30% B 3.50 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 11.13  Department Store 875 1,000 SF GFA 1.95 30% B 1.37 6.35 50% 3.18 3.18 4.36 SERVICES  Walk-In Bank 911 1,000 SF GFA 12.13 40% B 7.28 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 12.38  Drive-In Bank 912 Drive-in Lanes 27.15 35% A 17.65 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 30.01  Hair Salon 918 1,000 SF GLA 1.45 30% B 1.02 3.39 50% 1.70 1.70 1.73 Key to Sources of Pass-by Rates: 
A: ITE Trip Generation Handbook 3rd Edition (August 2014) 
B: Estimated by Kimley-Horn based on ITE rates for similar categories 
C: ITE rate adjusted upward by KHA based on logical relationship to other categories  
(d)  The maximum assessable roadway impact fee per service unit set forth in Schedule 42-505(a) that is assessed to new development is declared to be the roughly proportionate measure of the impact(s) generated by a new unit of development on the city's transportation system. To the extent that the roadway impact fee per service unit collected is less than the maximum assessable roadway impact fee per service unit, such difference is hereby declared to be founded on policies unrelated to the measurement of the actual impacts of the development on the city's transportation system. The maximum assessable roadway impact fee per service unit may be used in evaluating any claim by an applicant, developer, or property owner that the dedication, construction, or contribution of a capital improvement imposed as a condition of development approval pursuant to the city's regulations is not roughly proportionate to the impact(s) of the new development on the city's transportation system. 
(e)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the payment of a roadway impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the new development. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-506. - Assessment of roadway impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of the roadway impact fee per service unit for any new development shall be made as set forth in subsection 42-505(b). 
(b)  Following assessment of the roadway impact fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the roadway impact fee assessed per service unit for that new development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or replat approval, in which case new assessment shall occur at the rate then in effect, as set forth in subsection 42-505(b). 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with the then current impact fee as set forth in subsection 42-505(b). 
(d)  Approval of an amending plat pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016, is not subject to reassessment of a roadway impact fee hereunder provided that the use of the property remains the same. 
(e)  The director of transportation shall compute the assessment of roadway impact fees for new development by first determining whether the new development is eligible for offsets calculated in accordance with section 42-508, which would further reduce roadway impact fees otherwise due in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-507. - Payment and collection of roadway impact fees. 
(a)  For all new developments, roadway impact fees shall be collected at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. The roadway impact fees to be paid and collected are listed in subsection 42-505(b). The city reserves the right to enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of payment of roadway impact fees in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. 
(b)  The city shall compute the roadway impact fees to be paid and collected for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine the number of development units for each land use category in the new development using Schedule 42-505(c) then in effect. 
(2)  Multiply the number of development units for each land use category in the new development by the vehicle miles (per development unit) for each such land use category also found in Schedule 42-505 (c) then in effect to determine the number of service units attributable to the new development. 
(3)  The amount of roadway impact fees to be collected shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units for the new development by the roadway impact fee per service unit for the applicable roadway service area and shall be calculated at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. 
(4)  If an agreement as described in section 42-508 providing for offsets exists, the amount of the offsets shall be deducted from the roadway impact fees as calculated above. 
(c)  If the building permit for which a roadway impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the roadway impact fees shall be computed using the LUVMET found in Schedule 42-505 (c) and subsection 42-505(b) then in effect with credits for previous payment of fees being applied against any new fees due. 
(d)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional roadway impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the LUVMET and subsection 42-505(b) then in effect, and such additional fees shall be collected at the times prescribed by this section. 
(e)  Where an application for a building permit is for a "shell" or speculative building on a parcel zoned C-1, C-1a, or C-2, the amount of the roadway impact fee will be calculated assuming that the entire building will be used as a "shopping center" as shown on Schedule 42-505 (c). Where a subsequent application for a building permit is made for the finish-out of the shell building, or portion thereof, for the ultimate use, an additional roadway impact fee shall be charged and paid if the ultimate use is different from a "shopping center". 
(f)  Where an application for a building permit is for a "shell" or speculative building on a parcel zoned OF or OF-2, the amount of the roadway impact fee will be calculated assuming that the entire building will be used as a "general office building" as shown on Schedule 42-505 (c). Where a subsequent application for a building permit is made for the finish-out of the shell building, or portion thereof, for the ultimate use, an additional roadway impact fee shall be charged and paid if the ultimate use is different from a "general office building". 
(g)  Where an application for a building permit is for a "shell" or speculative building on a parcel zoned LI or I, the amount of the roadway impact fee will be calculated assuming that the entire building will be used as "warehousing" as shown on Schedule 42-505 (c). Where a subsequent application for a building permit is made for the finish-out of the shell building, or portion thereof, for the ultimate use, an additional roadway impact fee shall be charged and paid if the ultimate use is different from "warehousing". 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-508. - Offsets against roadway impact fees. 
(a)  The city may offset the cost of construction of any system facility that is required or agreed to by the city, pursuant to rules established in this section or pursuant to administrative guidelines promulgated by the city with the following limitations: 
(1)  The offset shall be associated with the plat or other detailed plan of development for the property that is to be served by the roadway facility. 
(2)  Projects that consist of multiple phases, whether approved before or after the effective date of this article, may apply for offsets against roadway impact fees for the entire project based upon improvements or funds toward construction of system facilities, or other roadway capital improvements supplying excess capacity. Offset shall be determined by comparing the actual costs of roadway capital improvements supplied by the project with the costs of roadway capital improvements to be utilized by development within the project, utilizing a methodology approved by the city. The offset determination shall be incorporated within an agreement for offsets, in accordance with this article. The roadway requirements of an agreement for offsets shall not be less than what is required by the zoning and development code. 
(3)  The city's then-current policies and regulations shall apply to determine a new development's obligations to construct adjacent system facilities. The obligation to construct, however, shall not exceed the maximum assessable roadway impact fees assessed against new development under Schedule 42-505(a). Construction required under such policies and regulations shall be an offset against the amount of impact fees otherwise due. If the costs of constructing a system facility in accordance with the then current city policies and regulations are greater than the amount of the roadway impact fees due, the amount of the credit due shall be deemed to be 100 percent of the assessed impact fees and no roadway impact fees shall be collected thereafter for the development, unless the number of service units is subsequently increased. 
(4)  All offsets against roadway impact fees shall be based upon standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines, including the following standards: 
a.  No offset shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
b.  No offset shall be given for a roadway facility which is not identified within the roadway impact fee capital improvements plan, unless the facility is on or qualifies for inclusion on the transportation master plan and the city agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new development other than the development paying the roadway impact fee and provisions for offsets are incorporated in an agreement for offsets pursuant to this article. 
c.  In no event will the city grant an offset when no roadway impact fees can be collected pursuant to this article or for any amount exceeding the roadway impact fees due for the new development, unless expressly agreed to by the city in writing. 
d.  The value of right-of-way dedicated for site-related facilities will not be considered for an offset. 
e.  The fair market value of right-of-way conveyed for roadway facilities that are not required by the new development will be entitled to an offset. If said roadway facilities are partially required by the new development, said portion shall not be entitled to an offset. The fair market value of the conveyed right-of-way will be determined by either: 
1.  The appropriate Central Appraisal District, 
2.  By agreement, or 
3.  By a MAI appraisal obtained by the city. 
f.  If the city requires a traffic impact analysis ("TIA") the cost of said TIA shall be included as an offset. 
g.  The city may participate in the costs of a system facility to be dedicated to the city, including costs that exceed the amount of the impact fees due for the development, in accordance with policies and rules established by the city. The amount of any offset for construction of a system facility shall be reduced by the amount of any participation funds received from the city. 
h.  Where funds for roadway facilities have been escrowed under an agreement that was executed with the city prior to the effective date of this article, the following rules apply: 
1.  Funds expended under the agreement for roadway facilities shall first be credited against the amount of roadway impact fees that would have been due under subsection 42-505(b) for those units of development for which building permits already have been issued; 
2.  Any remaining funds shall be credited against roadway impact fees due for the development under subsection 42-505(b) at the time building permits are issued. 
(b)  Except as provided below, offsets for construction of capital improvements shall be deemed created when the capital improvements are completed and the city has accepted the facility. In the case of capital improvements constructed and accepted prior to the January 1, 2020, offset shall be deemed created on said date. Offsets created on or before January 1, 2020 shall expire ten years from such date. Offsets created after January 1, 2020 shall expire ten years from the date the offset was created. Upon application by the property owner, the city may agree to extend the expiration date for an offset on mutually agreeable terms. 
(c)  Unless an agreement for offsets, as described herein, is executed providing for a different manner of applying offsets against roadway impact fees due, an offset associated with a plat shall be applied at the time of application for the first building permit and, at each building permit application thereafter, to reduce roadway impact fees due until the offset is exhausted. 
(d)  An owner of new development who has constructed or financed a roadway capital improvement or roadway facility expansion designated in the roadway impact fee capital improvements plans, or other roadway capital improvement that supplies excess capacity, as required or authorized by the city, shall enter into an agreement with the city to provide for offsets against roadway impact fees due for the development in accordance with this subsection. The agreement shall identify the basis for and the method for computing and the amount of the offset due and any reduction in offsets attributable to consumption of road capacity by developed lots or tracts served by the roadway capital improvements. For multi-phased projects, the city may require that total offsets be proportionally allocated among the phases. If authorized by the city, the agreement also may provide for allocation of offsets among new developments within the project, and provisions for the timing and collection of roadway impact fees. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-509. - Use of proceeds of roadway impact fees. 
(a)  The roadway impact fees collected within each roadway service area may be used to finance, pay for or to recoup the costs of any roadway facility identified in the roadway improvements plan for the roadway service area, including the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees), and amounts designated in any reimbursement agreements executed pursuant to section 42-508. 
(b)  Roadway impact fees may be used to pay for the contract services of an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the roadway improvements plan who is not an employee of the political subdivision. 
(c)  Roadway impact fees also may be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvement. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-510. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
    Roadway impact fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such roadway impact fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the Round Rock Comprehensive Plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations and policies of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-511. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for a new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city council: 
(1)  The applicability of an impact fee to the new development; 
(2)  The amount of the roadway impact fee due; 
(3)  The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of an offset; 
(4)  The application of an offset against a roadway impact fee due; 
(5)  The amount of the roadway impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or 
(6)  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The appellant shall state the basis for the appeal in writing with particularity. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset was not calculated according to the rules set forth in this article or by administrative guideline adopted by the city council. The appellant shall submit any traffic study or other documents upon which he relies to the city with the request for appeal. 
(c)  The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety with offices for local presentment in a form satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the roadway impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(d)  Along with the notice of appeal, an applicant may request an alternative service unit computation for land uses not contained within the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual by submitting a trip generation study demonstrating the appropriateness of the trip generation rates for the proposed development. An applicant may also include an alternative service unit calculation. 
(e)  The city manager or his/her designee may: (1) resolve the appeal, if the appellant agrees with the manager's decision, or (2) if the appellant does not agree, refer the matter to the city council for decision, along with the manager's recommendation and any trip generation study provided, if any. 
(f)  If city council review is requested by the appellant after receiving the city manager's decision, the city clerk shall schedule a public hearing at which the applicant may present testimony and evidence before the city council. The city council shall act on the appeal within 60 days of receipt of the notice of appeal by the city, unless otherwise agreed by the appellant. 
(g)  If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other bond or other sufficient surety with offices for local presentment in a form satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the roadway impact fee due, satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the roadway impact fee due, the city shall process and may issue a building permit if other requirements are met while the appeal is pending. 
(h)  If the city council allows for a different amount of the roadway impact fee due for new development under this section to be paid, it may cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the roadway impact fee to the account for the service area in which the new development is located. 
(i)  The appellant shall promptly pay to the city the full amount of the roadway impact fee determined to be due by the city council regarding such appeal. Failure to promptly pay such roadway impact fee within five business days after the city council's determination on the appeal shall serve as authority for the city to present the bond or other surety to the bonding company or financial institution for performance with no other or further notice or contact with the appellant. 
(j)  The appellant shall bear all costs of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-512. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any roadway impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been expended within the applicable roadway service area for an authorized purpose within ten years from the date of payment shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid or, if the roadway impact fee, was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 302.002, or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted in writing within 60 days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. A roadway impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis. 
(b)  A roadway impact fee collected pursuant to this article shall be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements authorized in section 42-509 within the roadway service area within ten years following the date of payment exceed the total fees collected for such improvements during that time period. 
(c)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), the city shall prorate the refund by dividing the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the roadway service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the new development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  If the building permit for a new development for which a roadway impact fee has been paid has expired and a modified or new application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, refund the amount of the roadway impact fee to the applicant. The city may establish guidelines for refunding of roadway impact fees collected for which construction plans have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 42-513. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid a roadway impact fee or an owner of land upon which a roadway impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing, filed with the city clerk, and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within 60 days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required, pursuant to this article and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. 
(b)  The city council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to the ordinance, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would when regarded as a whole result in confiscation of the property. 
(c)  If the city council grants a variance or waiver to the amount of the roadway impact fee due for a new development under this section, it may cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the roadway impact fee to the account, for the roadway service area, in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0124, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Secs. 42-514-42-535. - Reserved. 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 1 et seq.; water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Connection to available sewer and water line required within 90 days; toilet facilities required. 
(a)  When the city determines that it is necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare, each property owner owning a lot or plot of ground in the city on which there is located a house or dwelling occupied or capable of being occupied by human beings and which lot or plot of ground is capable of connecting to a city sewer or water line by construction of 200 feet or less of sewer or water line is hereby required to connect such house or dwelling to such sewer and water lines at their expense within 90 days from the time the sewer or water service is available. Each said property owner is further required to equip such house or dwelling with toilet facilities and keep said toilet facilities connected at all times with the city sewer and water lines and the occupants of the house or dwelling shall at all times use the sewer and water facilities of the city. 
(b)  When the city determines that it is necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare, each property owner owning a lot or plot of ground in the city on which is located a building or structure containing toilet facilities and which lot or plot of ground is capable of connecting to a city sewer or water line by construction of 200 feet or less of sewer or water line is hereby required to connect such building or structure to such sewer and water lines at their expense within 90 days from the time the sewer or water service is available. Each said property owner is further required to keep any toilet facilities in any building or structure connected at all times with the city sewer and water lines and the users of said building or structure shall at all times use the sewer and water facilities of the city. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution, waive the requirements to connect to the city sewer or water lines. 
(Code 1995, § 10.101; Ord. No. 2257, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. G-09-04-09-10B1, § I, 4-9-2009) 
Secs. 44-2, 44-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-4. - Repair of sewer, water, and reuse water service lines on private property. 
    All sewer, water, and/or reuse water service lines on private property from the city's main lines to the premises, including all connections, shall be installed, maintained, and repaired at the expense of the property owners. All leaks and other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by the property owners. If required repairs are not completed within ten days after written notice is mailed or hand delivered to the premises, water and/or reuse water service to the premises shall be terminated and shall not be restored until the repairs are made and all applicable fees and expenses paid. Any expenditures incurred by the city because of said leaks or defects shall be charged against the property owners, and must be paid before water and/or reuse water service is restored. 
(Code 1995, § 10.104; Ord. No. 2331, 3-24-1988; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § IX, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 44-5. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commission means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or any successor agency. 
    Customer means the person who has applied for and through such application agrees to undertake primary responsibility toward the city to ensure compliance with the city's ordinances, rules and regulations dealing with utilities. The term "customer" includes agents, attorneys-in-fact, or representatives of such person. 
    Director means the director of utilities for the city or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 10.105; Ord. No. G-05-09-08-10A1, 9-8-2005) 
Sec. 44-6. - Prohibiting water waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any conduct that results in the waste of water from the city's potable and/or reuse water utility systems. 
(b)  Without limiting the foregoing, the following acts constitute the waste of water: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes, a leaking faucet, or leaking toilet. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or allow to be operated, an irrigation system with: 
a.  A broken head; 
b.  A head that is out of adjustment where the arc of the spray head is over a street or parking lot; or 
c.  During irrigation, allowing water to run off a property such that there is a trail of water that is running in the street for a distance of 50 feet or greater, allowing water to pond in the street or parking lot to a depth greater than one-fourth of an inch, or head(s) that are misting due to high water pressure. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or allow to be operated a fountain or decorative water feature unless a recirculation device is in use. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § III, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § X, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-1908, § I, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-4305, § I, 4-13-2017) 
Secs. 44-7-44-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY METERS, RATES, FEES, DEPOSITS, AND IMPACT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, adopted Aug. 28, 2014, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 44-29-44-33 was entitled "Water and Sewer Rates and Utility Billing Policies." For full derivative history of former art. II see the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 44-29. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-30. - Connection and transfer fees. 
(a)  Water, reuse water and sewer service connection and transfer fees. 
(1)  Upon making application for water, reuse water and/or sewer service the customer shall pay a service connection fee of $25.00. 
(2)  Upon making application to transfer an existing service account to a new address, the customer shall pay a water and sewer service transfer fee of $25.00. 
(3)  Service will generally be connected the next business day after the customer makes the application for service. If a customer requests same day connection service, the fee for same is $75.00. However, same day service may not be available if the work load does not permit it. "Business day" does not include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(4)  Bulk water customers that require a fire hydrant meter to be relocated within the same job site or another job site shall pay a $50.000 fee for each time that the meter is relocated. 
(b)  Additional service trips. If additional meter service trips are required, including rereads and trips for collection of outstanding charges, fees or penalties, the customer shall pay an additional trip fee in the amount of $25.00 for each additional trip made to the location. If any service trips are caused by the city's error, the customer will not be charged such additional trip fee. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-4835, § I, 11-9-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VI, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-31. - Deposits. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms are defined as follow: 
(1)  Residential customers shall mean those customers that are zoned SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, MH, TF, or TH. 
(2)  Noresidential customers shall mean those customers that are zoned for uses other than SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, MH, TF, or TH. 
(b)  Deposits for water and other utility services. 
(1)  Residential customers. 
a.  Water customer deposit. Upon making application for water or reuse water service, a residential customer shall pay a water services deposit in the amount of $100.00 per residential dwelling unit. This deposit will also cover sewer and/or garbage services. 
b.  Non-water customer deposit. Upon making application for sewer and/or garbage service, but not water service, a residential customer not receiving water service shall pay a deposit in the amount of $25.00 for sewer service and/or a deposit in the amount of $25.00 for garbage service. 
c.  Refund. The above deposit(s) shall be refunded to the customer when: 
1.  Service is cancelled; provided, however, that any unpaid charges shall first be deducted from the deposit; or 
2.  The customer shall have 12 consecutive months of satisfactory payment history. 
d.  Additional deposit. If the city has refunded the customer's deposit for "satisfactory payment history" under subsection (c) above, and thereafter the customer's service has been discontinued for nonpayment or meter tampering, then the customer shall pay additional deposit(s) in the same amounts as set forth above. In that event, the customer shall thereafter be entitled to a satisfactory payment history deposit refund upon completion of the required 12 consecutive months of satisfactory payment history, as computed from the date of reconnect. 
(2)  Nonresidential customers. 
a.  Deposit. Upon making application for water or reuse water service, a nonresidential customer shall pay a water services deposit according to the size of meter serving the premises pursuant to the following schedule: 
Meter Size Deposit 5/8 inch $100.00 3/4 inch $100.00 1 inch $100.00 11/2 inch $150.00 2 inch and larger $100.00 per inch or fraction thereof  
b.  Refund. The water deposit shall be refunded to the customer when: 
1.  Service is cancelled; provided, however, that any unpaid charges shall first be deducted from the deposit; or 
2.  The customer shall have 12 consecutive months of satisfactory payment history. 
c.  After return of refund, additional deposit required following city's discontinuation of water service. If the city has refunded the customer's water deposit for "satisfactory payment history" under subsection (b)(1)c. of this section, and thereafter the customer's water service has been discontinued for nonpayment or meter tampering, then the customer shall pay another water deposit in the amount indicated. In that event, the customer shall thereafter be entitled to a satisfactory payment history deposit refund upon completion of the required 12 consecutive months of satisfactory payment history, as computed from the date of reconnect. 
(3)  Bulk water customers shall pay a meter deposit in accordance with the following schedule: 
Fire Hydrant Meter Size Deposit 5/8 x 3/4 inch $100.00 1 inch $150.00 3 inch $700.00  
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 44-32. - Water rates. 
(a)  Water rates for retail customers. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billing period means a period of approximately 30 days between meter readings for which water consumption is determined. The chief financial officer will determine the billing periods for various categories of customers. 
Commercial customer means a non-residential water customer, including multifamily uses and schools. 
Commercial water use means water used by a commercial customer. 
Irrigation water means water measured by a separate meter and used exclusively to irrigate landscaping. 
Irrigation water customer means any water customer who uses irrigation water. 
Multifamily means a residential dwelling structure: (i) with more than four units, and (ii) which are not individually metered. 
Rate block means the water volume blocks, as described in subsections (a)(4) and (7) of this section. 
Residential customer means a water customer in any residential structure other than a multifamily structure. 
Service unit is defined in accordance with subsection 44-37(e). 
(2)  Determination of service units. 
a.  Conversion table. The number of service units for water service is determined by the size and type of the water meter purchased for and/or providing service to the property in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size (inches) Service Units 5/8 1.0 3/4 1.5 1 2.5 1.5 5.0 2 8.0 3 16.0 4 25.0 6 50.0 8 80.0 10 or more 115.0  
b.  No adjustment. No adjustment in service units shall be made for water use or fire demand that falls between standard meter sizes. 
c.  Adjustment for fire flows meters and multiple meters. In the event that a customer has either: (i) a meter that is oversized because of fire flow requirements; or (ii) more than one meter, such as where a fire flow meter is utilized in combination with a standard usage meter, the director of utilities shall determine the number of service units for the customer in accordance with generally accepted engineering and/or planning standards and assign an equivalent meter size for billing purposes. 
(3)  Revision of service unit determination. The city may revise the service unit determination of a specific customer or customer class in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards and based on applicable historical data and trends. 
(4)  Rate blocks for residential customers by service units. 
a.  Rate block one by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 0 to 15,000 3/4 1.5 0 to 22,500 1.0 2.5 0 to 37,500  
b.  Rate block two by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 15,001 to 21,000 3/4 1.5 22,501 to 31,500 1.0 2.5 37,501 to 52,500  
c.  Rate block three by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 21,001 to 27,000 3/4 1.5 31,501 to 40,500 1.0 2.5 52,501 to 67,500  
d.  Rate block four by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 More than 27,000 3/4 1.5 More than 40,500 1.0 2.5 More than 67,500  
(5)  Residential customer volume rates for billing periods. For water consumed by residential customers during billing periods, each residential customer shall pay a volume rate in the amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof consumed during such billing period: 
  Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2017 Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2018 Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2019 Rate Block One $2.49 $2.56 $2.64 Rate Block Two $3.11 $3.20 $3.30 Rate Block Three $3.74 $3.85 $3.97 Rate Block Four $5.60 $5.77 $5.94  
(6)  Commercial customer volume rates for billing periods. For water consumed by commercial customers during billing periods, each commercial customer shall pay a volume rate in the amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof consumed during such billing period: 
Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2017 Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2018 Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2019 $2.72 $2.80 $2.89  
(7)  Rate blocks for irrigation customers by service units. 
a.  Rate block one by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 0 to 21,000 3/4 1.5 0 to 31,500 1.0 2.5 0 to 52,500 1.5 5.0 0 to 105,000 2.0 8.0 0 to 168,000 3.0 16.0 0 to 336,000 4.0 25.0 0 to 525,000 6.0 50 0 to 1,050,000 8.0 80 0 to 1,680,000 10 or more 115 0 to 2,415,000  
b.  Rate block two by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 21,001 to 27,000 3/4 1.5 31,501 to 40,500 1.0 2.5 52,501 to 67,500 1.5 5.0 105,001 to 135,000 2.0 8.0 168,001 to 216,000 3.0 16 336,001 to 432,000 4.0 25 525,001 to 675,000 6.0 50 1,050,001 to 1,350,000 8.0 80 1,680,001 to 2,160,000 10 or more 115 2,415,001 to 3,105,000  
c.  Rate block three by service units is as follows: 
Meter Size in inches Number of Service Units Volume by Gallons 5/8 1.0 More than 27,000 3/4 1.5 More than 40,500 1.0 2.5 More than 67,500 1.5 5.0 More than 135,000 2.0 8.0 More than 216,000 3.0 16 More than 432,000 4.0 25 More than 675,000 6.0 50 More than 1,350,000 8.0 80 More than 2,160,000 10 or more 115 More than 3,105,000  
(8)  Irrigation customer volume rates for billing periods. For water consumed by irrigation customers during billing periods, each irrigation customer shall pay a volume rate in the amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof consumed during such billing period: 
  Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2017 Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2018 Volume Charge
Effective
October 1, 2019 Rate Block One $3.11 $3.20 $3.30 Rate Block Two $3.74 $3.85 $3.97 Rate Block Three $5.60 $5.77 $5.94  
(9)  Monthly service charge. Except as provided below, in addition to the above volume rates, each residential, commercial, and irrigation customer shall pay a monthly water service charge pursuant to the following schedule regardless of the amount of water used: 
Meter Size in inches Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2017 Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2018 Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2019 5/8 $16.04 $16.52 $17.02 3/4 $22.33 $23.00 $23.69 1 $35.26 $36.32 $37.41 1-1/2 $67.56 $69.59 $71.67 2 $106.32 $109.51 $112.79 3 $196.78 $202.68 $208.76 4 $326.01 $335.79 $345.86 6 $1,016.37 $1,046.86 $1,078.27 8 $1,776.48 $1,829.77 $1,884.67 10 $2,789.97 $2,873.67 $2,959.88 12 $3,423.41 $3,526.11 $3,631.90  
a.  Medicaid exemption discontinued after October 1, 2005. Except as provided in subsection (a)(9)b of this section, on and after October 1, 2005, the monthly water service charge exemption for head of household residents eligible for Medicaid benefits will be discontinued. 
b.  Exemption for current recipients. For residential service located within the corporate city limits where the head of the household is eligible for Medicaid benefits, and if said resident head of household was receiving the Medicaid exemption from the monthly water service charge prior to October 1, 2005, and if said resident head of household re-applies for said exemption between October 1 and October 30 of each year, then the exemption from paying the monthly water service charge shall continue until the head of the household is no longer eligible for Medicaid benefits, as determined by federal guidelines and as administered by the state. 
c.  Unlawful acceptance of exemption or discount. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply for and/or receive a water rate discount or exemption from the monthly water service charge if such person is not eligible to receive said discount or exemption. 
(10)  Outside city limits. The above water rates and service charges apply to all customers located within the corporate limits of the city. All customers located outside of the corporate limits of the city shall pay double the applicable rates charged customers within the corporate limits of the city, unless a different rate is approved by the council pursuant to a contractual agreement. 
(11)  Age 65 years and older. 
a.  Discounts discontinued after June 10, 1993. Except as provided below, on and after June 10, 1993, the water rate discount for head of household residents 65 years of age and older will be discontinued. All head of household residents 65 years of age and older actually receiving said discounts prior to June 10, 1993, shall continue to receive said discounts as stated in this section, so long as they re-apply for said discounts before October 30 of each year. 
b.  Discounts for current recipients. For residential service located within the corporate city limits where the head of the household has attained the age of 65, and if said resident head of household was receiving water rate discounts prior to June 10, 1993, and if said resident head of household re-applies for said discounts between October 1 and October 30 of each year, then the following schedule of monthly rates or charges for services furnished by the city's water system shall be and such is hereby adopted and established as follows: 
1.  Rate. 
Number of Gallons
of Water Used Monthly Water Rates 1-20,000 gallons $1.20 per 1,000 gallons 20,000 gallons to 75,000 gallons $1.45 per 1,000 gallons used exceeding 20,000 gallons up to 75,000 gallons Use exceeding 75,000 
gallons $1.70 per 1,000 used exceeding 75,000 gallons  
2.  Monthly charge. In addition to the foregoing rates, each customer shall also pay a monthly water service charge of $5.50 regardless of the amount of water used. 
(b)  Water rates and permit fees for bulk users. 
Fire Hydrant Meter Size Monthly Base Rate 5/8 inch $75.00 1 inch $100.00 3 inch $150.00  
Bulk use customers volume rates for billing periods. For water consumed by bulk use customers during billing periods, each bulk use customer shall pay a volume rate in the amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof consumed during such billing period: 
Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2017 Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2018 Volume Charge Effective October 1, 2019 $2.72 $2.80 $2.89  
(c)  Rates for water service to wholesale customers. 
(1)  The rate for water service to a wholesale customer shall consist of a monthly base charge and a volumetric charge per 1,000 gallons of water used. 
(2)  The monthly base charge and the volumetric charge for water to wholesale customers are as follows: 
a.  Aqua Texas, Inc.: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $5,193.00 $5,364.00 $5,477.00 Volume Charge $2.63 $2.71 $2.77  
b.  Fern Bluff Municipal Utility District: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $25,634.00 $26,506.00 $27,063.00 Volume Charge $2.81 $2.90 $2.97  
c.  Paloma Lake Municipal District Nos. 1 & 2 (Consolidated): 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $5,318.00 $5,566.00 $5,728.00 Volume Charge $3.82 $3.97 $4.05  
d.  R&R Mobile: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $1,035.00 $1,070.00 $1,094.00 Volume Charge $2.31 $2.39 $2.44  
e.  Walsh Ranch Municipal Utility District: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $3,462.00 $3,580.00 $3,655.00 Volume Charge $3.13 $3.23 $3.30  
f.  Williamson County Municipal Utility District #10: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $14,996.00 $15,506.00 $15,832.00 Volume Charge $2.76 $2.85 $2.91  
g.  Williamson County Municipal Utility District #11: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $14,173.00 $14,655.00 $14,963.00 Volume Charge $3.11 $3.22 $3.29  
h.  Vista Oaks Municipal Utility District: 
  Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 Base Charge $11,873.00 $12,277.00 $12,535.00 Volume Charge $2.76 $2.85 $2.91  
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-2384, § I, 6-11-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-4779, § I, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 44-33. - Reuse water rates. 
(a)  Reuse water rates. 
(1)  Volume rates. For reuse water consumed, each reuse water customer shall pay a volume rate in the amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof consumed during such billing period: 
Effective
October 1, 2017 Effective
October 1, 2018 Effective
October 1, 2019 $1.87 $1.92 $1.98  
NOTE: Reuse water rates have only one block volume rate. In addition, reuse water is not subject to ANY watering restrictions imposed during any stage of the drought contingency plan. 
Monthly service charge. Except as provided below, in addition to the above volume rates, each reuse water customer shall pay a monthly water service charge pursuant to the following schedule regardless of the amount of water used: 
Meter Size
in inches Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2017 Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2018 Monthly Service Charge Effective October 1, 2019 5/8 $16.04 $16.52 $17.02 3/4 $22.33 $23.00 $23.69 1 $35.26 $36.32 $37.41 1-1/2 $67.56 $69.59 $71.67 2 $106.32 $109.51 $112.79 3 $196.78 $202.68 $208.76 4 $326.01 $335.79 $345.86 6 $1,016.37 $1,046.86 $1,078.27 8 $1,776.48 $1,829.77 $1,884.67 10 $2,789.97 $2,873.67 $2,959.88 12 $3,423.41 $3,526.11 $3,631.90  
(2)  Service charge. Single-family residential homes with city water service that have reuse water meters shall pay 50 percent of the monthly service charges for reuse meters. 
(3)  Outside city limits. The above reuse water rates and service charges apply to all customers located within the corporate limits of the city. All customers located outside of the corporate limits of the city shall pay double the applicable rates charged customers within the corporate limits of the city, unless a different rate is approved by the council pursuant to a contractual agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-4779, § II, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 44-34. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  Sewer rates for retail customers inside the city limits. The rate schedule for retail customers of the city's sanitary sewer system shall be as hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  Volume rates. The sewer volume rate for retail customers shall be in an amount set forth below per 1,000 gallons of water used for all users: 
Charge Effective October 1, 2017 ..... $3.39 
(2)  Monthly service charge. Except as provided below, in addition to the foregoing volume rates, each customer shall also pay a monthly sewer service charge pursuant to the following schedule, regardless of the amount of water used: 
Meter Size Monthly Service Charge
Effective October 1, 2017 5/8" $13.27 3/4" $17.31 1" $24.82 1-1/2" $45.26 2" $69.79 3" $127.01 4" $208.75 6" $615.27 8" $1,073.67 10" $1,684.85 12" $2,066.84  
(b)  Sewer rates for retail customers outside city limits. All customers located outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay double the applicable rates charged customers within the corporate limits of the city, unless a different rate is approved by the council pursuant to a contractual agreement. 
(c)  Consumption based on winter usage. Monthly sewer consumption for all retail customers shall be based upon the actual monthly water consumption, or upon the average monthly consumption of water during the months of December, January, and February of each fiscal year, whichever is less. 
(d)  Discounts for age 65 and older. Discounts for new customers age 65 and older have previously been discontinued. However, those customers who were receiving the discount prior to June 10, 1993 are eligible to continue to receive the discount provided below, so long as they re-apply for said discount before October 30 of each year. The discounted rate is as follows: 
(1) Rate: ..... $1.20 per 1,000 gallons of water used; and (2) Monthly charge: ..... $5.50 per month regardless of the amount of water used  
(e)  Rates for sewer service to wholesale customers. The monthly volumetric charge for sewer service to all wholesale customers, per 1,000 gallons of water used in accordance with each entity's respective contractual obligation, is as follows: 
Charge Effective October 1, 2017 ..... $3.90 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-2384, § II, 6-11-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-4779, § II, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 44-35. - Utility billing policy. 
(a)  New service, residential. New residential accounts are to be established in the names of the persons requesting the service, on an application acceptable to the city. 
(b)  New service, commercial. New commercial accounts established in a company or business name must provide the name, identification, and contact information of the manager or a responsible party of the company or business before an account will be established; the customer shall provide the business names and names of the manager or responsible party for any unrelated business entities who jointly own or occupy the premises and will jointly utilize the utility service. 
(c)  Due date. Bills for water, sewer, and garbage collection shall be dated and mailed at such time as may be directed by the city manager, and payment for such bills is due on or before the 16th day following the mailing of the bills. 
(d)  Penalty for late payment. 
(1)  Any bill not paid by the due date shall be deemed past due and a late fee of $2.50 or ten percent of the total amount due, whichever is more, will be assessed. 
(2)  Any bill not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the 14th day following the due date will be assessed a $25.00 past due administrative fee. 
(3)  Upon written request by a customer with proof that such individual is age 60 years or over, payment may be delayed without penalty until the 25th day after the date the bill is issued. This subsection applies only to residential customers who occupy the entire premises for which the delay is requested. 
(e)  Disconnection and restoration of services. 
(1)  If a bill is not paid by the 14th day following the due date, the water supply to the customer shall be shut off. Water service shall not be resumed until all outstanding fees, service fees, charges or penalties are paid in full. 
(2)  The service fee for service restoration shall be $50.00. Service will generally be re-connected the next business day after the customer pays the past due bill and service fee in full. If a customer requests same day re-connection service, the service fee for same is $75.00. However, same day re-connection service may not be available if the work load does not permit it. As used herein, "business day" does not include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(f)  Notice. After a bill has become past due, the city shall mail to the customer at his last known address a written notice stating that the bill is presently delinquent and that the customer's water service will be disconnected if the bill and all fees are not paid within 14 days of the bill becoming delinquent. 
(g)  Disconnection hearing. Any customer who has reason to believe that his bill is inaccurate shall have the right to request a hearing before the city's director of finance within the aforementioned 14-day period. If for any reason the director of finance is unable to grant a hearing within that time period, the disconnection of utilities shall be delayed until after a hearing is provided. The decision of the director of finance concerning the accuracy of any utility bill shall be deemed final. 
(h)  Transfers of balances. 
(1)  In order to transfer utilities from one location to another, any outstanding billed amount on the current account must be paid. The final bill for the original account will be transferred to and be payable on the due date of the new account including the fees as set forth in section 44-30. Service may be discontinued at the new address if the previous balance becomes delinquent. 
(2)  Where a person liable for delinquent charges at one address is found to have an account in his name at another address, the delinquent amounts due at the previous address may be transferred to the account at the new address, and service may be discontinued at the new address until the delinquent amounts are paid. The name on the account need not be the same if ownership or residency can be established by the city. 
(i)  Joint liability. 
(1)  Spouses receiving service to premises they jointly own or occupy are deemed to be joint customers-of-record, notwithstanding that only one spouse may have signed an application, and shall be jointly and severally liable for unpaid delinquent charges. 
(2)  If service is provided to property owned by a person jointly with the customer-of-record, or if the customer-of-record is an agent or property manager for one or more owners of property, the joint owners shall all be treated as customers, and each shall remain jointly and severally liable with the customer-of-record for unpaid delinquent charges. 
(3)  The city may request proof of residency or ownership when occupancy and/or liability is in question. 
(j)  Incomplete or false information. 
(1)  If any of the information provided to the city to establish a utility account or transfer an existing account is incomplete, the city may deny service to the premises or may delay the service until the information is provided to the satisfaction of the city; 
(2)  If any of the information provided to the city to establish a utility account or transfer an existing account is false, the city may disconnect the service to the premises. 
(k)  Rate adjustment authority. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to adjust the monthly billing calculations/procedures for any customer to correct inequities that may arise due to methodologies adopted for calculating rates or for such other good cause as may be determined by the city. (See section 2-325 for returned check charge.) 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2017-4835, § II, 11-9-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-36. - Prohibitions and enforcement. 
(a)  Tampering with meters and lines prohibited. Whoever by any means or device, prevents water and/or reuse water from passing through any meter belonging to the city, or prevents any meter used in connection with the supply of water and/or reuse water to any customer by the city from registering the amount of water and/or reuse water passing through such meter, or prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of water supplied, or in any way interferes with its proper action of just registration, or without the consent in writing of the director, diverts any water and/or reuse water from any pipe of the city's, or otherwise uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the director, any water and/or reuse water produced or distributed by the city, or retains possession of, or refuses to deliver any meter, materials or equipment belonging to the city, regardless of how it came into his possession, shall be in violation of this article. The presence at any time on or about any such meter or pipe or any device or pipes resulting in the diversion of water and/or reuse water or prevention of its free passage and registration by the meter, or resulting in the diversion from the meter as above-defined, or resulting in the prevention of water and/or reuse water reaching the meter, or resulting in the prevention of the just registration of the meter or meters or the taking of any water and/or reuse water except through a meter as above set forth, shall constitute prima facie evidence on the part of the person owning or having custody and control of the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is, or knowledge of the existence thereof and knowledge of such existence to the person who would be benefitted by the failure of the water and/or reuse water to be properly metered, and shall further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such person to defraud, and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning, and penalties of this section. 
(b)  Tampering with hydrants and other system apparatus. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the fire department, or employee of the city, to open or use water from a fire hydrant, or to take off the cap without permission from the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or in association with others, to willfully break, injure or tamper with any part of the city's system for any purpose whatsoever, or in any manner to maliciously interfere with or prevent the running and operation of the system and the water supply therein. 
(c)  Responsibility for water and/or reuse water leakage and use; discontinuance of service. The customer shall be held responsible as consumers for loss of water and/or reuse water and property damage due to leakage in pipes or plumbing inside the discharge side of the meter or on the customer's property, and if this water and/or reuse water is not paid for according to the rates provided when it becomes due, the water and/or reuse water shall be cut off by the city and not turned on again until all charges and fees are paid and proof provided that the leak has been repaired. The city may consider an adjustment if the customer presents a plumber's statement indicating that the leak was not reasonably detectable from the surface, the leak has been repaired and the type of repairs made. The city may request additional information before adjusting the customer's bill. The customer may receive only one adjustment during a 12-month period, unless the director determines that extenuating circumstances justify allowing additional adjustments. 
(d)  Customer assents to chapter provisions. All of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the city and its customers, and each customer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of this chapter and, by applying and accepting water from the city, to have assented to the provisions hereof. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he violates any provision of this article, water and sewer rates and utility billing policies. Each instance of a violation of this article is a separate offense. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes a false statement on an application for service under this article. 
(g)  Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of any offense under this article. 
(h)  A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a class C misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable as set forth in section 1-9. Prosecution of an offense under any section does not preclude other enforcement remedies under this article. 
(i)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of this article, the city is entitled to pursue any and all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to authority granted by any other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(j)  For repeat violations of this article, water service may be disconnected or restricted. 
(k)  Any penalties provided for by this article are in addition to those penalties or fees provided for by other provisions of this Code for failure to timely pay any bill, or portion thereof, for water and sanitary sewer services. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XI, 8-28-2014) 
Secs. 44-37-44-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET CUTTING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 44-55. - Permit required prior to cutting streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut, bore, install, repair or remove, water, reuse water, sewer or gas mains, electric utility or telephone lines in existing paved or unpaved streets, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits of the city without having first obtained a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this article or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit. 
(Code 1995, § 10.301; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XII, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 44-56. - Applications to be made to city secretary. 
    Applications for such permits shall be made to the city secretary, and shall describe the location of the intended work site, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual work, and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or which the work is being done; and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. 
(Code 1995, § 10.302; Ord. No. 305, 12-19-1974) 
Sec. 44-57. - Permit fee. 
    The fee for such permits shall be $200.00 except that the fee charged for the purpose of modifying, replacing or realigning the driveway of an existing single-family or two-family dwelling shall be $50.00. 
(Code 1995, § 10.303; Ord. No. 2399, 3-23-1989) 
Sec. 44-58. - Bond required. 
    No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with the city secretary a bond in the sum of $2,000.00 conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation. Such bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety company. 
(Code 1995, § 10.304) 
Sec. 44-59. - Specifications and construction requirements. 
    Such installation, repair or removal of water, sewer or gas mains, electric utility or telephone lines in existing paved, or unpaved streets, alleys or other public places in the corporate limits of the city shall be done in accordance with the following specifications and requirements: 
(1)  Backfilling. All excavations within a right-of-way and not under surfacing shall be back-filled by tamping in six-inch horizontal layers, ponding or jetting. All surface materials shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation finished flush with surrounding natural ground. 
(2)  Sodding on certain slopes. Where sodding is disturbed by excavation or back-filling operations, such areas shall be replaced by mulch sodding on all slopes of two percent or less. All slopes over two percent shall be replaced by black sodding. 
(3)  Back-filling gravel streets or streets under construction. All excavation in gravel streets or streets under construction shall be back-filled with select material by tamping six-inch horizontal layers to finished grade, then the top six inches of back-fill shall be removed and replaced with one-inch road base, tamped or rolled to 95 percent of density. 
(4)  Boring under surfaced streets. Crossings under surfaced streets within the right-of-way shall be placed by boring. Boring shall extend from crown line to crown line, or to a point two inches beyond back of curb. All lines under streets carrying pressure shall be enclosed in casing satisfactory to the city. Gravity flow sewer lines placed under existing paved streets by boring shall be cast iron pipe. 
(5)  Where boring impracticable. Where evidence is presented indicating the impracticability of boring or tunneling, the public works director of the city may grant permission to cut the surfacing. In the event a cut is permitted, the following conditions shall govern said operation: 
a.  If the surface to be cut is an asphalt surface, it shall be cut or scored in a straight line before any digging has begun to prevent breaking the seal of the paved area not to be disturbed. 
b.  All back-fill material shall be stabilized with Portland cement and mixed in a concrete mixer or transit mix equipment. If soil is used, it shall be sandy material free from lumps or clods, and shall be stabilized with two sacks of cement per cubic yard of soil. If sand and gravel are used, pit run material will be allowed, and it shall be stabilized with one sack of cement per cubic yard. Backfill may be mechanically tamped in a moist condition or water added to provide a free flowing mixture. Stabilized backfill shall be completed to a point 11/2 inches below existing finished grade and the remaining 11/2 inches shall be replaced with hot mix asphaltic concrete; hot or cold lay. 
(6)  Excavations along highways. Operations along highways shall be performed in compliance with state department of highways and public transportation specifications and in such manner that all excavated material is kept off the pavement at all times, as well as all operating equipment. 
(7)  Terms of permit to be complied with; damage to be avoided. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in excavations the excavations shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. 
b.  No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged with the care thereof which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed. 
c.  No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree, shrub or the roots thereof. 
(8)  When sidewalk blocked by work. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. 
(9)  Responsibility for enforcement. The director of public works or his designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to him at least ten hours before the work of refilling any tunnel or excavation commences. 
(10)  Barriers and warning devices to be properly placed and maintained. 
a.  It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for the safety of the general public. Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the requirements of the city. Warning lights shall be flares, torches, lanterns, electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. 
b.  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation or other work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. When traffic conditions permit, the director of public works may, by written approval, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his opinion it is necessary. Such written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. 
c.  Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the instructions of the director of public works. 
(11)  Access to vital equipment to be maintained. All works performed shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment as designated by the director of public works. 
(12)  Permittee to maintain safe crossings for vehicles and pedestrians. The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation or work is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. 
(13)  Permittee to preserve and protect private and public property. The permittee shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting measures, the permittee shall first obtain consent from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if he cannot obtain such consent, the director of public works may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. The permittee shall, at his own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work, and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from his failure to properly protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, said area shall be re-seeded or the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been back-filled as required in this section. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate city department or city official having supervision of such property. 
(14)  Streets to be thoroughly cleaned of debris. As the work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess rock, earth or other debris resulting from such work. All clean-up operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of public works. From time to time, as may be ordered by the director of public works and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at his own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the director of public works, said work may be done by the director of public works and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder. 
(15)  Street to be restored to original condition as quickly as possible. After an excavation or other work is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all work covered by the permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary. 
(16)  Unnecessary inconvenience, annoyance, and noise to be avoided. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the work in such a manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall not use, except in case of emergency, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(17)  Emergency repairs authorized. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such repairs or excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, or for restoring utility service, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the director of public works for a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced and fully comply with the other requirements of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 10.305; Ord. No. 305, 12-19-1974; Ord. No. 307, 4-10-1975) 
Sec. 44-60. - Applicability of article. 
    Irrespective of any language to the contrary hereinabove set forth, this article shall apply to any existing paved or unpaved streets, alleys or other public places within the corporate limits of the city of, and also shall apply to such streets, both paved and unpaved, alleys, and other public places that may be dedicated or constructed in the corporate limits of the city in the future. 
(Code 1995, § 10.306; Ord. No. 306, 3-13-1975) 
Secs. 44-61-44-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRETREATMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 44-79. - Pretreatment regulations adopted. 
    This article adopts by reference, the applicable regulations of title 40 Code of Federal Regulations, part 403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, and other applicable state and federal laws, including but not limited to, the Clean Water Act. These regulations are herein referred to as general pretreatment regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 10.400) 
Sec. 44-80. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. This article forms the basis of the city's pretreatment program to regulate nondomestic discharges to its sewage collection and treatment facilities. Regulation of such discharges is necessary to prevent interference with the operation of the facilities, to prevent pass-through of the treatment facilities, and to prevent any other condition which would be incompatible with the facilities. To ensure the quality of sludge to allow its use and disposal in compliance with statutes and regulations; improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge; provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW); enable the POTW to comply with Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all nondomestic dischargers to the Brushy Creek Regional Wastewater System. 
(Code 1995, § 10.401) 
Sec. 44-81. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the regional executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
    Approved test procedures means those procedures found at 40 CFR 136 and those alternate procedures approved by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of title 40. 
    Authorized representative of user means a duly authorized representative of a user in accordance with the general pretreatment regulations. 
    BCRWS means the Brushy Creek Regional Wastewater System. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the oxygen required for the biochemical degradation of organic material in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as determined by approved test procedures. 
    Categorical user means a user that is subject to the National Categorical Standards. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any system of condensation, such as air conditioning, cooling, and refrigeration systems. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure of the oxygen equivalent of the organic matter content that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant, expressed in mg/l as determined by approved test procedures. 
    Composite sample means a sample resulting from the combination of individual aliquots taken at equal intervals based on increments of time, flow or both. 
    Control authority means the city manager, director of public works or a duly authorized representative for the purpose of implementation and enforcement of this division and the Brazos River Authority as the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) responsible for implementation of the pretreatment program approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
    Control point means point of access to a user's sewer where sewage monitoring can be done. 
    Dilution means the addition of any material, either liquid or nonliquid, or any other method to attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the national categorical standards or local limits set by this section. 
    Director means the city director of public works or his duly authorized representative unless otherwise specified. 
    Domestic sewage means water-borne materials normally discharged from sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm water, utility and process discharges. Normal domestic sewage means normal sewage for the city in which the average daily concentration of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS) are established at 250 mg/l each, on the basis of the normal contribution of 0.20 pound per capita per day each, and in which the average daily concentration of chemical oxygen demand (COD) is established at 450 mg/l. It is further expressly provided that for the purpose of this section, any discharge that exceeds the above concentration of BOD, TSS or COD shall be classified as nondomestic and made subject to all regulations pertaining thereto, whether or not such discharge was partially of domestic origin. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
    General pretreatment regulations means 40 CFR 136, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected without regard to flow in a time not to exceed fifteen minutes. 
    Headworks means the location where raw (untreated) sewage is introduced into the sewage treatment facilities. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    Maximum allowable discharge limit means maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Monthly average limit means a discharge limit based on the average of the analytical results of all samples for a parameter taken during a calendar month using approved methods for both sampling and analysis. 
    National categorical standards means the pretreatment regulations of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, chapter I, subchapter N, EPA Effluent Guidelines and Standards. 
    New source means the following: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b and c of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation. 
    Noncategorical user means a user that is not subject to the national categorical standards. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Nondomestic sewage means a discharge to the POTW that is not domestic sewage. 
    Nonprocess flows means sewage that is not classified as domestic or process, such as noncontact cooling water, cooling tower blowdown, air conditioner condensates, and demineralizer blowdown. 
    Outfall means a discharge of sewage that is expressly identified by the control authority for control and monitoring purposes. 
    Overload means the imposition of mass or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Pass-through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges form other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Brushy Creek Regional Wastewater System TPDES permits, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration; measure of the acidity or alkalinity measured in standard units. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    POTW (publicly owned treatment works) means the sewage treatment works owned/operated by the BCRWS. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage. It includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey sewage to the BCRWS. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means all of the requirements that are set forth in this article and in 40 CFR. 
    Process flow means sewage that is generated during manufacturing or processing, which comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
    Removal is as defined in the general pretreatment regulations. 
    Sewage means solids, liquids, or gaseous materials discharged to the city's POTW. Sewage includes both domestic and nondomestic sewage. 
    Sewage sludge. 
(1)  The term "sewage sludge" means any solid, semi-solid, or liquid residue generated during the treatment of domestic sewage in a treatment works. Sewage sludge includes, but is not limited to, domestic septage; scum or solids removed in primary, secondary, or advanced wastewater treatment processes; and a material derived from sewage sludge. 
(2)  The term "sewage sludge" does not include ash generated during the firing of sewage sludge in a sewage sludge incinerator or grit and screenings generated during preliminary treatment of domestic sewage in a treatment works. 
    Sewer (sanitary sewer) means an artificial pipe or channel that carries sewage and to which stormwater and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Significant user means a user that: 
(1)  Is subject to national categorical standards; 
(2)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of process flow to the POTW; 
(3)  Discharges of process flow which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(4)  Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control authority, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant. 
    Slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards stated herein. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the office of management and budget. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Surcharge means the additional wastewater service charge incurred by any user discharging waste containing higher concentrations of BOD, oil and grease, TSS and COD than those defined for domestic sewage herein. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts. 
    TPDES means Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    TPDES permit holder means the Brazos River Authority for the Brushy Creek Regional Wastewater System. 
    TSS (total suspended solids, nonfilterable residue) means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension, measured at 103-105 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/l, as determined by approved test procedures. 
    User means a discharger of any nondomestic sewage to the POTW. A user includes, but is not limited to, any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, group, association, organization, agency, city, county, or district. 
(b)  The meaning of all terms used in this article that are not defined above shall be as defined in title 40, Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 10.402) 
Sec. 44-82. - Pretreatment standards. 
(a)  There are three types of pretreatment standards: prohibited discharge standards, including general, specific, and dilution prohibitions; national categorical standards; and local limits. These standards shall apply to a user whether or not the user is subject to other federal, state, or local requirements. 
(b)  The standards in this subsection shall apply to each user, as applicable. Users in an industrial manufacturing category specified in title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, chapter I, subchapter N, EPA Effluent Guidelines and Standards, shall be subject to prohibited discharge standards, national categorical standards, and local limits. Other users shall be subject to prohibited discharge standards and local limits. Where these standards overlap, the most stringent standard shall apply to the user. 
(c)  The control authority, at his discretion, has the right to apply these standards to individual nondomestic discharges before they are commingled. 
(d)  Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions. A user may not discharge to the POTW any material which causes pass-through or interference. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. The following shall not be discharged to the POTW: 
a.  Discharges which are capable of creating a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW. These discharges include, but are not limited to, discharges with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit, as determined by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials) standard D-93-79 or D-93-80K or a Seta flash Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified in ASTM standard D-3278-78; 
b.  Discharges which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.5; 
c.  Discharges containing: 
1.  Solid or viscous materials in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in or proper operation of the POTW resulting in interference; 
2.  Any materials such as wax, grease, oil, or plastics that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
3.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
4.  Any materials such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids in such quantities capable of causing interference with the POTW; or 
5.  Any fats, oils, greases or similar materials in excess of a daily average limit of 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) using approved methods for fats, oils and greases. 
d.  Discharges having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any discharge which contains heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity or cause interference with the POTW, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the headworks of the POTW exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
e.  Discharges that contain any noxious or malodorous materials which can form a gas; which, either singly or by interaction with other discharges, are capable of causing objectionable odors or hazard to life; which creates any other condition deleterious to the POTW; or which requires unusual provisions, attention, or expense to handle; 
f.  Discharges which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute workers health and safety problems; 
g.  Discharges that are capable of causing excessive discoloration in the POTW effluent; 
h.  Discharges with unusual flow and concentration, including those with oxygen demanding materials, at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference with the POTW, or, if such materials can cause damage to collection facilities, impair the treatment processes, incur excessive treatment cost, or cause the city to be noncompliant with the conditions of its discharge permits; 
i.  Discharges containing a BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) or TSS (total suspended solids) concentration in excess of 7,000 mg/l; 
j.  Discharges classified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality as hazardous waste at 31 TAC (Texas Administrative Code) chapter 335 without the written approval of the control authority; 
k.  Discharges containing radioactive materials without the written approval of the control authority; 
l.  Materials that are trucked or hauled in, except at discharge points that are designated by the control authority; or 
m.  Discharges from steam cleaning and chemical cleaning businesses unless a facility or process is provided that will produce an effluent compliant applicable pretreatment requirements. There shall be no discharge of visible foam. 
(3)  Dilution prohibitions. 
a.  No user shall ever add any material, either liquid or nonliquid, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the national categorical standards or local limits. 
b.  This prohibition does not include dilution which is a normal part of the production process or a necessary part of the process to treat a waste, such as adding lime for neutralization or precipitation, or the mixture of compatible wastes in order to treat at capacity levels rather than treating wastes in small batches. 
c.  The control authority, at his discretion, may impose mass limitations on a user that is using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(e)  National Categorical Standards. National Categorical standards apply to specific industrial subcategories under title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, chapter I, subchapter N, EPA Effluent Guidelines and Standards. A user that falls into one of these subcategories shall be subject to the pretreatment standards applicable to that subcategory and is classified as a categorical user. 
(f)  Local limits. Local limits are quantitative limits on discharges applicable to all users. Local limits are designed to meet the general and specific prohibitions in this section. 
(1)  Existing local limits. Local limits are periodically reviewed by the control authority and revised as necessary to respond to changes in federal, state, or local regulations, environmental protection criteria, plant design and operational criteria, and the nature of industrial discharges to the POTW. Local limits are as follows: 
Constituent* Maximum Allowable Concentration 
in a Daily Composite, mg/l Arsenic 1.06 Cadmium 0.32 Chromium 10.70 Copper 3.83 Cyanide 0.40 Lead 0.95 Mercury 0.0** Nickel 3.96 Selenium 0.04 Silver 0.81 Zinc 1.80  
Notes: 
*Limits for metal based on unfiltered samples. 
**Compliance shall be measured at the minimum analytical level (MAL) of 0.0002 mg/l) 
(2)  Case-by-case local limits. Local limits that have not yet been established for a material may be developed on a case-by-case, user specific basis. A user must have the case-by-case local limits included in a permit before discharging to the POTW. 
(Code 1995, § 10.403) 
Sec. 44-83. - Significant users. 
(a)  Option to exclude industrial users. The control authority need not list as significant any industrial user that does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user as found in 40 CFR 403.3(t). 
(b)  Delisting of industrial users. Any industrial user that has been listed as a significant industrial user may petition the control authority to be removed from the significant industrial user list and reclassified as nonsignificant on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any of the pretreatment requirements. 
(c)  Notification requirements. If an industrial user has been listed as a significant industrial user by the control authority for whatever reason, prior to removal from the list, the control authority will notify the approval authority. 
(Code 1995, § 10.404) 
Sec. 44-84. - Discharge permits. 
(a)  Applicability. The following shall obtain a discharge permit: 
(1)  Significant users; 
(2)  Categorical users; 
(3)  Businesses or industries with a manufacturing process; 
(4)  Any other business, individual or entity connected to the sanitary sewer, which in the opinion of the control authority requires a permit. These entities shall obtain a permit from the control authority prior to discharging non-domestic sewage to the BCRWS. Permit applications shall be submitted to the control authority prior to permit issuance. Either the owner or operator of a user's facility shall submit the application. 
(b)  Denial or condition of permit. The control authority has the right to deny or condition a permit for any nondomestic discharges that do not meet the pretreatment requirements or would cause the city to be noncompliant with the conditions of the BCRWS's discharge permits. 
(c)  Permit conditions. 
(1)  Minimum conditions. The permit will contain the following minimum conditions: 
a.  Period during which the permit is effective, in no case greater than five years; 
b.  Transferability of the permit to a new owner or operator allowable only with notification and approval of control authority; 
c.  Limits on the volume and quality of sewage discharged based on the pretreatment standards; 
d.  Requirements for self-monitoring programs such as location, type, and frequency of sampling, measurement, and analysis; 
e.  Requirements for notifications, reports, and record keeping; and 
f.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(2)  Other conditions. The following conditions, as applicable, will be in the permit: 
a.  Conditions and compliance schedule necessary to achieve compliance with the pretreatment requirements; 
b.  Plans to prevent and control spills and batch discharges; 
c.  Any other conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the pretreatment requirements, and other federal, state and local requirements; and 
d.  A statement requiring that all reports contain the certification statement at 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2). 
(d)  Permit application form. Applications for new permits, permit renewals, and permit modifications shall be made on a standard form provided by the control authority. Applications shall be submitted to the control authority. 
(e)  Existing users. Significant users with existing nondomestic discharges prior to March 14, 1990, shall submit a permit application before September 15, 1990. Other users with existing nondomestic discharges prior to March 14, 1990, shall submit a permit application before June 15, 1990. Existing users shall be allowed to discharge nondomestic sewage without a permit until the control authority has issued the user a permit, if the user has submitted a permit application with the applicable time period. 
(f)  New users. A new user shall submit a permit application and obtain a permit before discharging to the POTW. An application shall be submitted by significant users at least 180 days before the date the discharge will begin. It is recommended that an application be submitted by other user at least 90 days before the date the discharge will begin. 
(g)  Discharge and permit modifications. If a user with a discharge permit wishes to add or change a process or operation which would change the nature or increase the quantities of materials discharged to the POTW such that the user would be noncompliant with the user's permit requirements or the pretreatment requirements, the user shall obtain approval by the control authority prior to making these additions or changes to the discharge. Approval shall be given by the control authority by a modification, or revocation and re-issuance of the permit. A significant user shall submit an application for permit modification at least 180 days before the date the change in discharge is expected to begin. It is recommended that an application be submitted by other users at least 90 days before the date the change in discharge is expected to begin. 
(h)  Permit renewal. A permit may have a period of duration up to five years. A permit shall be renewed by submitting an application for renewal. An application for the user shall be submitted at least 90 days before the expiration date of the existing permit. 
(i)  Re-opening of permit. The control authority has the right to re-open a permit before its expiration date to include compliance schedules, or to achieve compliance with new or revised pretreatment requirements, and other federal, state, or local requirements. 
(j)  Changes in owner or operator. 
(1)  Transfer of permit. A permit shall only be transferred to a new owner or operator if the following conditions are met. The expiration date of the permit is not extended by the transfer. The control authority will send to the owner or operator a revision to the permit to reflect the change in owner or operator. 
a.  The nature of the discharge or operation of the facility will not change under the new owner or operator; 
b.  The current owner or operator notifies the control authority at least 30 days in advance of the proposed transfer date; 
c.  The notification includes a written agreement between the current and new owner or operator continuing a specific date for transfer of permit responsibility, coverage, and liability between them; and 
d.  The control authority does not notify the current and new owner or operator of the control authority's intent to revoke and reissue the permit. If the control authority does not notify, the transfer is effective on the date specified in the written agreement. 
(2)  Revocation and re-issuance of permit. If above conditions in subsection (j)(1) of this section are not met, the control authority shall require the new owner or operator to submit a permit application as a new user and obtain a permit before discharging to the POTW. In addition, the current owner or operator shall notify the control authority at least 30 days in advance of the proposed date on which the ownership will change. 
(Code 1995, § 10.405) 
Sec. 44-85. - Removal credits. 
(a)  The control authority may, at his discretion, grant removal credits to a categorical user to reflect removal by the POTW of materials specified in the national categorical standards. The control authority may grant a removal credit equal to or, at his discretion, less than the POTW's consistent removal rate. Removal credits may only be given for indicator or surrogate materials regulated in a national categorical standard if the standard so specifies. 
(b)  A user shall submit a removal credit application to the control authority. Written approval by the control authority shall be obtained prior to taking the removal credit. Application shall be made on a standard form provided by the control authority. 
(c)  The control authority has the right to grant removal credits only after the user has met the requirements of the general pretreatment regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 10.406) 
Sec. 44-86. - Notification requirements. 
    Notification to the control authority is required for any of the following. The timing, content, and form of notification are established either in the discharge application or discharge permit, as applicable. 
(1)  A condition or event that would cause pass-through of or interference with the POTW, including slug loadings as defined by sections 44-81 and 44-82. 
(2)  Permit noncompliance. 
(3)  Bypasses and upsets. 
(4)  A change in pretreatment processes. 
(5)  A change in monitoring facilities such as location and type of equipment. 
(6)  Discharges of hazardous waste. 
(7)  Discharges containing radioactive materials. 
(8)  Other appropriate conditions or events to ensure compliance with the pretreatment requirements, and other federal, state, or local requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 10.407) 
Sec. 44-87. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline report. Categorical users shall submit baseline reports in accordance with the general pretreatment regulations. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of the categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least ninety days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the following: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Descriptions of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use to the combined wastestream formula. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR 136. 
f.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). This statement must be reviewed by an authorized representative of the IU and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. 
(1)  Should additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance be required to meet pretreatment standards, a compliance schedule will be issued. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements. 
(2)  No increment shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance. This report shall include as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the progress increments, reasons for any delays, and steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(c)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d-f of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2). Categorical users shall submit reports in accordance with the general pretreatment regulations on compliance schedule progress, compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, and continued compliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(d)  Periodic reports on continued compliance. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the control authority but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants and the estimated or measured daily maximum and average flows of the discharges to which pretreatment requirements are applicable. All periodic reports must be complete, signed and certified in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(2)  The control authority may require all other users and/or persons discharging nondomestic wastewater into the POTW to submit appropriate reports concerning the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge. 
(e)  Reports of additional samples taken. If a user subject to pretreatment requirements monitors any pollutant more frequently than required using approved test procedures, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the periodic reports. 
(f)  Repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(g)  Sample collection and monitoring requirements. All sampling techniques and pollutant analyses used for compilation of data required to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge application or report required by any pretreatment requirement shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. 
(h)  Additional reports. The control authority has the right to request any additional reports from a user that are necessary to assess and assure compliance with the pretreatment requirements. 
(i)  Record keeping. 
(1)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and additional records obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. 
(2)  Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of the sampling and the name of the persons taking the sample; dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of the analyses. 
(3)  Records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user of the control authority, or where the user has been specifically notified of a linger retention period by the control authority. 
(Code 1995, § 10.408) 
Sec. 44-88. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide pretreatment facilities if they are necessary in order to comply with the pretreatment standards in section 44-82. 
(1)  Approval of proposed pretreatment facilities. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information related to proposed pretreatment facilities for significant users shall be submitted to the control authority. Other users may be requested by the control authority to submit plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information related to proposed pretreatment facilities. Construction of such facilities prior to acceptance by the control authority may be done solely at the risk of the user. This acceptance shall in no way relieve the user of the obligation to install, operate, maintain and, if necessary, modify the pretreatment facilities to maintain compliance with the pretreatment requirements. Pretreatment facilities shall be constructed so as to provide the following: 
a.  Prevention of prohibited discharges from entering a sewer; 
b.  Control of the quantities and rates of discharge of nondomestic sewage into a sewer; and 
c.  An accessible entry so that any authorized employee of the city may readily and safely inspect and monitor the nondomestic discharges. 
(2)  Pretreatment facilities to be maintained. Pretreatment facilities shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the user at the user's expense. Operation and maintenance records shall be maintained by the user as specified in the user's discharge permit. 
(3)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. Users discharging nondomestic wastewater into the POTW shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited wastes. Prior to the commencement of any nondomestic discharge and at least once every two years the control authority shall evaluate whether each significant user requires an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. Each plan shall include the following as a minimum: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
b.  Description of stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 44-86; 
d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, measures and equipment for emergency response and any other procedures deemed necessary to prevent accidental/slug discharges from entering the POTW. 
(4)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require user to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
b.  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when deemed necessary by the control authority for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand. Such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the control authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning an inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
c.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Code 1995, § 10.409) 
Sec. 44-89. - Inspection, surveillance, and monitoring. 
(a)  Minimum monitoring requirements. 
(1)  Significant users shall be required to self-monitor to meet, at a minimum, the requirements of the general pretreatment regulations. 
(2)  Users that have the potential to routinely discharge nondomestic sewage that contains concentrations of BOD, TSS, and COD higher than those defined for domestic sewage herein shall be independently monitored by the city for flow, BOD, TSS, COD and pH at least once a year. The control authority shall determine which users have this potential. 
(3)  The city shall independently monitor all other users for flow, BOD, TSS, COD, and pH at a frequency in relation to their potential impact on the POTW, as determined by the control authority. 
(4)  The control authority may increase the frequency and/or add parameters to a user's self-monitoring program or the city's independent monitoring program to ensure compliance with the pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  Sampling and analysis. 
(1)  Significant users shall meet the requirements of the general pretreatment regulations for sampling and analysis. Other users shall meet the requirements for sampling and analysis as stated herein or in the user's control document. 
(2)  For all users, containers, preservation techniques, and holding times for samples shall comply with methods and procedures found at 40 CFR 136. 
(3)  For all users, sample analysis shall be in accordance with approved test procedures. The control authority, at this discretion, may specify which approved test procedure shall be used. 
(4)  Type of samples (grab or composite) and flow measurement shall be consistent with the type of discharge and parameters being regulated and shall be specified by the control authority in the permit. 
(c)  Control point. A user shall provide a control point for the purpose of sampling and flow measurement. The location and design of the control point shall be approved by the control authority. The control point shall be placed so that nondomestic sewage can be sampled and measured prior to any commingling with domestic sewage or nonprocess flows. Written approval of exceptions to this requirement shall be obtained by a user form the control authority. It is recommended that the control point for sampling and flow measurement be at the same location. Flow may be determined by water supply meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. Other methods for estimating wastewater discharge flow must approved by the control authority. 
(d)  Inspection and entry. The control authority or his duly authorized representative, federal and state officials, upon presentation of credentials and other documentation as may be required by law, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, set up and use of monitoring equipment, and inspection and copying of records having a direct bearing on the discharges of nondomestic sewage. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. The control authority may obtain search warrants to secure access to facilities/property. 
(e)  Use of contractors. The control authority may select an independent contractor to conduct the independent monitoring by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 10.410) 
Sec. 44-90. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative order. In addition to any other actions or remedies authorized in this article, the control authority or its duly authorized representative is authorized to enforce this article through the exercise of any one or more of the following administrative actions. Unless otherwise expressly set forth herein, the selection or use of one such action or remedy by the control authority shall not be construed to prevent the control authority from pursuing any other enforcement actions or remedies nor require the pursuit of a particular action or remedy as a condition precedent to the use of any other such action or remedy. 
(b)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  The control authority shall serve a user that is found noncompliant with the pretreatment requirements with a notice stating the nature of the noncompliance. This notice may or may not be in writing. 
(2)  Any violation of pretreatment standards incurs immediate liability. Each day of violation constitutes a separate noncompliance. 
(3)  Within 30 days after the date of receipt of this notice, a user shall submit a written response to the control authority with an explanation of the noncompliance, what steps are currently being taken to prevent the noncompliance, and a plan for the correction and continued prevention of the noncompliance. Submission of this response in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  Consent order. The control authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. 
(d)  Show cause hearing. The control authority may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement action issued, or any other pretreatment requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served by hand or certified mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Compliance order/compliance schedules. 
(1)  Applicability. If a user cannot comply with the pretreatment standards in section 44-82 or any other pretreatment requirement, the control authority may provide a compliance order containing a schedule for achieving compliance. 
(2)  Allowable time for compliance. The compliance schedule shall be the shortest time in which the user is able to provide pretreatment facilities or changes in operation and maintenance that will achieve compliance. If a user is given a compliance schedule for national categorical standards, the completion date of this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable national categorical standard and shall be in accordance with the general pretreatment requirements. A user shall not continue discharging in noncompliance of the pretreatment requirements beyond the time limit provided in the compliance schedule. 
(3)  Form of compliance schedule. Compliance schedules may be provided by the control authority by notice of noncompliance, enforcement order, or as part of the discharge permit. The control authority has the right to re-open a user's discharge permit in order to add a compliance schedule. 
(f)  Cease and desist order. When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued herein, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(g)  Authority to disconnect service. 
(1)  Conditions for disconnection. The city shall have the right to disconnect a user's sewer service when a user's discharge reasonably appears to: 
a.  Damage sewer lines or POTW treatment processes; 
b.  Cause the BCRWS to be noncompliant with the conditions of its discharge permits; 
c.  Present an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW; or 
d.  Present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. 
(2)  Notification. In the case of an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the control authority shall give oral or written notice to a user before disconnecting sewer service. Under all other conditions for disconnection, the control authority shall give written notice to a user before disconnection. Within ten days after receipt of notification of disconnection, the user must submit a written response to the control authority with an explanation of the cause of the problem and what measures have and will be taken to prevent any future occurrence. Submission of this response in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of disconnection. 
(3)  Reconnection of service. The user's sewer shall remain disconnected until such time that the user has demonstrated that the cause of this noncompliance has been eliminated. 
(4)  Liability. The city shall not be liable for any resulting damage to the user's property as a result of disconnection under the conditions for disconnection. 
(h)  Termination of permit. A user that violates any of the following conditions may be subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Failure to report a reasonable estimate of the volume and quality of its nondomestic sewage. 
(2)  Failure to notify the control authority of a change in process or operation which would significantly change the nature or increase the quantities of materials discharged to the POTW that would cause the user to be noncompliant with its discharge permit requirements or the pretreatment requirements. 
(3)  Refusal of right of entry to the user's premises in accordance with section 44-29. 
(4)  Intentional violation of permit conditions. 
(5)  Falsifying information. 
(6)  Failure to pay sewer charges or fines. 
(i)  Injunctive relief. The control authority may seek injunctive relief to restrain or compel actions of a user. 
(j)  Civil and criminal penalties. The control authority has the right to seek or assess civil or criminal penalties in at least the amount of $1,000.00 per day for each violation of the user's permit or the pretreatment requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 10.411) 
Sec. 44-91. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Act of God defense. 
(1)  The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense (V.T.C.A., Water Code § 7.251) in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. Act of God does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence that: 
a.  An event that would otherwise be a violation of the pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe; and 
b.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; 
2.  The time period of the event, including dates and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(3)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. 
(4)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment requirements upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power for the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Bypass. 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 
(3)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. 
(4)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(5)  A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment requirements within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if proper oral notice has been given. 
(6)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as stated herein. 
(7)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions in subsection (b)(6) of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 10.413) 
Sec. 44-92. - Confidentiality. 
    Information and data pertaining to an industrial user or other person subject to the ordinance obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharges, permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs, and from city inspection, sampling and enforcement activities shall be available to the public in accordance with the laws of the state, subject to the following: 
(1)  Such information shall be withheld from disclosure if the industrial user or the person subject to this chapter makes a specific and timely request in writing and demonstrates to the satisfaction of the control authority that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secret under applicable law; 
(2)  When timely requested and demonstrated that such information should be held confidential, the portions of the information that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the TPDES or pretreatment and monitoring program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the information; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be made available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1995, § 10.413) 
Sec. 44-93. - Right of revision. 
    The city shall have the right to revise the pretreatment requirements to ensure compliance with federal, state, or local requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 10.414) 
Sec. 44-94. - Public participation. 
    The city shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii) in the enforcement of these pretreatment requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 10.415; Ord. No. 2463, 3-8-1990; Ord. No. G-94-05-26-9B, 5-26-1994; Ord. No. G-03-08-28-9B1, 8-28-2003) 
Secs. 44-95-44-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 

Secs. 44-117-44-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES FEES 

Sec. 44-148. - Review and adjustment of fees. 
    In order to ensure an equitable cost recovery system, the control authority shall periodically review the fees and adjust them as appropriate. 
(Code 1995, § 10.600) 
Sec. 44-149. - Wastewater discharge permit applications and surcharge. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all nondomestic dischargers to the Brushy Creek Regional Wastewater System. 
(b)  Definitions. All words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as the words and phrases defined in section 44-81. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permit application. A user is subject to the following application fees: 
Significant Users Other Users New Permit $250.00 $25.00 Permit Renewal $250.00 $25.00 Permit Modification $250.00 $25.00  
Removal credit. A fixed fee for a removal credit application cannot be given because of the circumstances of each user and constituent the credit is applied for are highly variable. Any user or group of users wishing to apply for a removal credit shall assume responsibility for all costs incurred by the city. 
(d)  Surcharge for higher concentrations. Users shall be assessed a sewer surcharge for nondomestic sewage that contains concentrations of TSS and BOD/COD higher than those defined for domestic sewage herein. The surcharge shall be in addition to any other sewer charges required by other city ordinances. If a user has more than one nondomestic outfall identified in a permit, the surcharge shall be applicable to the daily average total of all nondomestic discharges and not the individual nondomestic discharges. 
(1)  When surcharge shall be applied. A user shall be subject to a surcharge when its nondomestic discharge daily average total: 
a.  Exceeds a TSS concentration of 250 mg/l; and/or 
b.  Exceeds a BOD concentration of 250 mg/l; or 
c.  Exceeds a COD concentration of 450 mg/l. 
(2)  Computation of surcharge. The city shall sample for both TSS and either BOD or COD. Computations of surcharges shall be based on the formulas below and for those concentrations that exceed the levels set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the surcharge shall be applied to that excess. The surcharges for individual TSS and BOD/COD are additive. 
BOD surcharge S BOD = V × 8.34 (A[BOD - 250]) TSS surcharge S TSS = V × 8.34 (B[TSS - 250]) COD surcharge S COD = V × 8.34 (C[COD - 450])  
S - Sum of surcharges in dollars that will appear on the user's monthly bill. V - Monthly average volume of nondomestic discharge in millions of gallons whichever is the least of the following volumes: (1) total monthly water consumption during the billing period, (2) the average water consumption for the billing periods of December, January and February of each fiscal year, or (3) the total estimated or measured nondomestic discharge as determined by methods specified in the user's permit. 8.34 - Conversion factor for units of measure in surcharge equations. A - $0.477 per pound of BOD B - $0.477 per pound of TSS C - $0.477 per pound of COD BOD - Biological Oxygen Demand concentration in mg/l. For more than one nondomestic discharge, this shall be the flow-weighted concentration. TSS - Total Suspended Solids concentration mg/l. For more than one nondomestic discharge, this shall be the flow-weighted concentration. COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand concentration in mg/l. For more than one nondomestic discharge, this shall be the flow-weighted concentration. 250 - Normal daily average domestic BOD and TSS concentration in mg/l. 450 - Normal daily average domestic COD in mg/l.  
(3)  Application of surcharge. Surcharge will apply directly to the water meter customer assigned to the discharging user. 
(4)  Sampling and analysis. The city shall sample for TSS, and either BOD or COD. The time of sampling shall be at the sole discretion of the control authority. The control authority may select an independent contractor to conduct the sampling and/or analyses. 
(5)  Sampling/control point. The user shall provide and the control authority shall designate a sampling/control point for the purpose of sampling. The location and design of the control point shall be approved by the control authority. 
This sampling point shall be free of impediments and easily accessible by city personnel. 
(6)  Period of surcharge. If analyses for TSS and/or BOD/COD shows that a surcharge is applicable, the surcharge shall be applied to the monthly water bill for a period of six months. 
(7)  Costs of analyses. When analyses show that a surcharge shall be applied, a fee of $50.00 shall be added to a user's bill to cover the sampling, handling, and laboratory analyses. When analyses show that a surcharge shall not be applied, then this fee shall not be added to the user's bill. 
(8)  Contested charges . User must contest any/all charges within 14 days of issuance of surcharge notification. 
(Code 1995, § 10.601; Ord. No. O-2016-3150, § I, 1-28-2016; Ord. No. O-2019-0094, § I, 2-28-2019) 
Sec. 44-150. - Special scheduling fees for household hazardous waste. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  The term "household hazardous waste" or "HHW" means leftover residential household products that contain corrosive, toxic, ignitable or reactive ingredients. Products such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries and pesticides that contain potentially hazardous ingredients require special care when disposed. 
(2)  The term "resident" means a person or individual living within the corporate boundaries of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(b)  Applicability. The fees described herein shall not be levied for any routinely-scheduled collection events for city residents. However, at any other times that a city resident requests special scheduling to dispose of an HHW product, such resident shall be charged the fees described herein. 
(c)  Fees for collection of household hazardous waste on special scheduling basis. A special scheduling fee of $20.00 is for residential household hazardous waste and residential quantities only. Residential quantity is defined as 25 gallons of materials or less. Commercial/business waste is not accepted. Determination of acceptable materials is at the sole discretion of the city. Unlabeled and/or unidentified wastes will not be accepted. 
(d)  Fees for collection of household hazardous waste from non-residents. The participation fee for non-residents in a household hazardous waste collection event is $40.00 per household. Non-residents from municipal utility districts participating in the city's household hazardous waste program may present a valid program voucher in lieu of the above fee. 
(e)  Payment of fee. Due at time of scheduled appointment. 
(Code 1995, § 10.602; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9B1, § I, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. O-2019-0094, § I, 2-28-2019) 
Sec. 44-151. - Analytical fees, sampling fees, and instrument inspection fees. 
(a)  Applicability. The fees described herein do not apply to any sampling event or analytical work initiated by the city for the purposes of its own routine testing and monitoring. 
(b)  Payment of fees. Fees for analytical, sampling, or instrument inspection work requested by a water or wastewater customer of the city shall be billed to the customer on the monthly utility bill. Fees for such work requested by persons or entities that are not water or wastewater customers of the city must be paid in advance at the environmental services laboratory. Requests for analytical, sampling, or instrument inspection work must be accompanied by the appropriate paperwork and evidence of payment, if applicable. 
(c)  Analytical fees. 
(1)  Analytical fees for water/wastewater. Fees for analytical tests are as follows: 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) $20.00 per sample Total Suspended Solids (TSS) $20.00 per sample CarbonaceousBiochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD) $20.00 per sample Hardness $10.00 per sample Alkalinity $10.00 per sample Turbidity $10.00 per sample Chlorine $10.00 per sample pH $10.00 per sample Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) $20.00 per sample  
(2)  Water bacteriological fees. 
24 hour Present/Absence Test for Total Coliform/E. Coli $20.00 per sample 18 hour Presence/Absence Test for Total Coliform/E. Coli $25.00 per sample 24 hour Enumeration Test For Total Coliform/E. Coli $25.00 per sample 18 hour Enumeration Test for Total Coliform/E. Coli $30.00 per sample Heterotrophic Plate Count (HPC) $15.00 per sample After Hours Presence/Absence Test for Total Coliform/E. Coli (24 hour or 18 hour) $50.00 After Hours Enumeration Test for Total Coliform/E. Coli (24 hour or 18 hour) $50.00  
The above-stated fees include reporting to the appropriate state agencies when required. 
(d)  Sampling fees. 
(1)  The sampling fee for wastewater discharge is $75.00 per sampling event. 
(2)  The wastewater discharge sampling event consists of a 24-hour composite sample taken by automatic sampler. The scheduling of this service is subject to approval and availability of the appropriate public works personnel. 
(e)  Instrument inspection fees. 
(1)  Applicability. The fee described herein only applies to customers requesting the service. 
(2)  Fee. Chlorine field instrument check: $10.00 per device. 
(Code 1995, § 10.603; Ord. No. G-97-03-27-10A, 3-27-1997; Ord. No. G-03-08-28-9B1, 8-28-2003; Ord. No. G-03-12-04-7D1, 12-4-2003; Ord. No. G-09-06-11-9B1, § II, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. O-2019-0094, § I, 2-28-2019) 
Sec. 44-152. - Recycling center fees. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a cost recovery mechanism for the handling and managing of materials at the City of Round Rock Recycling Center, making use of the recycling center fair and equitable to all persons. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means branches, limbs, and other parts of trees, shrubs, bushes, and similar vegetation which have been cut, lopped, or broken. The term "brush", as used herein, does not include grass clippings, leaves, or construction debris. 
    Large load means a load of brush that is greater than four cubic yards in volume. 
    Medium load means a load of brush that is greater than or equal to two but less than four cubic yards in volume. 
    Resident means a person or individual living within the corporate boundaries of the City of Round Rock, Texas. 
    Small load means a load of brush less than two cubic yards in volume that is generated by normal residential yard maintenance. 
(c)  Brush handling. The fees for disposing of brush at the City of Round Rock Recycling Center are as follows: 
Small load resident No charge Small load nonresident $15.00 per load Medium load $20.00 per load Large load $40.00 per load  
(Code 1995, § 10.604; Ord. No. G-97-03-27-10A, 3-27-1997) 
Secs. 44-153-44-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION 

Sec. 44-173. - Cross connection standards. 
    Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from, or is located at, a residential or commercial establishment, and said source of contamination or possible contamination is connected to any public potable water supply or provides potable water to the public shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 10.701; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XIII, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 44-174. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word used in this article is not contained in the following list, it shall have the definition listed in section 44-5 or in the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California. The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, and shall not be less than one inch in any case. 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly means an assembly to counteract back pressure or prevent backsiphonage. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB means a device used to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent backpressure backflow. 
    Auxiliary supply means any water source or system other than the public potable water system that is or may be available in a building or on real property, including reuse water, groundwater or surface water used for industrial, irrigation or any other purpose. 
    Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow of the city's potable water system, or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the city's potable water system. 
    Backflow prevention assembly tester means a licensed tester who is registered with the city's third party vendor to test backflow pressure assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation service. 
    Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow of water in the city's potable water system, or the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
    Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source, other than its intended source, caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Boresight or boresight to daylight means the provision of adequate drainage for assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe. 
    Commercial establishment means any property or location which is used for the manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of any good or ware which is, or may be, placed in the flow of commerce, or any property or location which is used for the provision of any service for compensation. 
    Contaminants means any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply which makes or may make the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption. 
    Contamination means the admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system. 
    Cross connection means any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device through which it may be possible for any reuse, nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Cross connection control device means any device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is designed to prevent reuse, nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Degree of hazard means the hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross connections. 
(1)  The term "health hazard" means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
(2)  The term "high hazard" means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(3)  The term "low hazard" means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to a person's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
(4)  The term "plumbing hazard" means an internal or plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination-type hazard. 
(5)  The term "pollutional hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined herein. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
(6)  The term "system hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Director means director of utilities and environmental services, or his designee. 
    Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC means an assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
    Fireline tester means a tester who is employed by a state-approved fireline contractor and is qualified to test assemblies on firelines only. 
    Mobile unit means any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles. 
    Non-residential use means water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and include all uses not specifically included in "residential uses." 
    Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
    Potable water supply means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
    Premises means any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on the property. 
    Premises isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker or PVB means an assembly which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly must have suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allow the complete testing of the assembly. 
    Public water system or water system means any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
    Reduced pressure principal detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector or RPDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter must be capable of accurately registering very low rates of flow. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve the end of the assembly. 
    Residential use means water use of any residential customer of the water supply and shall include, but is not limited to, single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex, housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the units are full-time dwellings. 
    Service connection means the point of delivery at which the water supplier loses control of the water. 
    Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker or SVB means an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly must be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
    Tamper means to interfere in a harmful or disruptive manner, or to make alterations or adjustments. 
    Thermal expansion means heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
    Third party vendor means a third party contracted by the city to provide backflow testing notification and data management services on behalf of the city. 
    Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water customer is the person or company on the water billing account agreement with the city. 
(Code 1995, § 10.702; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XIV, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-175. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
    No person shall install or maintain an assembly, or any part thereof, upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided in this article. 
(1)  An assembly required by the city may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic, utilities or any other purpose for which the right-of-way exists. The person installing an assembly must obtain express written approval from the city regarding the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by any applicable code or regulation to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained prior to the installation of the assembly. 
(3)  The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends above ground shall be located no closer than 18 inches to the face of any curb. 
(4)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. A person that installs an assembly in a city right-of-way shall repair, clean up, and restore any and all streets, alleys, highways, public thoroughfares, public utility easements, public ways, and other public property within a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days after the completion of the work, to as good or better condition as existed prior to the commencement of the work, and to the satisfaction of the director. 
(5)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate an assembly that encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is deemed necessary by the city. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if he fails to relocate an assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way after receiving a written order from the director requesting such relocation. 
(Code 1995, § 10.703; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-176. - Multiple connections. 
    The owner of any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection must install an assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard that may occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 10.704) 
Sec. 44-177. - Protection required; installation. 
(a)  The assembly protection which is required under this article shall be any of the duly authorized assemblies listed in the Uniform Plumbing Code, or as determined by the director. Each assembly must be approved in writing by the director in conjunction with the chief building inspector of the city prior to installation. Failure to obtain such written approval prior to installation of the assembly may result in the assembly failing to meet final approval by the director. The director shall determine the type and location of assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. An assembly shall be required in each of the following circumstances, but the director is not limited to requiring the installation of an assembly only in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity on or near the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity on or near the premises, or materials stored on or near the premises, may contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having any one or more cross connections identified or one or more cross connections present on the premises. 
(3)  One or more cross connections are present on the premises and the cross connections are protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(4)  Internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 
(5)  Intricate plumbing arrangements are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 
(6)  There is a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established on the premises. 
(7)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist. 
(8)  Materials are being used on the premises such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard may result. 
(9)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the sole judgment of the city. 
(10)  An appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the utility department of the city after a request by the city. 
(11)  A fire sprinkler system on the premises is connected to the city's water system. 
(12)  All new construction, if deemed necessary as a result of the customer service inspection referred to in section 44-182. The type of assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by the director. 
(13)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly must be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(14)  Any used water return system is present on the premises. 
(15)  In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this section, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(16)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(17)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(18)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections, and in additional circumstances in which the city deems it necessary to retrofit. 
(b)  All assemblies installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection by the director of the city. Any currently installed assemblies that, in the opinion of the director, are located in inaccessible locations, or where the tester is subjected to physical danger, shall be relocated to location approved in writing by the director. 
(Code 1995, § 10.705; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-178. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  The director shall inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all assemblies in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installation; 
(2)  Whenever the assembly is relocated; 
(3)  A minimum of once every 12 months for assemblies that are used in high-hazard applications. Assemblies that are used in non-hazard applications must be tested a minimum of once every seven years; 
(4)  Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for 12 months, prior to reoccupancy; or 
(5)  Immediately after repairs have been made to the assembly. 
(b)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester registered with the third party vendor. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the city are authorized to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the city ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry onto their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their responsibilities. 
(d)  The city shall not be liable to any person for any damage to an assembly that occurs during testing or repairing. 
(e)  The director may cause a water use survey to be conducted at any commercial establishment located in the city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by the director that the commercial establishment falls under the provisions of this article and requires an assembly, the director shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the commercial establishment to install the proper assembly. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies tested upon installation in accordance with this article. 
(g)  After the initial testing upon installation, it is the responsibility of the water customer to have all assemblies subsequently tested in accordance with this article. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the director deems it necessary. 
(h)  All results from assembly testing, repairs and replacements by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester shall be submitted to the third party vendor. 
(Code 1995, § 10.706; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-179. - Thermal expansion. 
    It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of an assembly. 
(Code 1995, § 10.707; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-180. - Pressure loss. 
    Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of an assembly is not the responsibility of the city. The city shall not be liable to any person for damages resulting from any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of an assembly. 
(Code 1995, § 10.708) 
Sec. 44-181. - Residential service connections. 
    Any property owner at any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross connection or have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 10.709; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-182. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to commission water system regulations, a customer service inspection for cross connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously nonexisting premises; 
(2)  After any material improvement to buildings or premises; 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises served by the city; or 
(4)  The director deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a newly constructed facility until after the customer service inspection is completed. 
(Code 1995, § 10.710; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-183. - Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation of all assemblies: 
(1)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with state law, commission rules, this article, and any other applicable law or regulation. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the installation inspected by the director. 
(2)  With respect to facilities where the director requires an assembly to be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, the installation of the assembly must be made at a point prior to any branch in the line. Such installation must be made on private property within two feet of the water meter. If deemed necessary, the director may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed, or are located on, city rights-of-way are the responsibility of the business or entity that the water line is serving. 
(3)  All assemblies must be protected from damage caused by freezing or other severe weather conditions. 
(4)  All assemblies shall be of a type and model approved in writing by the director prior to installation. 
(5)  All vertical installations of assemblies must have prior written approval by the director. 
(6)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies that are larger than four inches and installed more than five feet above floor level must have a suitable platform for use by testing, inspection or maintenance personnel. 
(7)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line must not be installed on the premises. 
(8)  Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation of an assembly. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(9)  All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have an assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed without interrupting the water service to the premises. The assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly, operating independently, will provide the maximum flow required. 
(10)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from installation of an assembly. 
(11)  The water customer assumes all responsibility for any damages resulting from operation and/or maintenance of an assembly and shall be responsible for keeping all assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris. 
(12)  Upon completion of installation, the director shall be notified by the property owner, and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be approved in writing by and registered with the director, and the property owner shall provide to the director the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size and serial number of the assembly, and initial test report. 
(13)  Requests for variances from the specifications and requirements of this article will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations from this article must have prior written approval of the director. 
(b)  Upon written approval by the director, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs) may be utilized on-premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP must be effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(1)  RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. Flow characteristics are not standard. The manufacturer's specifications must be consulted for specific performance data. 
(2)  Each RP assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishings would not occur in the event of a relief valve discharge. The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from a RP assembly. 
(3)  An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one inch. An approved air gap funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; however, this assembly may not be used to control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines to accommodate full relief valve discharge flow should be installed. 
(4)  No part of an RP assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs must be installed above grade in well-drained areas. 
(5)  RP assembly enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Removable protective enclosures should be installed on smaller RP assemblies. Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the RP assembly. 
(6)  RP assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least six inches of clearance on both sides and on top of the assembly, and 12 inches of clearance below and behind the assembly. All RP assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of 12 inches of clearance on the back side, 24 inches of clearance on the test cock side. The relief valve opening shall be at least 12 inches (plus nominal size of assembly) above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of 60 inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches in diameter is required on all vault lids. 
(7)  Vertical installation of RP assemblies is prohibited. 
(8)  All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this article. The initial testing is the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner must notify the director upon the installation of any assembly. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDAs) may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
(1)  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principle backflow assemblies (RPs). 
(2)  Each line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested for proper functioning. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the licensed tester. 
(d)  Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DCs) may be utilized on premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. The manufacturer's specifications must be consulted for specific performance data. 
(2)  Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical must be provided with two DC assemblies installed in parallel. DC assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly, operating independently, will provide the maximum flow required. 
(3)  Each DC assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, provided that all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. 
(4)  DC assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least six inches of clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than 24 inches below grade. All DC assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12 inches on the back side, 24 inches of clearance on the test cock side, and 12 inches of clearance below the assembly. Headroom of 60 inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 36 inches in diameter is required on all vault lids. "Y" pattern DCs shall be installed so that the checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all DC assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures or meter boxes. 
(5)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches and which also meet the following requirements: 
a.  Equipped with internally spring-loaded check valves; 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly; 
c.  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position; 
d.  Approved by director. 
(6)  All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. The initial testing is the responsibility of the assembly and property owner. The property owner must notify the director upon the installation of any assembly. 
(e)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA) may be utilized in all installations requiring a DC and detector metering. 
(1)  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for DCs. 
(2)  Each line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must be tested for proper functioning. A separate test report for each assembly must be completed by the licensed tester. 
(f)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs) may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure contamination. 
(1)  Each PVB assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest downstream piping. 
(2)  PVBs shall not be installed in any area subject to flooding or where damage may occur from water discharge. 
(3)  Each PVB assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of 12 inches in all areas immediately adjacent to the assembly. 
(4)  All PVBs must be tested in accordance with this article. The initial testing is the responsibility of the assembly and property owner. The property owner must notify the director upon the installation of any assembly. 
(g)  Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVBs) may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs). 
(Code 1995, § 10.711; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-184. - Air gap separation. 
    Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized in water systems situated on premises where a substance is present which would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(1)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel, and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle, and the air gap distance shall in such case be measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses shall not be used. 
(2)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior written approval from the director, and must be accessible for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Side walls, ribs, or similar obstructions shall be spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening to a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or to a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
(4)  In systems where there are three or more side walls, ribs, or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening in a manner other than specified in subsection 44-183(c), the air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall. 
(5)  The effective opening shall be the minimum cross sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller. 
(Code 1995, § 10.712; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-185. - Fire systems. 
(a)  An approved DCDA or RPDA shall be installed on fire sprinkler systems comprised of piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each 24-hour period, unless a variance has been granted in writing by the director. A RPDA must be installed if any solution or substance other than the potable water may be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(b)  Upon the approved installation of a DCDA or RPDA, a cross connection test report completed by a city registered, licensed fireline tester must be sent to the director, and such report must include the information required by this article. 
(Code 1995, § 10.713; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-186. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  All property owners shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the director. All property owners are also responsible for the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs designated the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to this article, and the purchase and installation of the assemblies required by this article. 
(2)  To install all assemblies in accordance with this article and acceptable industry practices. 
(3)  If not obtained by the licensed backflow prevention assembly tester, apply for and obtain a building permit from the building official of the city prior to commencing any work, including testing of, on any assembly device. 
(b)  All water customers shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article. All water customers are also responsible for the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs designated the responsibility of the water customer pursuant to this article, and all maintenance, testing and required repairs excluding costs for installation and initial testing of assemblies required by this article. 
(2)  All commercial establishments shall annually test, or cause to be tested, all assemblies on the premises. Such tests must be conducted by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester who is registered with the city. 
(3)  Maintain all assemblies in proper working order at all times, including making repairs as required to ensure the proper functioning of the assemblies. 
(5)  Maintain all assemblies such that the assemblies may be tested by a method that has been approved by the director. 
(6)  Each record related to assembly installation, testing and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years. 
(c)  All licensed backflow prevention assembly testers shall: 
(1)  Annually register with the third party vendor, pay any required fee, and provide the information required by this article. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration. 
(3)  Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested in compliance with accepted industry practices, commission regulations, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(5)  Enter the required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on third party vendor's website. 
(6)  Report test results electronically to the third party vendor's website within five days of testing. For any new assemblies, either new installs or previously undocumented assemblies not in the third party vendor's system, the tester may submit by e-mail or fax the test results to the third party vendor for the initial year. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed initial test report required after installation to the property owners subject to the testing requirements of this article. All other completed test reports after the initial test report shall be provided to the water customer. 
(8)  Maintain each testing and/or repair record for a minimum of three years. 
(9)  If not obtained by the property owner, apply for and obtain a building permit from the building official of the city prior to commencing any work, including testing, on any assembly device. 
(10)  Pay the third party vendor fee as a data entry charge for each test report submitted to the third party vendor's website. 
(11)  Immediately turn off all devices that fail a test. 
(d)  The director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article, state law and regulations regarding cross connections. The director shall inspect and initially test, or cause to be tested, all assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. Permanent water service shall not be provided to new facilities until all assemblies have been tested and are functioning properly. Except in cases where the testing of assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the director shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all assemblies have been tested and are functioning properly. 
(e)  The third party vendor shall: 
(1)  Through the use of its proprietary software, maintain an online database and website for testers to register and input test reports. 
(2)  Send by mail a notice to the water customer approximately 30 days prior to the testing due date, advising the water customer that the assembly is due for testing, and transmit a copy of the notice to the last tester of record. 
(3)  Send by mail a second notice to the water customer once the testing due date has passed if a test report for the assembly has not been submitted. 
(4)  Transmit a notice of noncompliance to the director by electronic transmission if the third party vendor fails to receive a test report within 15 day of the mailing the second notice. 
(Code 1995, § 10.714; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-187. - Backflow prevention assembly tester registration required. 
    Persons desiring to be approved backflow prevention assembly testers within the city must provide to the third party vendor proof of commission licensing, and provide proof that their testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy. The third party vendor shall maintain a database of licensed and registered testers. 
(Code 1995, § 10.715; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-188. - Fees. 
(a)  All property owners shall: 
(1)  Have the assembly tested as required by a licensed tester upon installation of an assembly. All property owners shall pay the testing fee to the tester upon completion of the initial testing of an assembly. If a property owner fails to test the device upon installation, the director may perform the test and assess a testing fee of $75.00 plus the actual cost of the test for each separate assembly device on which the director performs a test. 
(2)  If an assembly is deemed not to be working properly upon the initial inspection or initial testing of the assembly after installation, the director shall have the necessary repairs and/or adjustments made immediately and shall retest the assembly. The property owner will then be required to pay the actual cost of the retest and repair required. 
(b)  All water customers shall: 
(1)  Have the assembly routinely tested as required by a licensed tester. Upon receipt of a notification that testing is required, all water customers shall have the assembly tested by a licensed tester and pay the testing fee to the tester upon completion of the testing. 
(2)  If the assembly is located on residential premises and categorized as "low hazard," the water customer may in lieu of having the assembly tested, choose to notify the director within the timeframe set forth in the notification, to lock the assembly in the closed position and tag with a do not operate notice. Removal of this tag and/or lock is a violation of this section. 
(3)  If a water customer fails to test the device or notify the director to lock the assembly within the required timeframe, the director may perform the test and assess a testing fee of $75.00 plus the actual cost of the test for each separate assembly device on which the director performs a test. 
(4)  If an assembly is deemed not to be working properly after testing, the director shall have the necessary repairs and/or adjustments made immediately and shall retest the assembly. The property owner will then be required to pay the actual cost of the retest and repair required. 
(5)  If the assembly is located on a residential premises and categorized as "low hazard," after an assembly is tested and deemed to not be working properly, the water customer can choose to immediately notify the director to lock the assembly in the closed position and tag with a do not operate notice in lieu of a retest. Removal of this tag and/or lock is a violation of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 10.716; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-189. - Compliance for lawn irrigation or sprinkler systems. 
    All persons installing commercial and residential lawn irrigation or sprinkler systems shall annually register with the director and obtain a permit from the building inspection department of the city prior to making such installations. The installation requirements must comply with standards for the applicable device required by this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source are prohibited. Appropriate backflow prevention devices must be installed on the premises if any mechanical injection stations are used with the irrigation or sprinkler system. 
(Code 1995, § 10.717; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-190. - Mobile units. 
    The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly. Prior approval and annual device testing of any air gap or assembly must be obtained from the director before connecting a mobile unit to any potable water system. Testing fees shall be assessed in the amounts provided for in section 44-188, and shall be paid by the owner or operator of the mobile units prior to any inspection or testing of the air gap or assembly. 
(Code 1995, § 10.718; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015) 
Sec. 44-191. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if he fails to maintain an assembly in compliance with this article. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if he fails to comply with a repair order issued by the director. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if backflow from premises he owns, controls, operates or manages enters a public potable water supply system. 
(4)  A person commits an offense if he fails to pay any fees required by this article. 
(5)  A person commits an offense if he violates any provision of this article. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if he reinstates water service to premises discontinued or disconnected pursuant to the provisions of this article, except as directed by the director. 
(7)  A person owning or in control of premises commits an offense if he allows an unregistered or unlicensed tester to perform testing work on his premises. 
(8)  A person commits an offense if he tests an assembly within the city without being registered with the director. 
(9)  A person commits an offense if he tests an assembly within the city without being licensed by the commission. 
(10)  A person commits an offense if he possesses on his premises a cross connection that is not protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly as described in section 44-183. 
(11)  A person commits and offense if he tampers with a backflow device or valve that has been shut off and tagged by the director. 
(b)  Punishment for violations; other remedies. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-9 for a violation of an ordinance or regulation governing public health and sanitation. 
(2)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of this article, the city is entitled to pursue any and all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to the authority granted by any other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided for by this article, the city is entitled to impose penalties or fees provided for by other provisions of this Code for failure to timely pay any bill, or portion thereof, for water, sanitary sewer, and/or reuse water services. 
(d)  A tester's registration may be revoked by the city if the director determines that the tester: 
(1)  Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately submitted assembly testing reports; 
(2)  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Has used improper testing procedures; 
(4)  Has created a threat to public health or the environment; 
(5)  Has failed to register with third party vendor; 
(6)  Has failed to submit a test report within five days of the test date; or 
(7)  Has violated any other provision of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 10.719; Ord. No. G-98-03-12-9B1, 3-12-1998; Ord. No. G-05-08-11-10B2, 8-11-2005; Ord. No. O-2014-1645, § XV, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-2423, § I, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Sec. 44-192. - Compliance for temporary fire hydrant meters. 
    All persons utilizing a fire hydrant for a temporary meter shall sign a contract and pay a deposit prior to having the temporary meter installed. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source are prohibited. Appropriate backflow prevention devices must be installed on the premises at time of a temporary meter installation. A licensed backflow tester, contracted by persons utilizing temporary meters, must be present to test backflow assembly at time of installation. The backflow assembly must pass in order for fire hydrant to remain on. Backflow assembly must then be tested on an annual basis. Failure to maintain testing and proper use will result in immediate removal of temporary meter and loss of deposit. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-3846, § I, 10-27-2016) 
Secs. 44-193-44-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND PEAK DAY WATER USE MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, adopted July 12, 2012, amended art. VIII, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 44-221-44-238, was entitled "Drought Contingency and Peak Day Water Use Management Plan", and derived from: Code 1995, §§ 10.801-818; Ord. No. G-02-04-11-15A1, adopted Apr. 11, 2002; Ord. No. G-06-06-08-9C1, adopted June 8, 2006; Ord. No. G-09-04-23-9B2, § I, adopted Apr. 23, 2009; Ord. No. G-09-08-27-8C1, § I, adopted Aug. 27, 2009; and Ord. No. G-11-11-10-9B1, § I, adopted Nov. 10, 2011. 

Sec. 44-221. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared that, because safe and high-quality drinking water is a precious resource, the general welfare requires that the water resources available to the city be put to the maximum beneficial use, and that the waste or unreasonable use of water be prevented, and the conservation of water is to be encouraged with a view to its reasonable and beneficial use in the interests of the people of the city and for the public health, safety and welfare. The city council has determined that an aggressive water conservation and drought contingency program will protect the integrity of water supply facilities, prolong the life of existing water sources, and minimize the impacts of water supply shortages, and therefore adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. Water uses regulated or prohibited under this plan are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during time of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions are deemed to constitute a waste of water which may subject the offender to penalties. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-222. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the definitions set forth in section 44-5 shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-223. - Implementation. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable conservation stages upon his determination that the implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city manager shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-224. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons, customers, and owners of property who use or allow the use of city water, wherever situated. The terms person and customer, as used in this article, include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal entities. The provisions of this article do not apply to: (i) persons who use water from private wells; (ii) persons who use water from the city's reuse water system; or (iii) persons who otherwise use water from a source other than the city's water utility system. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-225. - Public education. 
    The city will periodically provide the public with information about water use, including information about the conditions under which each stage of this article is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. Drought and water conservation information will be provided by public meeting, press releases, utility bill inserts, the city's website, and/or electronic media notification. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-226. - Wholesale providers. 
    The city contracts for raw water in Lake Georgetown and Lake Stillhouse Hollow from the Brazos River Authority and Lake Travis from the Lower Colorado River Authority and the Brazos River Authority. The city will comply with and implement any drought contingency requirements that may be set forth in any contracts with these river authorities. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-227. - Wholesale customers. 
(a)  All wholesale water contracts require compliance with the city's drought contingency and water conservation programs. Each contract specifies that the water supplied to the wholesale customer may be reasonably limited by the city on the same basis and to the same extent as the supply of water to any other customers within the city. 
(b)  All wholesale contracts entered into, renewed or extended after the adoption of this plan will include provisions for distributing water to the wholesale customer in accordance with V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.039. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-228. - Voluntary water conservation during peak water use periods. 
(a)  The city has determined that the peak water use period begins on May 1 of each year and ends on October 31 of each year. During this period of peak water use, the city seeks to encourage water conservation. 
(b)  During the peak water use period of May 1 to October 31 of each year, water customers will be encouraged to voluntarily use water in compliance with all of the stage I regulations set forth in section 44-233. 
(c)  At the beginning of the peak water use period, the city will initiate actions and engage in educational programs designed to increase customer awareness of water conservation and encourage the most efficient use of water. 
(d)  Water customers are encouraged to voluntarily limit the use of water for nonessential purposes and to practice water conservation. Voluntary observance of the stage 1 twice-per-week watering schedule is requested. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2017-4304, § I, 4-13-2017) 
Sec. 44-229. - Stage I triggers. 
(a)  Stage I shall be implemented when any of the following triggers occur: 
(1)  Supply-based trigger for implementation of stage I is as follows: 
a.  Lake Georgetown Reservoir elevation is below 770 feet above mean sea level (msl) for three consecutive days; or 
b.  The combined storage of Lake Georgetown and Lake Stillhouse Hollow is less than 162,752 acre feet of water. 
(2)  Demand or capacity-based triggers for implementation of stage I are as follows: 
a.  Water treatment capacity has reached 85 percent for three consecutive days; 
b.  Total daily demand has reached 85 percent of the raw water pumping capacity for three consecutive days; 
c.  Total daily demand is 85 percent of storage capacity for three consecutive days; 
d.  Total daily demand is 85 percent of the treated water pumping capacity for three consecutive days; or 
e.  Production or distribution limitations including, but not limited to system outages or equipment failure. 
(3)  Wholesale water suppliers' triggers: 
a.  Pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water supply contract(s), notification is received from the city's wholesale water supplier(s) requesting implementation of the stage I restrictions. 
(4)  Public health, safety and welfare triggers: 
a.  The city manager makes a written public announcement that he has reasonably determined that one or more reasons exist to initiate stage I restrictions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
b.  The implementation of stage I by the city manager pursuant to subsection (4)a. above, shall expire 15 days thereafter unless the city council adopts a resolution ratifying such determination and implementation within such 15-day period. 
(b)  Stage I shall terminate when any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Stage I will terminate when the city manager makes a public announcement that all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days; or 
(2)  When the city manager makes a public announcement that it is in the best interest of the city to terminate stage I. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-230. - Stage I twice-per-week watering schedule. 
    The stage I twice-per-week watering schedule is hereby established as follows: 
Type of Property Watering Days Watering Times Commercial Tuesday & Friday Midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
and 
7:00 p.m. to midnight Industrial/Multifamily Tuesday & Friday Residential (Addresses ending in odd numbers) Wednesday & Saturday Residential (Addresses ending in even numbers) Thursday & Sunday  
    During stage I, all watering is discouraged on Mondays. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-231. - Stage II triggers. 
(a)  Stage II shall be implemented when any of the following triggers occur: 
(1)  Supply-based trigger for implementation of stage II is as follows: 
a.  Lake Georgetown Reservoir elevation is below 765 feet above mean sea level (msl) for three consecutive days; or 
b.  The combined storage of Lake Georgetown and Lake Stillhouse Hollow is less than 105,001 acre feet of water. 
(2)  Demand or capacity-based triggers for implementation of stage II are as follows: 
a.  Water treatment capacity has reached 90 percent for three consecutive days; 
b.  Total daily demand has reached 90 percent of the raw water pumping capacity for three consecutive days; 
c.  Total daily demand is 90 percent of storage capacity for three consecutive days; 
d.  Total daily demand is 90 percent of the treated water pumping capacity for three consecutive days; or 
e.  Production or distribution limitations including, but not limited to system outages or equipment failure. 
(3)  Wholesale water suppliers' triggers: 
a.  Pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water supply contract(s), notification is received from the city's wholesale water supplier(s) requesting implementation of the stage II restrictions. 
(4)  Public health, safety and welfare triggers: 
a.  The city manager makes a written public announcement that he has reasonably determined that one or more reasons exist to initiate stage II restrictions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
b.  The implementation of stage II by the city manager pursuant to subsection (4)a. above shall expire 15 days thereafter unless the city council adopts a resolution ratifying such determination and implementation within such 15-day period. 
(b)  Stage II shall be terminated when any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Stage II will terminate when the city manager makes a public announcement that all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days; or 
(2)  When the city manager makes a public announcement that it is in the best interest of the city to terminate stage II. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-232. - Stage II once-per-week watering schedule. 
    The stage II once-per-week watering schedule is hereby adopted and established as follows: 
Type of Property Watering Days Watering Times Industrial/Commercial/Public Schools Friday Midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
and 
7:00 p.m. to midnight Multifamily/Homeowner Association common areas Tuesday Residential addresses ending in odd numbers with automatic irrigation system Wednesday Residential addresses ending in odd numbers without automatic irrigation system Saturday Residential addresses ending in even numbers with automatic irrigation system Thursday Residential addresses ending in even numbers without automatic irrigation system Sunday  
    During stage II, all watering is prohibited on Monday. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-233. - Stage I and stage II water conservation regulations. 
(a)  When either stage I or stage II mandatory water conservation regulations are implemented, the following restrictions and prohibitions shall be in effect: 
(1)  Outdoor irrigation. All outdoor irrigation by automatic irrigation systems, hose end sprinklers, soaker hoses, or drip irrigation is prohibited unless it occurs in compliance with the applicable stage I or stage II watering schedule. Irrigation by hand-held hoses or hand-held buckets is permitted anytime. The outdoor watering day and time restrictions do not apply to outdoor irrigation by commercial plant nurseries. 
(2)  Vehicle washing. The washing, including charity car washes, of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other type of mobile equipment is prohibited except in compliance with the applicable stage I or stage II watering schedule. The washing, when allowed, must be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose. 
The vehicle washing prohibition does not apply to the following: 
a.  The washing of vehicles or mobile equipment when conducted on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or a commercial service station; or 
b.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment (such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables) when the washing is necessary on a more regular and frequent basis in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(3)  Power washing. The day and time regulations of outdoor watering do not apply to commercial companies in the business of power washing. 
(4)  Foundation watering. The watering of the ground around foundations is prohibited except in compliance with the applicable stage I or stage II watering schedule. 
(5)  Pools. If either stage I or stage II is implemented, the initial filling and the refilling or adding of water to nongovernment owned swimming pools, hot tubs, wading pools, or ponds is prohibited except in compliance with the applicable stage I or stage II watering schedule. 
(6)  Fountains and similar water features. 
a.  During stages I and II, the operation of ornamental fountains or other similar structures that do not recirculate the water is prohibited. 
b.  During stage I, the operation of ornamental fountains or other similar structures that recirculate water is permitted. 
c.  During stage II, the operation of ornamental fountains or other similar structures that recirculate water is prohibited. 
(7)  Golf courses. The use of water for irrigation of golf fairways is prohibited except in compliance with the applicable stage I or stage II watering schedule. The irrigation of golf course greens and tees is allowed on an every-other-day schedule if a plan therefor is approved in writing by the director. 
(8)  Fire hydrants. The use of water from fire hydrants is prohibited except for firefighting-related activities or other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Routine flushing of fire hydrants for other than health and safety reasons is prohibited. 
(9)  Street washing. Street washing is prohibited. 
(10)  New landscaping. Because of the watering restrictions imposed by this section, landowners are encouraged to postpone the installation of new landscaping until after all mandatory restrictions are lifted. In lieu of installing the required landscaping during mandatory restrictions, owners of new construction may apply for a temporary certificate of occupancy in accordance with subsection 10-56(d) of this Code. 
(b)  The stage I and stage II regulations do not apply to the following: 
(1)  The necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions for the benefit of the public, such as for capital improvement construction projects. 
(2)  The necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, for land development (such as roadway base preparation, flushing of utility lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) and for building construction processes. 
(3)  The necessary use of water for repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and landscape irrigation systems. 
(4)  The necessary use of water for athletic fields for organized youth, amateur, or professional sports such as football, soccer or baseball where the field is in use or will be in use within 60 days of the institution of stage I or II restrictions. 
(c)  Stage I and stage II regulations are intended to achieve the following target reductions in water consumption: 
(1)  Stage I regulations are intended to achieve a 15 percent reduction in daily water consumption. 
(2)  Stage II regulations are intended to achieve a 25 percent reduction in daily water consumption. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-234. - Stage III triggers. 
(a)  Stage III shall be implemented when any of the following triggers occur: 
(1)  Supply-based trigger for implementation of stage III is as follows: 
a.  The combined storage of Lake Georgetown and Lake Stillhouse Hollow is less than 52,501 acre feet of water. 
(2)  Demand or capacity-based triggers for implementation of stage III are as follows: 
a.  Water treatment capacity has reached 95 percent for three consecutive days; 
b.  Total daily demand has reached 95 percent pumping capacity for three consecutive days; 
c.  Total daily demand is 95 percent of the storage capacity for three consecutive days; or 
d.  Significant production or distribution limitations including, but not limited to, system outages and equipment failure. 
(3)  Wholesale water suppliers' triggers: 
a.  Pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water supply contract(s), notification is received from the city's wholesale water supplier(s) requesting implementation of the stage III restrictions. 
(4)  Public health, safety and welfare triggers: 
a.  The city manager makes a written public announcement that he has reasonably determined that one or more reasons exist to initiate stage III restrictions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
b.  The implementation of stage III by the city manager pursuant to subsection (a)(1) above shall expire 15 days thereafter unless the city council adopts a resolution ratifying such determination and implementation within such 15-day period. 
(5)  Triggers for termination of stage III restrictions: 
a.  Stage III may terminate when the city manager makes a public announcement that all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days; or 
b.  When the city manager makes a public announcement that it is in the best interest of the city to terminate stage III. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-235. - Stage III water conservation regulations. 
(a)  When stage III mandatory water conservation regulations are implemented, the following restrictions and prohibitions shall be in effect: 
(1)  Outdoor irrigation. Except as provided below, all outdoor irrigation of vegetation is prohibited. Irrigation by hand-held hoses or hand-held water cans is permitted in compliance with the stage II once-per-week watering schedule found in section 44-232. Commercial plant nurseries are permitted to irrigate by hand-held hoses or hand-held water cans in compliance with the stage I twice-per-week watering schedule. 
(2)  Vehicle washing. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited, unless occurring on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or a commercial service station and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  Power washing. Power washing is prohibited. 
(4)  Foundation watering. The watering of the ground around foundations is prohibited except by hand-held hoses or soaker hoses and in compliance with the stage II once-per-week watering schedule found in section 44-232. 
(5)  Pools. Except as provided below, the refilling or adding of water to nongovernment owned swimming pools, hot tubs, wading pools, or ponds is prohibited. For new and existing swimming pools, hot tubs, wading pools, and ponds, the initial filling of said new water features and the refilling or adding of water in existing water features in accordance with the stage II schedule is permitted if necessary to prevent damage to the pool or equipment. 
(6)  Fountains and similar water features. The operation of ornamental fountains or other similar structures is prohibited. 
(7)  Golf courses. The use of water for irrigation of golf courses is prohibited. 
(8)  Fire hydrants. The use of water from fire hydrants is prohibited except for firefighting-related activities or other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Routine flushing of fire hydrants for other than health and safety reasons is prohibited. Provided however, when approved in writing by the director, a business may use water from a fire hydrant for land development and building construction processes. 
(9)  Street washing. Street washing is prohibited. 
(10)  New landscaping. All new planting of plants or grass of any type is prohibited. 
(11)  Water served in restaurants. Water may not be served in restaurants unless requested by a customer. 
(b)  The stage III regulations do not apply to the following: 
(1)  The necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of its governmental functions for the benefit of the public, such as for capital improvement construction projects. 
(2)  The necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, for land development (such as roadway base preparation, flushing of utility lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) and for building construction processes. 
(3)  The necessary use of water for repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and permanently installed landscape irrigation systems. 
(c)  Stage III regulations are intended to achieve a 50 percent reduction in daily water consumption. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012; Ord. No. O-2015-2383, § I, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 44-236. - Powers of the city manager. 
    In the event of unusual operational events, catastrophic occurrences, severe weather events, or other public emergencies, the city manager may implement mandatory water restrictions in addition to those set out in this article. The city manager may implement these mandatory restrictions by public announcement and the restrictions are effective immediately upon the making of such public announcement. The implementation of additional restrictions pursuant to this section 44-236 shall expire 15 days thereafter unless the city council adopts a resolution ratifying such determination and implementation within such 15-day period. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-237. - Procedures for the implementation and termination of mandatory restrictions. 
(a)  Stages I, II, and III may be implemented or terminated at any time by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  When the triggers for implementation of stages I, II, and III are met, the city manager shall implement the respective mandatory restrictions by issuing a written public announcement stating at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The date restrictions will begin; and 
(2)  The circumstances and/or reasons that triggered the restrictions. 
(c)  Notice of the implementation and termination of mandatory restrictions will be given through press releases, cable television announcements, postings in public areas, on the city's web page and/or other electronic means. The notifications for implementation will contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The date restrictions will begin; 
(2)  The circumstances that triggered the restrictions; 
(3)  The stages of response and explanation of the restrictions to be implemented; 
(4)  An explanation of the consequences for violations. 
(d)  When the triggers for implementation of stages I, II, and III are no longer in effect, or the city manager determines that it is in the best interest of the city to terminate the restrictions, the city manager may do so by issuing a written order terminating the restrictions. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-238. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-239. - Variance; alternative compliance. 
(a)  The director may grant any customer a temporary variance from the restrictions when failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the public health, welfare or safety, and if one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  Compliance with this article cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the restrictions in effect; or 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same or better level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  The director shall inform the customer in writing concerning the granting or denial of such variance and any conditions that may accompany such variance, including any timetables for compliance with the restrictions. The city will treat all customers equally concerning variances, and shall not discriminate in granting variances. No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of restrictions occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(c)  Customers requesting a variance shall file a petition for variance with the director. All petitions shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner; 
(2)  Purpose of water use; 
(3)  Specific provisions of the restrictions from which the petition is requesting relief; 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific restriction(s) adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with the restriction(s); 
(5)  Description of the relief requested; 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this article and the compliance date; 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(d)  If approved, the customer shall keep a copy of the alternative water use requirements in the location accessible and visible to the public. 
(e)  If granted, the variance shall expire when the then current stage of regulations is terminated or the city implements a different stage. A new petition must be submitted each time the city implements a new higher stage of regulations. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Sec. 44-240. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the person or customer in whose name the utility billing office last billed or who is receiving the economic benefit of the water supply is presumed to have knowingly made, caused, used or permitted the use of water received from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this article and proof that the violation occurred on the person's or customer's property shall constitute a rebuttal presumption that the person or customer committed the violation. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person performs an act prohibited by this article or fails to perform an act required by this article. Each instance of a violation of this article is a separate offense. 
(c)  Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense under this article. 
(d)  Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parent's control shall constitute a rebuttal presumption that the parent committed the violation. 
(e)  An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Prosecution of an offense under any section does not preclude other enforcement remedies under this article. The enforcement of other remedies under this article does not prevent prosecution for a violation of this article. 
(f)  If a person is convicted for three or more violations of this article within a 12-month period, water service may be disconnected or restricted. 
(g)  If a customer is irrigating during a time period or on a day when irrigation is not permitted for that customer and a city worker cannot find any person at that street address to turn off the irrigation system, the city worker may enter the property and turn off the irrigation system. 
(h)  The city's authority to seek injunctive or other civil relief available under the law is not limited by this article. 
(Ord. No. G-12-07-12-G1, § I, 7-12-2012) 
Secs. 44-241-44-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 44-270. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on, under or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, deterioration, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.901), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-271. - Authority and scope. 
    This article applies to all utility companies that place facilities in, on, under or over public rights-of-way. Compensation for use of the public rights-of-way shall be paid in accordance with all applicable law, including but not limited to cable providers, in accordance with the Federal Cable Act, 47 USC 5241 et seq. and V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66; for certificated telecommunication providers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283; for distributors of natural gas and electricity or as otherwise applicable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.025 and V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 33.008; and in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(1), all as applicable. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.902), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-272. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business day shall mean any day of the week, not including Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider shall mean the same as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(2): any entity that has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission to offer local exchange telephone service or a person that provides voice service, as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(2). 
    City shall mean the City of Round Rock, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
    City property shall mean all buildings, infrastructure, bridges, parks, golf courses, parking lots and other real property owned by the city that is not dedicated for utility or street transportation purposes. 
    Design and construction standards (DACS) shall mean the design and construction standards that have been adopted by ordinance by the city council and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Director shall mean the chief of public works operations, or the designee of the chief of public works operations, or the designated director of the city's department administering this program or such director's designee. 
    Emergency shall mean a customer service interruption or a condition that threatens imminent harm to property or to health and safety. 
    Facility or facilities shall mean any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, pipes underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plants and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
    Person shall mean a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
    Public rights-of-way shall mean the same as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(6): the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public rights-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. The term does not include city property and rights-of-way owned by the State of Texas or agency thereof. 
    Utility company or utility companies shall mean any person or entity that owns or operates facilities. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.903), 8-9-2007; Ord. No. G-10-06-10-8B1, § I, 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 44-273. - Municipal authorization required. 
(a)  Construction permit required. 
(1)  Construction permit application fee. Any utility company seeking to place, replace, or alter facilities on, in, under or over the public rights-of-way, shall pay a cost-based construction permit application fee of $400.00, except certificated telecommunications providers and their contractors, per V.T.C.A, Local Government Code ch. 283, and holders of a state-issued certificate of franchising authority to provide cable or video services per V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66, and shall file an application for such construction permit with the director and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this article pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way. If there are additional direct costs to the city in processing the applications, the city may recover those costs from the applicant prior to the issuance of the construction permit. A construction permit application fee is not required for city initiated projects that require utility companies to place, replace, or alter facilities on, in, under or over the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Construction permit application. With such application, applicants shall submit to the director written applications identifying the applicant and all affiliates that may have physical control of facilities within the public rights-of-way, with plans of the proposed work, general description of the services to be provided, a construction schedule, and a general description of the expected impact and effect on public rights-of-way as detailed in subsection 44-275(6) below. 
(b)  Municipal authorization. Any utility company, except a certificated telecommunications provider under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283, and holders of a state-issued certificate of franchising authority to provide cable or video services under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66, prior to placing, replacing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city. For use of the public rights-of-way, all users of the public rights-of-way shall compensate the city on the value of the rights-of-way used, being typically either on a gross receipts basis or on a linear foot basis, to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(c)  Franchise agreements. Any utility company with a current and unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city ("grant") to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this article, Public Rights-of-Way Management Ordinance, is adopted, shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant (except to the extent the police power regulations in such grant are inconsistent with this article, in which event, this article will control) until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the utility company, or is terminated as otherwise provided for in law. 
(d)  Prerequisites to issuance of construction permit. Each utility company must register with the city. In order for the city to know which utility companies own facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city, each utility company that owns facilities shall register with the city and provide the following information: 
(1)  Utility company's name; and 
(2)  The current name, address and telephone number of a contact person employed by and with decision-making authority for the utility company and who is available 24 hours per day. 
Each utility company shall update and keep current its registration with the city at all times and shall inform the city of any changes no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. For a utility company with a grant from the city, the grant will be evidence of registration. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.904), 8-9-2007; Ord. No. G-10-06-10-8B1, § II, 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 44-274. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The director shall have the primary responsibility to administer and enforce compliance with this article and to bring to the attention of the city manager, and any other appropriate authority, any violations or lack of compliance with these regulations. Any department, agency, employee or enforcement officer of the city having information regarding an alleged violation of this article, shall report that information to the director. 
(2)  A utility company shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the director requires in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the director as set forth herein. 
(3)  The director shall report to the city manager upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with this article. 
(b)  Civil enforcement. The director shall report violations to the city manager to determine what action is deemed proper, and the city attorney is hereby authorized, without further authorization from city council, to file suit in district court, in addition to any criminal penalties to enjoin the violation of any provision of this article. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by the city in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, and to restrain, correct, or abate a violation. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in this section. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.905), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-275. - Construction obligations. 
    A utility company is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property based upon the city's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  At the city's request, a utility company shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities performed by the utility company in the public rights-of-way, as set forth herein and in the DACS. Information provided to the city pursuant to this subsection may be designated by the providing utility company as confidential and will be kept confidential by the city to the extent allowed by law. 
(2)  A utility company shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city ordinances. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. Any facility placed within the public rights-of-way that is attached in any manner above ground shall either be placed on existing poles or equipment or be attached in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. A utility company shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(3)  A utility company shall be required to utilize trenchless technology wherever the proposed construction crosses any portion of a paved public street, public or private driveways, or the critical root zone of a protected tree, as those terms are defined by section 14-20; provided, however, that in exceptional cases where particular field conditions prevent the use of trenchless technology, the director has the discretion to grant a waiver of this requirement. 
a.  A utility company may be required to utilize trenchless technology wherever the proposed construction crosses any portion of a public sidewalk or occurs in an area of the city that is significantly developed. The director may waive this requirement if he determines based upon information provided by the utility company that the use of trenchless technology is not economically acceptable or technically feasible. 
b.  A utility company will not be required to utilize trenchless technology wherever the proposed construction is in an undeveloped area and does not cross any portion of a paved public street, public or private driveways or the critical root zone of a protected tree. 
(4)  A utility company shall use its best efforts to coordinate construction and installation of facilities, including collocation of poles for aerial facilities and joint trenching, with any other utility companies which may be constructing in and along the same public rights-of-way. The city may mandate such coordination to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(5)  To the extent known, plans for ongoing repair, maintenance and improvements that involve cutting into paved city roads or streets shall be submitted to the city on an annual basis, no later than April 1 of each year, and updated based upon any changes. This does not require any proprietary information, such as equipment or customer specific information. Such information may be designated confidential, and to the extent allowed by law, will be kept confidential by the city. Alternatively, a utility company may meet with the appropriate representative of the city each calendar quarter to provide such plans to the extent known. 
(6)  Construction permits. 
a.  Except as provided in subsections (6)c. and (6)d. below, all utility companies must obtain a construction permit before performing any new construction or replacement, upgrading, excavation, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way. The permit will be in the name of the utility company who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit must be completed and signed by a lawful representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. Failure to obtain a required construction permit will subject the utility company to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to this Code. 
b.  Except as provided in subsections (6)c. and (6)d. below, a utility company must submit an application for a construction permit at least seven days prior to the proposed commencement of work in the request and must obtain the construction permit 48 hours prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the utility company's facilities. The aforesaid seven-day and/or 48-hour requirement may be waived or altered by the city for good cause shown by the applicant. 
c.  No permit is required for the installation of facilities necessary to provide primary or regular service to a customer's property or performing routine repair or maintenance of existing facilities, unless the utility company's activities require: 
1.  The breaking of the asphalt, concrete or similar surface of the public rights-of-way; 
2.  The installation of a pole within the public rights-of-way; 
3.  The installation of an appurtenance extending to or above the surface of the public rights-of-way within two feet of a curb, sidewalk, or driveway, or within public rights-of-way containing roadways without barrier curbs; 
4.  Excavation greater than three feet in depth or ten feet in length within the public rights-of-way; 
5.  The closure of a traffic lane; or 
6.  Boring within the public rights-of-way. 
d.  No permit is required before performing emergency repair or maintenance; provided, however, that if such emergency repair or maintenance requires breaking of the asphalt, concrete or similar surface of the public rights-of-way, the utility company performing such work shall notify the director immediately, and in no event later than two hours, after the commencement of breaking of the asphalt, concrete or similar surface. Any utility company performing emergency repair or maintenance in the public rights-of-way that does not require the breaking of the asphalt, concrete or similar surface of the rights-of-way shall provide the director with notice of any work performed by the next business day from the commencement of such work. A utility company shall provide the director with a written, reasonably detailed description of emergency repair or maintenance work performed in the public rights-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were relocated within 20 business days of completion of such work. In addition, the utility company shall comply with the requirements of this article for the restoration, replacement or repair of the public rights-of-way. 
e.  If nonpavement excavation required for the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property or for routine repair or maintenance cannot be backfilled at the end of a business day, then the utility company performing the excavation shall fence off the excavated area. If such nonpavement excavation cannot be backfilled by the following business day, the excavation must be fenced off and a permit application must be submitted to the city the next business day. 
f.  Insurance and bonding will be required in accordance with section 44-279 below. 
g.  If the utility company fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall expire unless extended by the city upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a permit, a utility company shall be required to obtain another permit pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
h.  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to take place, and any other reasonable conditions set out by the director. 
i.  No permit shall be issued until the utility company requesting the permit provides the director, in the format specified by the city, the following: 
1.  The completed application with the approximate location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction of all facilities at least seven days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the director and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction or reconstruction. A utility company may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. In the event a utility company is required to commence construction within less than seven days in order to comply with service objectives set by the Public Utility Commission of Texas, the utility company shall provide notification of such requirement to the city with the completed application and the utility company may commence construction no sooner than one business day following submission of the application to the city; in the event the city subsequently reasonably withholds approval, the utility company shall adjust its application and any associated installed facilities to comply with the city's requirements. Furthermore, the utility company shall provide personnel to respond to the city's requests regarding the application on a reasonably continual basis for the business day after the time the application is submitted. 
2.  For review, one set of construction plans in an electronic format acceptable to the director, or two hard copy sets of construction plans. Upon approval of the application by the director, three sets of construction plans each with a copy of the approved application shall be delivered in hard copy to the director. Construction plans shall clearly display footages, reference points, tie-ins and proposed alignments of items being constructed. It is recommended that nonstructure construction plans be drawn to scale, but if not, they shall be of a size and of sufficient detail that is reasonably clear and readable as determined by the director. Construction plans for structures must be prepared on a recognized scale no smaller than one inch = 50 feet, unless otherwise approved by the director, and must be sealed by a professional engineer to the extent required by The Texas Engineering Practice Act (Article 3271a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes. 
3.  Except as provided below, the construction plans shall show all features as set forth herein. For utility construction involving the placement of new or replacement poles or utilizing underground trenchless technology, the construction plans shall show all features located within seven feet on either side of the proposed facilities. For utility construction utilizing excavated trenches, the construction plans shall show all features located within seven feet on either side of the excavation. The features that are required to be shown on the plans include existing underground and aerial wires or conduits, ducts, poles, wires, pipes, sewerage, water lines, and cables as well as their ownership; traffic signal and street light poles; fire hydrants; driveways; curbs, inlets and drains; sidewalks and wheelchair ramps; and trees and large shrubs. If the nature of the proposed facilities or specific site conditions warrants it, the director may increase the above distance to 50 feet. For construction within rights-of-way containing streets, roads, or highways, drawings shall show horizontal dimensions from the curb line or edge of pavement, or if a sidewalk exists, from the edge of sidewalk when not on the road or street side of the sidewalk, provided however, the director may require drawings to show dimensions from specific lines or features when a more uniform alignment would be achieved as determined by the director. Within other rights-of-ways, drawings shall show horizontal dimensions from property lines or easement lines. Drawings shall show elevation data including depth of installation and separation distances from other utilities. If typicals are used, they shall reference the station numbers for which they are to be applied. Traffic control plans shall be in conformance with the latest revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD). The director may accept construction plans which deviate from the standards contained herein, so long as good cause is shown, and such a deviation is applied in a competitively neutral, nondiscriminating manner. Regardless of the above, features other than those to be utilized by the utility company for its construction need not be shown for projects that entail the installation of additional or replacement equipment on existing poles, or the installation of additional ducts, inner ducts, or cable within existing conduit, and which do not entail either the installation of new poles or conduit, or the alteration of the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. 
4.  Location of all public rights-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use. 
5.  Detail of all existing city utilities in relation to applicant's proposed route. 
6.  Description of what the applicant proposes to install, including but not limited to pipe size, number of conduits, and valves, with appropriate details attached. 
7.  Location of areas where asphalt or concrete in streets will be removed and replaced, with appropriate plans and details that include City of Round Rock Standard Construction Details and Development and Construction Standards (DACS), as appropriate. 
8.  Drawings of any boxes, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gears, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth located in public rights-of-way. 
9.  Handhole and/or manhole typicals of type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access. 
10.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by the applicant. 
11.  Name, address and telephone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be provided as soon as it is known by the utility company, but in any event prior to the commencement of construction and shall be amended by the utility company as necessary during the course of the work by written notification to the director. 
12.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way and the dates and times work will occur. 
13.  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located within the city, if requested by the director. 
j.  The director shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions and restrictions on the permit in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, as well as for the protection of property located within or adjacent to the right-of-way. 
k.  All construction and installation in the public rights-of-way shall be accomplished by the utility company in strict compliance with the permit for the facilities. The director shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as may reasonably be required to ensure compliance with the permit. No deviation whatsoever from the permit shall be allowed without the director's approval in writing of a permit amendment. When conditions warrant, such permit amendment may be accomplished with a written amendment in the field. 
l.  The director may inspect the site to ensure compliance with the permit and shall conduct a final inspection of the site and provide final approval of the work permitted. The director shall make a reasonable effort to complete the final inspection within five days following notification by the utility company that the project has been completed. Upon final inspection, if the director finds that the permit has not been complied with, the director will provide written notice to the utility company regarding the work to be performed in order to obtain final approval. 
m.  Copies of the approved construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
n.  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension from the director. The utility company shall notify the city's contact specified on the approved permit application at least one business day and no more than three business days prior to beginning the work authorized by the permit, or prior to continuing the work if work has been suspended for more than three business days. 
o.  Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the director within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. 
p.  The director may require a preconstruction meeting with the permittee and construction contractor. 
q.  If the director declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, or requests the relocation of a utility company's facilities in accordance with subsection 44-278(d), a utility company shall remove or abate the utility company's facilities by the deadline provided in the director's request. The utility company and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. As stated in subsection 44-273(a)(1), a construction permit application fee is not required for city-initiated relocation projects. If the utility company, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove, relocate or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the utility company, without paying compensation to the utility company and without the city incurring liability for damages. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility company shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
r.  In determining whether any requirement under this article is unreasonable or unfeasible, the director shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the utility company to an unreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden, and the utility's obligations as a provider of last resort pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Utilities Code. 
s.  A utility company issued a permit pursuant to this article shall, at all times, employ the standard of care attendant to the risks involved to prevent actions, failures and accidents that may cause damage, injury or nuisance to persons, the public, the facilities of other utility companies, or to any city structures or structures owned by other utility companies located in the public rights-of-way. A utility company issued a permit pursuant to this section 10.900 shall observe all federal and state statutes and regulations and all applicable city ordinances and safety codes. A utility company issued a permit pursuant to this article shall keep and maintain its facilities in a safe and suitable condition, and in good order and repair. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.906), 8-9-2007; Ord. No. G-10-06-10-8B1, § III, 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 44-276. - Restoration and repair. 
(a)  Within 14 days of completion of replacement, upgrading, excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities or other work in the public rights-of-way, a utility company shall temporarily restore and repair the public rights-of-way. Within 30 calendar days after completion of work in the public rights-of-way, the utility company shall permanently restore, replace, relay and/or repair the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment, trees, shrubs, sidewalks, mailboxes, walls, and other city facilities and infrastructure located on, in or under any public rights-of-way that has been excavated, altered or damaged by reason of the replacement, upgrading, excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the utility company's facilities to the condition the public rights-of-way were in before the construction or better and must receive final approval from the director. 
(b)  Restoration to the condition the public rights-of-way were in before the construction shall be to the reasonable satisfaction of the director. The restoration shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Restoration of all landscaping and sprinkler systems including replacing all ground cover damaged during work with the same type of ground cover or better by sodding, seeding, or as directed by the director; 
(2)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling and compaction of all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other excavation sites, unless other safety requirements are approved by the director; 
(4)  Smoothing of all trenches and ruts, and restoration of the surface to the lines and grades existing prior to the work being performed, unless otherwise approved by the director; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation site including compaction in accordance with city specifications. 
(c)  All locate flags associated with the permitted utility project shall be removed during the cleanup process by the applicant or its contractor at the completion of the work. 
(d)  Upon a showing of good cause, the city may, at its sole discretion, extend the time for restoration and repair of the public rights-of-way under this section. Unless the utility company provides a recent photograph or a video tape of the public rights-of-way before the construction, the condition of the public rights-of-way before construction should be presumed in good condition, subject only to reasonable wear and tear, as determined by the director. 
(e)  A utility company shall restore any right-of-way markers or monuments disturbed or destroyed during construction activities within 30 days after construction has ceased. The utility company shall furnish three sets of drawings, blueline or blackline, detailing the restored monumentation. State plane coordinates shall be shown for all monumentation (existing or restored). The drawings shall be signed (original signature), sealed and certified by a registered professional land surveyor, and delivered to the director for approval, no later than 30 days after construction has ceased. 
(f)  Should the director reasonably determine that additional restoration, replacement or repair work is required to restore any public rights-of-way to a condition that is at least as good as it was in before construction, the city shall provide written notice to the utility company of the need to perform such additional restoration, replacement or repair work. The utility company must begin such additional restoration, replacement or repair within ten business days of receipt of written notice and diligently pursue such work to completion. In the event repairs have not been initiated during such ten business day period or the utility company ceases to diligently pursue such work to completion, or the work is not performed to the reasonable satisfaction of the director, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the utility company. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility company shall reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the invoice. The city may, for good cause, extend the ten-business-day period. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the foregoing in subsection (f) of this section, if the director determines that the failure of the utility company to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances, and the utility company failed to respond within a reasonable time specified by the city. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility company shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.907), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-277. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Once a permit is issued, a utility company, or its representative, shall notify the director and any other designated departments of the city at least 24 hours in advance that construction in the public rights-of-way is ready to proceed. Information signs (at least three feet by three feet in size) stating the identity of the contractor doing the work, their telephone number, and the utility company's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur no earlier than five business days and no later than 24 hours prior to the beginning of work in the public rights-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring and/or until the work is completed. An informational sign will be posted on each end of the public rights-of-way 100 feet before the construction location commences. Information signs shall be located in such a manner that does not adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformity with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(c)  Erosion control measures and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins. A utility company may be required to show proof of engineered plans relating to storm water and erosion when applicable or a letter stating the utility company is not required by law to obtain such plans. The utility company shall be responsible for storm water management and erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines, as applicable. Requirements shall include, but shall not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open excavations, and wire backed silt fencing in high erosion areas. Upon request, the utility company may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state governments. 
(d)  The utility company shall ensure that dust control measures are implemented at the site. 
(e)  Except in the case of an emergency, or as otherwise approved by the director: 
(1)  Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., unless the director grants prior approval. All traffic control devices shall conform to the TMUTCD, provided that the city may dictate restrictions due to rush hour traffic, unique events, or other conditions that may warrant such restrictions. 
(2)  Working hours in the public rights-of-way are limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. When work on Saturdays, Sundays or city-observed holidays is allowed as provided in subsection (e)(4) below, working hours are limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and city-observed holidays, and between noon and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. Work to be performed after 6:00 p.m. must be approved in writing by the director in advance. Regardless of the above, work before sunrise or after sunset is prohibited unless appropriate provisions for night work as approved by the director are implemented. 
(3)  Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless approved in advance. 
(4)  Work on Saturdays, Sundays and city-observed holidays is generally discouraged; however, such work may be authorized when the director determines that the work is in the best interest of the public. The director's determination shall be based on factors including but not limited to the following: (i) the work will cause less disruption to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the public than that caused on a weekday; (ii) the availability and necessity of city staff to inspect or otherwise administer the provisions of this section with respect to the work; and (iii) any special activities planned or occurring at the site of the work. Any work in the public rights-of-way performed on Saturdays or city-observed holidays must be approved in writing by the director at least 48 hours in advance. Any work in the public rights-of-way performed on Sundays must be approved in writing by the director at least 72 hours in advance. 
(f)  Without affecting the legal relationship between the utility company and its contractors, a utility company is responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. A responsible representative of the utility company will be available to the director at all times during construction. 
(g)  The utility company or contractor or subcontractor shall notify the director immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city-owned or privately owned. 
(h)  It is city's policy to discourage the cutting of street and sidewalk pavements and the blocking of sidewalks or other pedestrian paths; however, when a street or sidewalk pavement cut is required, prior approval must be obtained in accordance with article III of this chapter and all requirements provided in article III shall be followed. When a sidewalk or other pedestrian path must be blocked or cut, temporary measures shall be provided to accommodate pedestrian traffic as approved by the director. Such measures may include the construction of a temporary pedestrian pathway in accordance with state accessibility standards. Repair of all street and sidewalk pavement cuts must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic. 
(i)  Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities or the maintenance of them, in particular, gravity dependent facilities. 
(j)  New facilities must be installed to a depth approved by the director, in accordance with DACS. 
(k)  All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. A locator shall place marks at each stem with paint dots and depths at least every other stem. 
(l)  Utility companies working in the public rights-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the Geographic Information System or the plans of record does not satisfy this requirement. 
(m)  The utility company will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities which might possibly interfere with the construction activities. When required by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 251.001 (the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act), the utility company shall verify locations by potholing, hand digging, or other acceptable method prior to any excavation or boring. 
(n)  Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by the director. Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks unless approved by the director. 
(o)  Locate flags or marks shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(p)  When the pumping of water and/or mud is required during construction, the water and/or mud shall be contained in accordance with applicable city ordinances and federal and state law and the directives of the director. 
(q)  All streets and sidewalks shall be kept clean and clear of rocks, mud, dirt, debris, etc. to the extent practicable and any street or sidewalk shall be cleaned upon notification by the director. If any streets or sidewalks are not kept clean, the director may suspend work. 
(r)  Except in emergency situations, work within a roadway shall not be initiated during inclement weather involving foggy, rainy or icy conditions. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.908), 8-9-2007; Ord. No. G-10-06-10-8B1, § IV, 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 44-278. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other users of the public rights-of-way. To the fullest extent allowed by law, the city reserves the right to: 
(1)  Lay sewer, gas, water facilities, and any other pipe lines or cables and conduits; 
(2)  Do underground and overhead work, including attachments; 
(3)  Require restructuring or changes in the city's aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way that may be occupied by a utility company; and 
(4)  Change the curb, route or grade of sidewalks and streets. 
(b)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users as allowed under state or federal law. As a priority, each user of the public rights-of-way will be allowed one alignment on one side of the street for placement of its facilities, provided there is adequate space available. In the event an additional alignment or both sides of the street has been requested by a user, the director will grant such request, provided there is adequate space available and the requestor has demonstrated the financial or technical impracticability of the use of the requestor's single alignment or use of only one side of the street. 
(c)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  If the director gives written notice, the utility company shall, at its own expense (unless provided otherwise by state law or a franchise), temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of the utility company's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120 days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the utility company. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, relocate, change or alter, the director will confer with the utility company before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The director shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This article shall not be construed to prevent a utility company's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall relocation or removal be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the utility company. 
(e)  If the utility company fails to relocate facilities in the time required by the director in this article, the utility company shall be subject to liability to the city for such delay. In addition, the city may relocate the utility company's facilities after providing reasonable notice to the affected utility company. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the utility company shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city for such relocation within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in subsection (d) of this section, the director and the utility company may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(g)  A utility company may trim trees or other vegetation in or over the public rights-of-way as needed for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with the city's tree protection and preservation ordinance, as amended. The utility company, its contractor or agent, shall remove such trimmings within 72 hours following routine maintenance or within ten business days following emergency activities. If the utility company fails to remove all debris resulting from trimming trees or other vegetation, the city may notify the utility company of such failure. If the utility company fails to remove such debris within five business days from receipt of notice from the city, the city may remove the debris or have it removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the utility company shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 working days. 
(h)  A utility company shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky objects. The utility company shall meet with the party or parties requesting the temporary rearrangement within 72 hours of receipt of notice from the city to discuss the scheduling and cost. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The utility company may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(i)  In the event a utility company's use of its facilities is discontinued or abandoned, the utility company shall notify the city and thereafter shall forthwith remove its facilities from the public rights-of-way unless specifically permitted to remain, and on the removal thereof shall restore, repair or reconstruct the public rights-of-way where such removal has occurred, to the same condition as existed prior to the removal. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of the utility company, after 30 days' notice by the director to remove such facilities as directed or repair the public rights-of-way upon removal of its facilities, the city may do such work or cause it to be done, and the reasonable cost thereof as determined by the city shall be paid by the utility company and collection may be made by court action or otherwise. There is a presumption of discontinued use if the facilities or related appurtenances are not used for a period of one year. Such presumption may be rebutted by the utility company by documentation of use or by documentation of future use as a utility company designated as a provider of last resort under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.909), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-279. - Insurance and bond requirements. 
(a)  Insurance. 
(1)  A utility company shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, with an AM Best rating of at least A-. A utility company shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the director at the time of the request for construction permits and prior to any commencement of work. The city's current insurance forms and requirements may be obtained from the engineering and development services department and at www.roundrocktexas.gov. 
(2)  A utility company shall furnish to the director, at no cost to the city, a certificate of insurance on forms provided by the city, showing proof of liability insurance in the total amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(3)  The insurance certificate required under subsection (a)(2) of this section shall: 
a.  Include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to provide the city a 30-day written notice before a cancellation, nonrenewal, reduction of policy limits, or other material change; and 
b.  Provide that notice of claims related to public rights-of-way construction shall be provided to the director by certified mail. 
(4)  The coverage must be on an occurrence basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards. 
(5)  An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city attorney approval. A utility company shall immediately advise the city of actual or potential litigation that may develop and may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(6)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(7)  A utility company shall pay premiums and assessments for the insurance required under this article. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. A company that issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a utility company must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(8)  The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas, or letters written by the utility company in those instances where the state does not issue such certificates, which provide the same coverage as required herein. The city has the right to require proof of financial stability prior to accepting the proof of self-insurance, provided that defense of the city shall be comparable as provided by an insurance carrier. The defense and claims processing required of holders of a state-issued certificate of franchising authority to provide cable or video services shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66. 
(b)  Bonds. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided for by a utility company's valid franchise, the director shall require reasonable bonding requirements of a utility company, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. Such bonding amounts will be reasonably determined by the director depending on several factors as to public safety and risk of harm to persons and property. Such factors include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The nature of the construction project; 
b.  The type of facility; and 
c.  Past construction history of the utility company in the city as to any damage claims, repairs and timeliness of construction. 
(2)  The utility company shall file an annual surety bond which will be valid each year construction will occur through one full year after the completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, and must be on forms provided by the city. Such surety bond will be in the amount of the estimated cost to restore the public rights-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year and to relocate facilities pursuant to this article. If the director determines that the annual surety bond on file is insufficient to restore the public rights-of-way and to relocate facilities related to a specific project for which a permit application has been filed, then the director may require the utility company to file an additional surety bond for such project. 
(3)  The city may either waive or reduce the amount of the bond in the event the utility company provides written documentation as to reserves available to compensate the city for damages, and has a two year history of no claims, or damages to city property by the city, or of prompt payment on such claims. Further, notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, a bond shall not be required of a utility company that can demonstrate a record of at least four years of work in the public rights-of-way in the city and to the extent applicable, in all other municipalities it has performed such work, free of unsatisfied claims. No bonds for aerial construction will be required of holders of a state-issued certificate of franchising authority to provide cable or video services, in accordance with V.T.C.A, Utilities Code ch. 66. 
(c)  Alternate compliance methods. The above requirements may be met by utilities with a current franchise or license if their current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of city. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.910), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-280. - System map. 
(a)  All utility companies who have facilities in the public rights-of-way existing as of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall provide a system map of their facilities to the city in a digital format commercially available, nonproprietary software no later than two years after the passage of this article, unless the utility company demonstrates an economic impracticality to provide such system map in the above format. An updated system map shall also be provided to the city on an annual basis to include new facilities. 
(b)  Information provided to the city pursuant to this section may be designated confidential by the providing utility company and will be kept confidential by the city to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.911), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-281. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any entity doing work in the public rights-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities. 
(b)  Facilities will be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property or constitutes a threat to public health and safety; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet applicable federal, state and city codes and regulations; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using reasonable methods; or 
(4)  The facilities are not installed in accordance with the approved permit issued by the director. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.912), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-282. - Revocation of permit. 
    If a utility company violates the terms and conditions contained herein, a permit may be revoked by the director or designee. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.913), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-283. - Appeal from revocation or denial of permit. 
    Appeal from revocation or denial of a permit or from the decision of the director shall be to the city manager. Appeal shall be filed with the city secretary within 15 days from the date of the decision being appealed. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.914), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-284. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunications providers, as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283, and holders of a state-issued certificate of franchising authority to provide cable or video services, in accordance with V.T.C.A, Utilities Code ch. 66, each utility company placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, claims, demands, suits, causes of action, judgments or expenses arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful acts or omissions of the utility company, its agents, employees, and subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to or authorized under this article for the repair, replacement or restoration of the city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities that are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective; damage to or loss of the property of any utility company, including but not limited to the utility company, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties; and death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person, including, but not limited to, the agents, officers and employees of the utility company, utility company's subcontractors and city, and third parties. 
(b)  Upon commencement of any suit, proceeding at law or in equity against the city relating to or covering any matter covered by this indemnity, for which the utility company is obligated to indemnify and hold the city harmless, or to pay said final judgment and costs, as the case may be, the city shall give the utility company reasonable notice of such suit or proceeding. The utility company shall promptly provide a defense to any such suit or suits, including any appellate proceedings brought in connection therewith, and pay any final judgment or judgments that may be rendered against the city by reason of such damage suit. Upon failure of the utility company to comply with the provisions of this article, after reasonable notice to the city, the city shall have the right to defend the same and in addition to being reimbursed for any such judgment that may be rendered against the city, together with all court costs incurred therein, the utility company shall promptly reimburse the city for attorney's fees, including those employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred by the city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether such suit or suits are successfully defended, settled, compromised, or fully adjudicated against the city. 
(c)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors. 
(d)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(e)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, a utility company shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties provided in this article. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney's fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by any employees of the city. In the event the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any such suit by reason of a utility company's failure to provide a defense as hereinabove provided, the city shall have full right and authority to make or enter into any settlement or compromise of such adjudication as the city council shall deem in the best interest of the city, without the prior approval or consent of the utility company with respect to the terms of such compromise or settlement. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.915), 8-9-2007) 
Sec. 44-285. - Governing law. 
    This article shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this article, to the extent that such code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable police power based regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 44-275 and 44-276 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.916), 8-9-2007; Ord. No. G-10-06-10-8B1, § V, 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 44-286. - Construction permit acceptance. 
    Each construction permit application to use the public rights-of-way shall contain, or have attached, the following: 
    "By this application for a construction permit to use the Public Rights-of-Way, I, as the lawful representative of ________, a representative of the Facility Owner with authority to bind the Owner, hereby acknowledge that I have read and understood the terms and conditions approved by the City of Round Rock under Article IX, Public Rights-of-Way Management. 
Name: ___________ Title: ___________ Date: ___________  
(Ord. No. G-07-09-12-10E1, § I(10.917), 8-9-2007) 
Secs. 44-287-44-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - USE BY THIRD PARTIES OF CITY-OWNED UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE 

Sec. 44-306. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person or entity which applies to use utility infrastructure owned by the City of Round Rock. 
    Attachment. The term "attachment" includes the following: 
(1)  On a pole, each aerial cable, together with its associated messenger cable, guy wire, anchors and other appurtenant and incidental facilities; 
(2)  In conduit, each linear foot of occupancy of a city-owned conduit or duct by each cable or other attachment; 
(3)  Each antenna, transceiver, amplifier, repeater or other device or equipment of a user that is supported by, affixed to, contained in, or placed on or in a unit of utility infrastructure. If a federal or state law or regulation which governs attachments to city owned utility infrastructure provides for a definition of attachment which conflicts with and preempts the definition set forth in this section, then the definition of attachment in such law or regulation shall control. 
    Attachment rights means all rights of a user to place, install, construct, replace, move, remove, keep, maintain, operate or use attachments on or in city-owned utility infrastructure under this chapter or any permit or contract granted pursuant to this chapter. 
    Cable means a wire rope or a bound or sheathed assembly of conductors, wires or fibers, including, without limitation, fiber optic cable, coaxial cable, and twisted pair copper cable. Each cable that is lashed to another cable or to a common messenger cable shall be considered a separate attachment. 
    Filing fees means non-refundable fees charged by the city to review and process an application to use utility infrastructure. 
    Infrastructure usage license agreement means the contract between the user and the city for use of utility infrastructure under this chapter that sets forth the terms and conditions to which the user's use of utility infrastructure is subject. 
    PWD means the public works department of the City of Round Rock. 
    Schedule of charges means the schedule of charges payable under this chapter or under a contract entered into hereunder. The schedule shall include: filing fees; usage charges; and such charges and costs as the city may establish by ordinance or are agreed to by the parties in an infrastructure usage agreement. 
    Usage charges means annual use and occupancy charges payable to the city for the attachment rights granted to a user. 
    User means an applicant who has been granted the right to install an attachment or attachment in accordance with this chapter. 
    Utility infrastructure means water storage structures and transmission structures, ducts, electrical transmission and distribution poles and conduit, building entry conduit, utility tunnels, manholes, vaults, radio towers, other radio equipment, fiber optic cable capacity and active communications capacity, together with all appurtenant facilities owned by the City of Round Rock. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1001) 
Sec. 44-307. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform policy for usage of utility infrastructure to enable the city to: 
(1)  Permit fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory access to the available capacity on city-owned utility infrastructure; 
(2)  Safeguard the reliability and integrity of the city's utility infrastructure; 
(3)  Obtain fair compensation for the use of utility infrastructure through collection of usage and other charges; 
(4)  Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, standards and policies; 
(5)  Support cost-effective, optimal use of public resources and economic development through increased competition in the delivery of wireless telecommunications services; and 
(6)  Avoid the congestion, inconvenience, cost, visual impacts, and other adverse effects on the city's street, highways and rights of ways which could result from the construction, operation and maintenance of redundant infrastructure. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1002) 
Sec. 44-308. - Utility infrastructure. 
(a)  Right to use of utility infrastructure not granted by franchise. The rights of persons to apply for or use utility infrastructure shall be governed by this chapter. The grant of a franchise under article XI of the city Charter shall not be construed to grant attachment rights or authorize the use of utility infrastructure without additional compliance by the franchisee with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Authority of public works department. The PWD shall operate, maintain and control the utility infrastructure, and is charged with the administration of this chapter. The PWD shall develop non-discriminatory policies and regulations to implement, administer and enforce this chapter. The PWD may delegate the operation, maintenance or control of specific types or units of utility infrastructure to another city department if it is in the best interests of the city to do so. 
(c)  Priority of usage. The safe and reliable transmission and distribution of utility services to the citizens of the city have first priority over all other competing uses of utility infrastructure. 
(d)  Reservation and restrictions. 
(1)  Certain classes of utility infrastructure or specific units of utility infrastructure may be determined by the PWD to be necessary for PWD's exclusive use due to legal, mechanical, structural, safety, environmental, service or other requirements, and therefore will be unavailable for use by others. 
(2)  Some utility infrastructure is located on dedicated utility easements, which by their terms limit the use of the easement by the PWD to the transmission and distribution of water and do not authorize other uses such as telecommunications. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to grant any third party rights in such easements without the prior consent of the grantor of the easement or its successor. All additional costs or expense to obtain the use by the user or applicant of such dedicated easements shall be borne solely by the user or applicant. 
(3)  Utility Infrastructure shall remain the property of the city and no payment made by user shall create in user any right, title, or interest in any utility infrastructure. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require the PWD to replace, upgrade or alter existing utility infrastructure to create additional capacity for attachment. 
(e)  Unauthorized use prohibited. No applicant, user or other party shall have the right to place any attachment on utility infrastructure except as authorized by the city hereunder. If one or more unauthorized attachment(s) are discovered, and the owner of the unauthorized attachment does not either undertake to remove the unauthorized attachment, or make application for such attachment together with any applicable charges or penalties, the city may, but shall not be required to, remove the unauthorized attachment from utility infrastructure without incurring any liability to the owner and at the owner's sole expense. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1003) 
Sec. 44-309. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  Filing fees. The filing fee for the review and processing of an application to use city owned utility infrastructure is $500.00 per communications site per application. 
(b)  Usage charges. Usage charges may be established by separate ordinance or by agreement of the city and the user under an infrastructure usage agreement; provided, however, that usage charges may not exceed the maximum amount permitted by applicable law. 
(c)  Non-discrimination. Filing fees and usage charges shall be calculated and applied in a consistent manner for all similarly situated users. If filing fees or usage charges shall become subject to preemptive legislation or regulation by the state or the United States, then the filing fees and usage charges payable to the city shall be the maximum lawful amount permitted under such federal or state law or regulation. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1004; Ord. No. G-01-01-11-12A1, 1-11-2001) 
Sec. 44-310. - Application for use of utility infrastructure. 
(a)  Authorized users. Unless otherwise required by law, only applicants who hold a valid franchise or license to use or utility infrastructure, granted by the city, will be granted attachment rights on utility infrastructure. The applicant shall be authorized to use utility infrastructure only for the purposes specified in its franchise or license. Attachments that are used for a purpose other than that authorized in the applicant's franchise or license shall be deemed to be unauthorized attachments. Persons who seek to use utility infrastructure for private purposes may not be granted attachment rights hereunder. 
(b)  Application process. To obtain the right to use utility infrastructure, an applicant must file an application with the PWD in accordance with procedures developed by the PWD. Subject to availability of utility infrastructure capacity, all applications shall be considered on a first come, first serve basis. If an application cannot be approved as presented, PWD may approve an application subject to conditions. All conditions of approval shall be incorporated into the infrastructure usage license agreement. 
(c)  Denial of an application. 
(1)  An application may be denied if: 
a.  The applicant fails to submit a complete application; 
b.  The applicant fails to supplement its application with additional information or otherwise cooperate with the city as requested in the evaluation of the application; 
c.  The applicant fails to timely pay the required filing fees; 
d.  The proposed attachments are of excessive size or weight or would otherwise subject utility infrastructure to unacceptable levels of additional stress; 
e.  Approval would jeopardize the reliability or integrity of the public utility systems or of individual units of utility infrastructure; 
f.  Approval would present a safety hazard to city employees or the public; 
g.  Approval would impair the city's ability to operate or maintain utility infrastructure; 
h.  Approval would require an unacceptable change, upgrade or addition to utility infrastructure; or, 
i.  Approval would expose the city, the PWD, the public, or other users to increased liability or financial risk. 
(2)  If an application is denied, the applicant shall be given written notice of the basis for denial. The denial of an application shall be without prejudice to the right of applicant to file a new application correcting any deficiencies that led to denial. If an application is denied, applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of its application to the director of the PWD or designee no later than 30 days after the date of the action being appealed, in accordance with procedures to be developed by the PWD. If, on appeal, the director of the PWD or designee upholds the original PWD decision, such that the applicant has been denied all, or substantially, all attachment rights, the applicant may appeal to the city council in accordance with section 44-313. 
(3)  Additional costs. All costs to replace, enlarge or upgrade utility infrastructure to accommodate the proposed attachments of an applicant or user, as determined by the PWD, shall be borne by the applicant or user. 
(4)  Infrastructure usage agreement. 
a.  The city attorney, in conjunction with the PWD, shall develop an infrastructure usage license agreement consistent with this chapter. 
b.  The infrastructure usage license agreement must be fully executed and approved before the applicant may undertake any work or make any attachments on any utility infrastructure. 
c.  The applicant must pay all usage charges for the initial contract year in advance at the time of execution of the contract. 
d.  If the annual usage charges to be paid to the city under an infrastructure usage license agreement are less than the amount specified in the city Charter as requiring approval of contracts by the city council, the director of the PWD, or designee, is hereby authorized to enter into and execute such infrastructure usage contract on behalf of the city without further action by the city council. Infrastructure usage license agreements which will generate annual usage charges greater than said amount specified in the city Charter or in this Code shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
e.  The license agreement shall identify and establish procedures to limit the number, kind and location of attachments that the user may place on any utility infrastructure, the method of construction or installation of user's attachments, and the authorized use of the attachments by user. User may not change the number, kind, location of attachments, the method of construction or installation, or the use of the attachments authorized under such contract without the prior written consent of the PWD, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. The denial or approval of an individual permit or attachment shall be governed exclusively by the terms of the infrastructure usage contract, and shall not be subject to the provisions of section 44-313. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1005) 
Sec. 44-311. - Obligations of a user. 
(a)  Compliance with law. The use of utility infrastructure shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations, city ordinances, regulations and policies and all applicable industry standards. 
(b)  Operational and maintenance requirements. 
(1)  User shall in all cases and at all times install, operate and maintain its approved attachments so as not to interfere with PWD facilities, the city use of utility infrastructure, or the facilities, attachments or operations of other users. 
(2)  User will not construe any contract, permit, correspondence or any other communication as affecting the rights, privileges or duties previously conferred or imposed by the city, by contract or otherwise, to or upon others. The city reserves the right to continue and extend such rights, privileges or duties and to admit other and different users irrespective of the character or degree of economic competition that results. 
(3)  User shall be responsible to perform all tree trimming necessary for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its attachments. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. 
(4)  Co-lashing or co-location of attachments is prohibited without the prior written consent of the PWD, which consent may be subject to such conditions as the PWD may reasonably require. 
(5)  Installation, operation and maintenance of user's attachments shall be at the sole risk and expense of user. Neither the PWD nor the city warrants or represents that the utility infrastructure is suitable for placement of user's attachments. User is expected to inspect the utility infrastructure on which its attachments will be placed and shall rely solely on such inspection to determine the suitability of the utility infrastructure for user's purposes. User accepts the city's utility infrastructure as is and where is, and assumes all risks attendant to its usage. 
(6)  If the PWD determines that a user's attachments impair the safety or structural integrity of utility infrastructure, the PWD may require the user, at user's sole expense and risk, to change, alter, improve, move, remove or rearrange any of its attachments. The PWD may also require a user to move or rearrange its attachments of a new or other user, provided that such movement or rearrangement of attachments will not materially impair the use or function of the existing user's system, and is subject to the agreement by the new or other user to compensate the existing user for its actual costs to move or rearrange attachments. If a user fails or refuses to comply with the directions of the PWD to change, alter, improve, move, remove or rearrange any of its attachments, such attachments shall thereafter be deemed to be unauthorized. The PWD may (but shall not be required to) change, alter, improve, move, remove or rearrange such attachments without incurring any liability to user, and at user's sole cost. 
(7)  The PWD may inspect, at any time, the construction or installation of a user's attachments on utility infrastructure. If, in the course of any such inspection, the PWD finds that the user's installation or construction violates any ordinance, code or statute the conditions of user's application, permit or infrastructure usage license agreement, or this chapter, the PWD may immediately suspend user's construction or installation activities. The PWD shall send written notice to the user within three business days after such suspension identifying the alleged violation. such suspension shall be in effect until such time as the user cures, at user's sole expense, the alleged violation. User may appeal a suspension under this subsection to the director of the PWD or designee. 
(8)  User shall not transfer, assign, convey or sublet any attachment rights without PWD's prior written consent. Any purported transfer, assignment or subletting of any right granted hereunder without obtaining PWD's prior written consent, shall not be binding upon the city, but shall be a material default of the user's infrastructure usage license agreement. 
(c)  Termination. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to immediately suspend the rights of a user to make new or additional attachments if the user materially fails to comply with the terms of its franchise, license or the infrastructure usage license agreement upon written notice to user. If the user fails to cure the default within 60 days after receipt of such notice, the city may terminate user's attachment rights. 
(2)  Immediately upon termination of a user's attachment rights, whether in accordance with franchise, permit or contract terms, a voluntary termination by user, or a termination by the city for cause, the user shall commence removal of its attachments. Unless an extension of time is granted by the PWD, all attachments must be removed within 60 days after the effective date of termination. 
(3)  User shall continue to comply with the applicable terms of this chapter, user's franchise, license and infrastructure usage license agreement after termination of its attachment rights until such time as all attachments are removed. 
(4)  User may appeal the termination of its attachment rights in accordance with the provisions of sections 44-310 and 44-313. During the pendency of an appeal, user may continue to use its existing attachments, but may not make, change, alter, move, rearrange, construct or install any other or additional attachments. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1006) 
Sec. 44-312. - Other agreements. 
(a)  Prior agreements. Any prior written agreement or any infrastructure usage license agreement between a user and the city that has been executed and is in force prior to the effective date of this chapter ("prior agreement") will continue in force and effect until the prior agreement terminates in accordance with its terms. Until termination, the use of utility infrastructure under a prior agreement shall be subject to the terms of this chapter to the greatest extent possible, consistent with the terms of the prior agreement. Upon termination of a prior agreement, the continued use of utility infrastructure by such party shall be subject to the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Existing users. Any party using utility infrastructure at the effective date of this chapter without a prior agreement ("existing user") shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to all duties and obligations of a user under this chapter. An existing user shall make application for use of utility infrastructure in accordance with the terms hereof within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Between the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and such time as the existing user's application is approved, the existing user may not place any new or additional attachments on or in city-owned utility infrastructure. If an existing user falls to make application to use utility infrastructure hereunder within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or if such application is finally denied, the existing user shall promptly commence removal of its attachments. If all attachments are not removed within an additional 60 days (or other period agreed to by the PWD) the existing user shall be deemed to be a trespasser on city-owned utility infrastructure and its attachments shall be deemed to be unauthorized attachments. 
(c)  Joint use contracts. In the event that a party (a "joint user") who owns or controls a minimum of 1,000 utility poles, or owns or controls other utility infrastructure, and offers the joint use of its utility structures to the PWD in consideration for use of city utility infrastructure, and the PWD desires to use the joint user's utility structures, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The joint user shall pay the city usage charges in accordance with subsection 44-273(b). 
(2)  Each party occupying jointly-used utility structures shall be responsible to perform its own work, including, but not limited to construction of jointly used utility structures and the installation, operation, maintenance (including tree trimming), replacement, removal, rearrangement or relocation of its attachments. If, for any reason, the joint user fails to perform work which it is obligated to perform on or concerning jointly-used utility structures owned by the city, the PWD may, but shall not be obligated to, perform such work on behalf of the joint user. In such event, the joint user shall pay the PWD its full cost of labor, material, equipment, plus overhead, general and administrative expense, general fund transfer and other charges and costs incurred by the PWD to perform such work, or the PWD may elect to own any utility infrastructure improvements installed or constructed by the PWD. 
(3)  Before a joint user may occupy city-owned utility infrastructure, the joint user must execute an infrastructure usage license agreement consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  As a condition to being granted the use of city-owned utility infrastructure, the joint user must agree not to unreasonably deny other users the right to place attachments on the utility infrastructure of the joint user, to the extent that capacity or space is available, and subject to agreement upon terms and conditions (including the payment of reasonable and nondiscriminatory fees) of usage between the joint user and the other user. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1007) 
Sec. 44-313. - Appeals to city council. 
(a)  If an applicant has been denied attachment rights substantially in their entirety under subsection 44-310(c)(1), or if a user's attachment rights have been terminated substantially in their entirety under subsection 44-311(c), the applicant or user may appeal the denial of its initial appeal by the director of the PWD to the city council. An appeal to the city council shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the PWD no later than 14 days after the date of the denial of applicant or user's appeal by the director of the PWD or designee. The notice of appeal shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the appellant; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of all interested parties, if any, including but not limited to all existing users of the units of infrastructure occupied by, or proposed to be occupied by, the appellant; 
(3)  The decision being appealed; 
(4)  The date of the decision being appealed; and 
(5)  The basis of the appeal including a concise statement setting forth the reasons the appellant believes it was wrongfully denied attachment rights or its attachment rights were wrongfully terminated. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the director of the PWD shall schedule a public hearing before the city council on the appeal, and shall notify the appellant and all interested parties of the time and date thereof by first class mail at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city before the 15th day before the date of the hearing. A public hearing may be postponed or continued in accordance with the provisions of the City Code. 
(c)  The appellant has the burden of establishing that the decision being appealed was wrong. 
(d)  Before opening the hearing, preliminary issues raised by the parties, such as a request for postponement or continuance, or questions of standing to bring an appeal shall be decided. The public hearing shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  A report from the director of the PWD or appropriate city staff; 
(2)  Presentation by the appellant; 
(3)  Comment by any interested parties supporting the appeal; or 
(4)  Comment by any interested parties opposing the appeal. 
(e)  The city council shall have and may exercise all of the powers of the official whose decision is being appealed. The decision being appealed may be approved or denied in whole or in part, or may be modified. A decision on an appeal of the denial of attachment rights shall be made in accordance with findings applying the grounds for denial in subsection 44-310(c)(1). A decision on an appeal of the termination of attachment rights shall be made in accordance with findings applying the grounds for termination in subsection 44-311(c). 
(Code 1995, § 10.1008) 
Sec. 44-314. - Unauthorized attachments unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly affix, install, place, attach, maintain, or fail to remove upon demand, any attachment to city-owned utility infrastructure that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use an attachment on city-owned utility infrastructure to provide services not authorized by a city franchise, license or contract. 
(c)  Each unauthorized attachment or use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be as provided in section 1-9, except that the maximum fine for a violation shall be $100.00 per attachment per day plus court costs and fees. 
(Code 1995, § 10.1009; Ord. No. G-00-11-21-9B1, 11-21-2000) 
Secs. 44-315-44-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 

Sec. 44-330. - Adoption of Act as authority to establish utility system. 
    The city does hereby declare, under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552 entitled "Municipal Utilities," subchapter C entitled "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems," V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.041 et seq. (the "Act"), that said Act is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-331. - Establishment of municipal drainage utility system. 
    The city does hereby declare, under and in accordance with the Act, that there is established and created a municipal drainage utility system within an established service area, herein referred to as the "drainage utility". 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-332. - Declaration of utility system as public utility. 
    The city does hereby declare, following statutorily-mandated public hearing, that the drainage utility so established and created under the Act is a public utility. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-333. - Incorporation of existing facilities. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.046 of the Act, the city does hereby incorporate existing drainage facilities, materials, and supplies into the drainage utility. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-334. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  Determination of service area. Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.044(8) of the Act, the city does hereby determine that the service area of the drainage utility shall be within the city's municipal boundaries. 
(b)  Finding. It is hereby found, determined, and declared that the city shall ensure that the cost of operating and maintaining the drainage utility, and the financing of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements, and extension thereof, must be directly related to stormwater drainage service and the terms of the drainage utility charges. 
(c)  Statutorily-mandated findings. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.045(b)(1) of the Act, the city does hereby make the following finding prior to final adoption of the ordinance establishing this article: The city hereby finds that it will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the proposed service area subject to charges under this article. 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.045(b)(2) of the Act, the city does hereby make the following finding prior to final adoption of the ordinance establishing this article: The city hereby finds that it will provide drainage for all real property in the proposed service area on payment of drainage charges, except real property exempted under this article. 
(3)  Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.045(b)(3) of the Act, the city does hereby make the following finding prior to final adoption of the ordinance establishing this article: The city hereby finds that it will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-335. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to any owner or user of a benefitted property, within the utility service area, to which stormwater drainage service is provided either directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-336. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever any words, terms and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in the federal and state laws regulating the subject matter hereof, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words, terms and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise requires: 
    Act means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552 entitled "Municipal Utilities," Subchapter C entitled "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems," V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.041 et seq., as amended. 
    Allocated portion of a parcel means the part of a parcel that has been assigned to an owner or customer based on the portion used by the owner or customer as compared to the parcel's total area. 
    Benefitted property means an improved parcel, lot or tract within the utility service area to which stormwater drainage service is made available under this article. All real property within the utility service area directly or indirectly receives stormwater drainage service. 
    Chief of public works operations means the city's chief of public works operations or his/her designee responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
    Customer means the person(s) or entity(ies) recorded as the customer or user of water and/or wastewater utility services for a parcel, based on the records of the city or its contracted utility billing systems. 
    Drainage utility charges means the fees and/or rates established by ordinance that are levied against the owner or customer of a benefitted property for stormwater drainage services provided by the drainage utility, including but not limited to the items described in the definition of "cost-of-service" in the Act. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a unit of measurement of impervious surface area calculated for the average singe-family residential property within the utility service area, as measured in square feet (SF), including the residential structure, garage, driveway, sidewalk, patio, out buildings, and any other impervious surface. 
    Impervious area means a measurement in square feet (SF) of impervious surface on which the amount of stormwater runoff potential for a benefitted property within a customer class is estimated. 
    Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to penetration by water and does not have a vegetative cover. An impervious surface includes but is not limited to compacted soil with a surface treatment, gravel, crushed stone surface or soil compacted by vehicle traffic, asphalt or concrete pavement, a parking lot, a driveway, a sidewalk or private roadway, a building or artificial structure, or any surface that changes the natural landscape and increases, concentrates, pollutes, or otherwise alters the flow or amount of stormwater runoff. 
    Improved parcel means a parcel, lot, or tract or portion of lot or tract that has been changed from its natural state by addition of a building, facility, structure or other improvement on all or a portion of the parcel, which creates an impervious surface. 
    Municipal drainage utility system or drainage utility means the stormwater drainage utility system owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by the city, including the city's existing stormwater facilities, materials, and supplies and any stormwater facilities, materials, and supplies hereafter constructed or utilized, and dedicated to the service of benefitted property, and including provision for additions to the system. 
    Nonresidential property means an improved parcel that is not a residential property, including commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental uses, a condominium or apartment consisting of five or more residential units, a homeowners' association, or other similar uses or properties. 
    Owner means the person(s) or entity(ies) listed as the owner of a parcel in the Williamson County Appraisal District's records, the Travis Central Appraisal District's records, or the city's records. 
    Residential property means an improved parcel upon which four or fewer residential units are constructed. 
    Residential unit means any building or portion thereof that contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by applicable city codes, for not more than one family. A residential unit may be a single-family house, a townhome, a condominium, a manufactured home, or a portion of a duplex, triplex or quadplex. 
    Service area means the geographic area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Stormwater drainage operations and maintenance expenditure means an expenditure required to finance, operate and maintain stormwater drainage infrastructure, including debt service, equipment, personnel, educational and administrative expenditures. 
    Stormwater infrastructure means the property (real, personal or mixed) that is used in providing stormwater capacity to manage and control stormwater runoff for the stormwater drainage system, including bridges, catch basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, retention ponds, ditches, draws, creeks, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works, and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the stormwater runoff away, collect, store, or treat the stormwater runoff, or divert the stormwater runoff into natural or artificial watercourses. 
    Stormwater runoff potential means the relative potential for causing stormwater runoff quantities, qualities, or velocities from an improved parcel based on the type of development or land use on the parcel and the size of the parcel. 
    Wholly sufficient and privately owned stormwater drainage system means land and facilities owned and operated by a person or entity other than the city and from which stormwater does not discharge, under any storm frequency event or conditions, into a creek, river, slough, culvert, channel or other infrastructure that is part of the city's stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-337. - Administration. 
(a)  Duty of chief of public works operations. The chief of public works operations shall administer the drainage utility. The chief shall maintain an accurate record of all properties benefitted or served by the drainage utility and the drainage utility charges levied for each parcel or portion of a parcel. The record may be maintained within the city's utility billing system or in another recordkeeping system that may be developed. 
(b)  Program implementation. By the adoption of the ordinance establishing this article, the city makes no representation that all stormwater problems may or will be remedied, and the city council retains full discretion in establishing the priorities in expending funds as they become available to meet the city's stormwater drainage needs. The adoption of the ordinance establishing this article shall not be construed to relieve private land owners, developers or other individuals or entities from providing stormwater drainage improvements required by this Code of Ordinances, and federal or state laws and regulations. 
(c)  Access to benefitted properties. City employees shall, at all reasonable times, have access to a benefitted property within the utility service area to inspect, maintain, repair, or enforce this article, or state laws or regulations. 
(d)  Governmental immunity. The city does not waive any immunity granted to it under any law. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-338. - Establishment of drainage utility charges; rate classes. 
(a)  Drainage utility charges are hereby established, and the charges shall be imposed on each benefitted property within the utility service area for stormwater drainage services and stormwater drainage facilities provided by the stormwater drainage system. 
(b)  A benefitted property within the utility service area shall be classified and charged drainage utility charges based on the stormwater drainage utility rate determined by the property's rate class. Depending on the use of the benefitted property, the property shall be classified as one of the following two rate classes: (i) residential property; or (ii) nonresidential property. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-339. - Revision of rates. 
    The city council shall establish the initial drainage utility charges via ordinance pursuant to the provisions of the Act. The city council reserves the right to review the drainage utility charges at any time and may, by ordinance, increase or decrease the drainage utility charges within the schedule upon a determination that the increase or decrease is warranted. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-340. - Delinquent charges; nonpayment. 
    Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city, together with maximum interest, attorneys' fees and other costs and fees if allowable under state or federal law. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by state or federal law or by the ordinance establishing this article, a customer's failure to pay the drainage utility charges promptly when due shall subject the customer to discontinuance of any or all municipal utility services, including without limitation, water, wastewater, and garbage collection services. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-341. - Calculation of rates and fees. 
(a)  Rates in accordance with the Act. The drainage utility charges shall be established in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 
(b)  Fee calculation. The drainage utility charges shall be based on an inventory of improved parcels within the service area. The inventory shall evaluate the stormwater runoff potential for improved parcels within the service area and establish a rate for each class of benefitted properties. If authorized by the city council, the chief may levy an amount to establish one or more funds to finance future stormwater drainage system construction and to improve stormwater quality. The stormwater runoff potential for each class shall be equitably and proportionately distributed between classes and among the parcels within each class of benefitted properties relative to the contribution of each class to stormwater runoff. The drainage utility charges shall be set according to the requirements of section 44-334 herein related to findings and determinations. 
(c)  Stormwater runoff potential. For purposes of establishing the stormwater runoff potential for each class of benefitted properties and between classes of benefitted properties, the chief shall calculate the impervious area for parcels within the service area based on data gathered from the Williamson Central Appraisal District, the Travis Central Appraisal District, Geographic Information System records, and aerial photography and site plans or plats available. The chief shall then determine the relative stormwater runoff potential for each rate class and among parcels within each rate class. The rate for each class of benefitted properties and for parcels within each class shall be based on the impervious area measured in square feet (SF). 
(d)  Property values. In calculating the drainage utility charges, the chief shall be prohibited from using property values. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-342. - Establishment of the drainage utility fund. 
(a)  Drainage utility system fund. A drainage utility fund is established and may consist of one or more accounts. All drainage utility charges shall be deposited as collected and received into this fund, and shall be used exclusively for stormwater drainage services as provided in the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The cost of the acquisition of land, rights-of-way, options to purchase land, easements, and interests in land relating to structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefitted property; 
(2)  The cost of the acquisition, construction, repair, and maintenance of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefitted property; 
(3)  The cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to planning, designing, providing, or determining the feasibility and capability of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefitted property; 
(4)  The cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to the provision and operation of draining the benefitted property; 
(5)  The prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest arising from construction projects and the start-up cost of a stormwater drainage facility used in draining the benefitted property; 
(6)  The prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements for funding of stormwater drainage infrastructure, equipment and facilities paid with revenue bonds or other securities or obligations issued by the city and supported by pledge of stormwater revenues, including any fees and expenses incidental thereto; 
(7)  To the extent permitted by law, the cost of constructing, sampling, monitoring, building, inspecting and maintaining structures needed for the state's regulation and permitting requirements imposed on the city for providing stormwater quality improvements for the benefitted property; and 
(8)  The administrative costs of the drainage utility. 
(b)  Drainage utility fund accounting. 
(1)  The city shall clearly account for revenues and expenditures authorized for operation of the drainage utility. 
(2)  The revenues collected from the drainage utility charges shall be segregated and completely identifiable from other city funds and accounts. 
(3)  Funds and revenues in the drainage utility fund may be transferred to the city's general fund as allowed by law. 
(c)  Drainage utility service deposit. A deposit shall not be imposed for initiation or continuation of stormwater drainage utility service. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-343. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 580.003(a), a state agency, and a public or private institution of higher education shall be exempt from payment of the fees charged for the development or maintenance of programs or facilities for the control of excess water or stormwater: 
(b)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.053(b), the following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The State of Texas; 
(2)  Williamson County; 
(3)  Travis County; 
(4)  The City of Round Rock; 
(5)  The Round Rock Independent School District; and 
(6)  Other independent school districts located within the corporate city limits. 
(c)  Private property exemption. Any property to which a mandatory exemption under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 552.053 of the Act applies is exempt from the ordinance establishing this article, including without limitation: 
(1)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned stormwater drainage system that does not discharge under any storm frequency event or conditions to waterways controlled or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city for maintenance; and 
(3)  A subdivided parcel or lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued, or the city has taken another official action to release the property for occupancy. 
(d)  Proof of exemption. If the owner of property asserts that such property is exempt pursuant to the ordinance establishing this article or any other applicable law, such property owner has the burden to assert such exemption by filing notice of eligibility for such exemption and sufficient evidence of entitlement to such exemption with the chief of public works operations. If the exemption is not granted, the decision may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B3, § I, 11-23-2010) 
Sec. 44-344. - Levy of drainage utility charges. 
(a)  Establishment and levy of drainage utility charges. The city does hereby establish drainage utility charges as set forth herein. Drainage utility charges shall be levied against all benefitted properties within the utility service area unless exempt by statute and/or ordinance. 
(b)  Fee calculation. 
(1)  Drainage utility charges calculation. Drainage utility charges shall be calculated based on the total stormwater runoff potential for benefitted properties for all customers within the utility service area. The total stormwater runoff potential shall be measured as impervious areas in square feet (SF). 
(2)  Drainage utility charges. The total stormwater runoff potential for the service area shall be allocated between the customer classes based on the relative amount of impervious area in each class established by ordinance. 
a.  Residential property class. Drainage utility charges for the residential property class of customers shall be as follows: 
1.  A monthly, flat-rate fee per an equivalent residential unit (ERU); or 
2.  One flat-rate ERU fee per dwelling unit on a residential parcel. 
3.  The flat-rate fee is established in the fee schedule listed herein in subsection (b)(3)a. of this section. 
4.  The monthly drainage utility charge is based on the average impervious area for an ERU, which is 2,900 square feet. 
b.  Nonresidential property class. A drainage utility charge for each improved nonresidential property or allocated portion of an improved nonresidential property shall equal the product of impervious area in square feet (SF) times the drainage utility charge established in the rate schedule listed herein in subsection (b)(3)b. of this section. 
(3)  Schedule of monthly fees and rates. The monthly drainage utility charge shall be as follows: 
a.  Residential units. The monthly drainage utility charge for each residential dwelling unit or ERU shall be as follows: 
Effective Date Monthly Fee March 1, 2014 $4.75  
b.  Nonresidential units. The monthly drainage utility charge for the impervious area measured in square feet on each nonresidential parcel shall be as follows: 
Effective Date Rate (per ERU) March 1, 2014 $4.75  
(c)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to any owner or user of a benefitted property, within the utility service area, to which stormwater drainage service is provided either directly or indirectly. 
(d)  Revision of rates. The city council reserves the right to review the drainage utility charges at any time and may, by ordinance, increase or decrease the drainage utility charges within the schedule upon a determination that the increase or decrease is warranted. 
(Ord. No. G-10-11-23-10B4, § I, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. G-13-12-05-E3, § I, 12-5-2013) 
Secs. 44-345-44-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 44-400. - Public, education and government ("PEG") access channels fund. 
(a)  Establishment of PEG fund. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66, there is hereby established the public, education and government access channels fund, also to be known as the "PEG fund." 
(b)  Source of funds. The holder of a state-issued certificate of franchise authority providing cable and/or video services in the city shall pay a PEG fee to the city pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 66.006. 
(c)  Maintain separate account. The city shall administer and maintain the PEG fund as follows: 
(1)  The revenue from the PEG fees paid shall be maintained in a separate account established for that purpose; 
(2)  The revenue from the PEG fees paid may not be commingled with any other money; 
(3)  A record shall be maintained of each deposit to and disbursement from the account, including a record of the payee and purpose of each disbursement; and 
(4)  Revenue from the PEG fees may not be spent except directly from the PEG fund. 
(Ord. No. G-11-10-06-10C7, § I, 10-6-2011) 
Secs. 44-401-44-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - NETWORK NODES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 44-431. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of node support poles in the right-of-way and network nodes in the public right-of-way and on service poles within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city public right-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by network nodes, including without limitation, ensuring that network nodes or node support poles do not adversely affect: 
(1)  Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  The operation of facilities lawfully located in public right-of-way or public property; 
(4)  The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees; 
(5)  The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in which network nodes may be installed; and 
(6)  The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services. 
(c)  Conflicts with other chapters. This article supersedes all articles, parts of articles or rules adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-432. - Definitions. 
    All terms used in this article, not specifically defined herein, have the meaning provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    "Applicable law" means Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    "Applicant" means any person who submits an application and is a network provider. 
    "Application" means a request submitted by an applicant: (i) for a permit to collocate network nodes; or (ii) to install a transport facility; or (iii) approve the installation, replacement or modification of a pole. 
    "City Code" means those ordinance provisions relevant to use of the public right-of-way where compliant with applicable law. 
    "Collocate" and "collocation" mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    "Day" means calendar day. 
    "Decorative pole" means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
    "Design district" means an area zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis and includes the following: 
(1)  A public improvement district pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 372, as amended; 
(2)  Reinvestment zone pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 311, as amended; 
(3)  Planned development zoning district with decorative poles; 
(4)  Zoning districts MU-1 (Mixed-use Historic Commercial Core), MU-2 (Mixed-use Downtown Medium Density), MU-L (Mixed-use Limited), H (Historic) Overlay, and CT (Chisholm Trail) Overlay, as specified by City of Round Rock Planning and Development Services; 
(5)  Property located within 300 feet of any property zoned H (Historic) Overlay; 
(6)  Conservation district; and 
(7)  Any other area the city council has designated a design district, which does not require a zoning case. 
    "Design manual" means design requirements adopted by city council for the installation and construction of network nodes and new node support poles in the public right-of-way that includes additional installation and construction details. 
    "Network node" means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
    "Network provider" means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    "Node support pole" means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    "Person" means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city. 
    "Routine maintenance" means: (i) work in the public right-of-way that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; (ii) replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or (iii) the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles, in the public right-of-way. 
    "Service poles" means a pole owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    "Technical grounds" means, in light of prevailing industry and engineering standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity, safety, reliability and/or generally applicable engineering purposes consistent with applicable law and city Code. 
    "Transport facility" means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-433. - Permitted use; application and fees. 
(a)  Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node support poles, meeting the parameters set forth in section 44-435 below and in applicable law, shall be a permitted use. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport facility or node support pole in the public right-of-way, without first filing a permit application and obtaining a permit therefore, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or electronic, provided by the city. 
(d)  Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be required for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or for 
(2)  The replacement of a node or pole with another node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way. 
(e)  Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00 for up to five network nodes addressed in the same application, $250.00 for each additional node in the same application; and a fee of $1,000.00 for each node support pole. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-434. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Review of applications. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable law and city Code and shall issue such permits on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Within 30 days of receiving an application for a network node or node support pole, or ten days for a transport facility, the city shall determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the city will specifically identify the missing information in such notification. 
(2)  The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a complete application no later than: 
a.  Twenty-one days after receipt of a complete application for a transport facility; 
b.  Sixty days after receipt of a complete application for a network node; and 
c.  One hundred fifty days after receipt of a completed application for a new node support pole. 
(3)  The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the application is denied, the city shall provide the basis for that denial, including specific provisions of city Code or applicable law on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional application fee, other than a fee for actual costs incurred by the municipality. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
(4)  If the city fails to act on an application within the review period specified in this section 44-434, the application shall be deemed approved. 
(5)  An applicant seeking to install or collocate network nodes may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive permits for not more than 30 network nodes. The city's denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same application. The city shall grant permits for any and all nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-435. - Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height; other requirements. 
(a)  Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network nodes in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the size limitations specified in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003. 
(b)  Maximum pole heights. A network provider shall ensure that each new, modified, or replacement utility pole or node support pole installed in a public right-of-way in relation to which the network provider received approval of a permit application does not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
(2)  Fifty-five feet above ground level. 
(c)  Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a public right-of-way. This requirement or restriction shall not be interpreted to prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure with a substantially similar structure. 
(d)  Historic sites and design districts. Subject to the permit application approval time frames in section 44-434, a network provider must obtain advance approval from the city before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in any areas zoned or designated or defined as a design district. Such installations shall be subject to the design and aesthetic standards of such areas. All applications for collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles within 300 feet of a designated historic landmark or historic district must be reviewed by the city's historic preservation officer for compliance with design and aesthetic standards. 
(e)  Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, written consent of the utility and environmental services director if the public right-of-way is located in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 1) not more than 50 feet wide; and 2) adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. A network provider shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions when installing network nodes in parks and residential areas. 
(f)  Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace or modify a pole or node in the public right-of-way that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this section, shall be subject to applicable zoning requirements. 
(g)  Only one node per service pole. Only one network node may be installed on a service pole. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-436. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval and shall diligently pursue the installation to completion. Provided, however, the city may place a longer time limit on completion or grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(c)  Interference with network nodes. A network provider shall operate all network nodes in accordance with all applicable laws, including regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission and shall ensure that the operation of a network node does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile telecommunications operation of the municipality operating at the time the network node was initially installed or constructed. On written notice, a network provider shall take all reasonably necessary steps to remedy any harmful interference. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-437. - Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Notice. Within 45 days following written notice from the city, a network provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node located within the public right-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider after disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole. 
(c)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way, the network provider shall notify the city within 30 days. Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if the city, or any of its departments, determines that such removal is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-438. - Public right-of-way rate. 
(a)  Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and made operational a network node in the public right-of-way, network provider shall pay to the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way in the amount of $250.00 annually per node in the city public right-of-way. This annual rate can be adjusted annually pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.054. 
(b)  Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from the public right-of-way and cease paying the city compensation for use of the public right-of-way following removal and notification to the city of such removal. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-439. - Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way. 
    A network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned service poles, consistent with applicable law and city Code and subject to the requirements specified herein. 
(1)  Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the terms of this article, prior to collocating network nodes on service poles. 
(2)  Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for costs for make ready work on city service poles to which provider seeks to place a network node. 
(3)  Technical limitations. Prior to collocating a network node on a city-owned service pole, the network provider will provide to the city an industry standard pole load analysis indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. 
(4)  Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a network node on a service pole in the public right-of-way shall be $20.00 per pole per year. Subject to the provisions of section 44-440, such compensation together with the application fee and the public right-of-way rate specified in section 44-438 shall be the sole compensation that the network provider shall be required to pay to the city. 
(5)  Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a service pole in the public right-of-way and cease paying the attachment fee to the city upon notification to the city that the facilities have been removed. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-440. - Transport facilities. 
    Installation of transport facilities, including applicable compensation to the city for such facilities, shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.055. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 44-441. - Design manual. 
    A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual, if any, in place on the date a permit application is filed in relation to work for which the city has approved a permit application. The city's design manual may not conflict with applicable law and must be competitively neutral. This article shall be considered part of the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-5461, § I, 5-24-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § VIII, 9-27-2018) 
Secs. 44-442-44-465. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Section Subject Amount CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS Reserved CHAPTER 2 - ADMINISTRATION Article V. Finance: 2-325(a) Returned item or item unpaid by financial institution $25.00 2-325(b) Convenience charge for payment made through web page on-line payment system or interactive voice response system $1.50 CHAPTER 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Reserved CHAPTER 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS Article III. Sexually Oriented Businesses: 6-64 Permit application fee $250.00 6-66 Permit renewal application fee $50.00 Article IV. Shooting and Archery Ranges: 6-98(b)(6) Minimum amount of liability insurance coverage $300,000.00 per person $500,000.00 per event CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS Article IV. Caring for Animals: 8-166 Microchip fee $5.00 per sterilized animal 
$10.00 per non-sterilized animal Re-issuance microchip fee for malfunctioning/destroyed microchips $5.00 per sterilized animal 
$10.00 per non-sterilized animal 8-314 Adoption fee for impounded animals $75.00 per animal 8-316 Reclaiming and impoundment fees:  Impoundment fee - first offense $20.00  Impoundment fee - second and subsequent offenses $25.00  Boarding fee, per each 24-hour period or portion thereof $10.00  Rabies quarantine boarding fee, per each 24-hour period or portion thereof $15.00  Medical costs Actual costs incurred 8-318(b) Owner voluntary release fee $50.00 per unweaned litter 
$30.00 per weaned animal 8-319 Owner release in lieu of impoundment fee $50.00 per unweaned litter 
$30.00 per weaned animal CHAPTER 10 RESERVED Reserved CHAPTER 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT Reserved CHAPTER 14 - ENVIRONMENT Article III. Public and Private Water Wells: 14-57(c) Water well permit fee $200.00 Article VII. Stagnant Water, Filth, Weeds and Rubbish: 14-181 Additional charges for removal by City $150.00 per lot or tract Article VIII. Noise: 14-215(c)(1) Filing fee to accompany application for temporary noise exemption permit If fee schedule is adopted by Council, in accordance therewith. Otherwise, $25.00 Article IX. Smoking of Tobacco Products in Public Places: 14-244(b)(2) Permit fee for processing application to be a designated smoking bar $50.00 14-244(b)(4) Re-testing fee relative to exhaust and/or air purification system having failed two successive tests $50.00 per additional test Article XI. Abandoned and Junked Vehicles; Other Abandoned Property: 14-302(h) Fees for impounding, storage, etc.:  Fee for the taking and impounding of any personal property The actual expenses incurred by the impounder in impounding the property, plus $2.00, but in no event less than $4.00  Storage fee, including storage for all or part of the first 24 hours $1.00 per 24-hour period or portion thereof  Fee for preparing notices of sale of each article, including newspaper advertisement $1.00  Fee for selling each article $1.00  Fee for posting notices of sale for each article $1.00  Fee for newspaper advertisement Actual publication costs CHAPTER 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION Article IV. Burning: 16-89(b) Fee for obtaining open burning permit from Fire Department $50.00 Article V. Fireworks: 16-110(a) Bond amount required for licensee relative to supervised public display of fireworks/pyrotechnic display Not less than $1,000.00 16-110(b)(2) Site inspection fee to accompany application for permit for pyrotechnic display $50.00 Article VI. Explosives: 16-143(i) Fee for Sec. 16-143(a)(3) permit "to use explosives or blasting agents"  Class A Permit: Class A Permits will be issued for a period of 45 calendar days. One extension not to exceed 10 calendar days may be approved by the City Engineer without additional fees $150.00  Class B Permit: Class B Permits will be issued for a period of 120 calendar days. One extension not to exceed 30 calendar days may be approved by the City Engineer without additional fees $350.00  Class C Permit: Class C Permits will be issued for a period of one year and may be renewed annually subject to the requirements of obtaining a permit $550.00 
$550.00 each renewal  Class D Permit: Class D Permits will be issued for a period of 10 calendar days $100.00  The various City departments, the utilities and city franchise holders, where normally engaged in such work as is described in Article VI, shall not be required to pay permit fees 16-144 Bond amount required for applicant for permit $300,000.00 16-146(d) License fee for initial issuance of each blasting license $100.00 Article VII. Hazardous Materials Incidents: 16-191 Services of Fire Department related to hazardous materials incident Apparatus:  Engine $750.00 per hour  Quint/Aerial $750.00 per hour  Tanker $500.00 per hour  Booster Truck $300.00 per hour  Rescue Truck $625.00 per hour  Haz Mat Trailer $225.00 per hour  Support Truck $300.00 per hour  Squad Truck $125.00 per hour  Command Unit $175.00 per hour  Staff Vehicle $75.00 per hour  Haz Mat Mobile Lab Unit $600.00 per hour  Ambulance/EMS Unit $350.00 per hour Personnel:  Fire Fighter $35.00 per hour  Haz Mat Operations Level $35.00 per hour  Haz Mat Technician Level $40.00 per hour  Haz Mat Specialist Level $65.00 per hour  Haz Mat Incident Command $75.00 per hour Protective Equipment:  FF Helmet $180.00  FF Hood $25.00  Bunker Coat $450.00  Bunker Pants $350.00  FF Boots $165.00  FF Gloves $55.00  Face Shield $5.00  Disposable Goggles $12.00  Ear Plugs $5.00  Over Boots $20.00  Chemical Boots $65.00  Nitrile Gloves $1.00 per pair  Nitrile Gloves, 15 ml $12.25 per pair  4H Chem Res Gloves $17.00 per pair  12" Neoprene Gloves $36.25 per pair  Butyl Gloves $30.00 per pair  Tyvek Coveralls $10.00 each  Tyvek 9400 HD Coveralls $82.00  Level B TyChem Suit 9400 $145.00  Level A Responder Chem Suit $1,235.00  CPF Suit Tape 2" $360.00 per roll  Isotherm Cooling Vest $20.00  Isotherm Repl Packs $72.00 each  SBCA 4500 Pack $95.00 per unit Testing and Monitoring Equipment:  PH Paper Roll .5" × 10' $9.75  Nerve Agent Sensor $32.25  Drager Unit $55.00  Drager Tubes (Group 1) $51.75 per 10-pack  Drager Tubes (Group 2) $55.75 per 10-pack  Drager Tubes (Group 3) $61.75 per 10-pack  Drager Tubes (Group 4) $67.75 per 10-pack  Drager Tubes (Group 5) $77.75 per 10-pack  Drager Tubes (Group 6) $118.35 per 10-pack  B/W Detect Simultin Device $97.25 per 10-pack  Tri Chem Single Unit $107.00  Chemical Agent Detect Kit M256A1 $25.00  Dosimeter DMC20 $37.00  Portable Radiation Survey Meter $60.00  Radiation Survey Meter $280.00  Spil Fyter Class Strips $272.05 per 50-pack  Pressure Test Kit $100.00  Haz Mat Tool Kit $120.00  Haz Mat Gas Detection Kit $150.00  Orion 4 Gas Meter $175.00  Infrared Heat Detector $75.00  ISGK90 Thermal Imager $200.00 Fire Equipment:  Axe $20.00  Pike Pole $20.00  Bolt Cutters $20.00  Chain Saw $40.00 per hour  PPV Fan $50.00 per hour  Generator $45.00 per hour  Scene Lights $15.00 each  Light Tower $75.00  Salvage Cover $25.00 each  Hall Runner $15.00 each  Portable Water Tank $50.00  Submersible Pump $30.00  1 3/4" Fire Hose (damaged) $137.50  2 1/2" Fire Hose (damaged) $154.00  4"/5" Supply Line (damaged) $795.00  Foam Nozzle $50.00  Foam Eductor $45.00  Dry Chemical Extinguisher $40.00  CO2 Extinguisher $40.00  Class D Extinguisher $75.00 Rescue Equipment:  Spreaders $100.00  Cutters $100.00  Rams $100.00  Air Bags $100.00  K 12 Saw $75.00  Rescue Rope $1.25 per foot  Utility Rope $0.75 per foot  Rescue Harness $25.00  Tripod $200.00  Sked Rescue System $75.00  Stokes Basket $50.00 Haz Mat Equipment:  Leak & Plug Kit $75.00  Chlorine Kit A $175.00  Chlorine Kit B 175.00  Mercury Spill Kit $110.75  Decon Drain Grid $20.00  Decon Catch Basin $20.00  Decon Shower Kit $65.00  Decon Privacy Curtain $50.00  Decon Soap $10.00  15 Gallon Salvage Drum $55.00  30 Gallon Salvage Drum $75.00  55 Gallon Salvage Drum $85.00  30 Gallon Overpack Drum $65.00  95 Gallon Overpack Drum $200.00  Drum Liners $8.00 each  Drum Dolly $25.00  5 Gallon Pump Sprayer $20.00  Poly Sheeting $50.00 per roll  Duct Tape $10.00 per roll  Waste/Bio Hazard Bag $1.50 Materials and Supplies:  Absorbent $9.00 per 20 lb. bag  Absorbent Pillows 17" × 5' (17 per case) $58.50  Absorbent Socks 3" × 10' (4 per case) $53.25  Absorbent Pads 16" × 20" (100 per case) $78.00  Absorbent Booms 8" × 10' (4 per case) $107.25  Soda Ash $52.00 per 50 lb. bag  AFFF Foam $35.00 per gallon  Class A Foam $20.00 per gallon  Micro Blaze $30.00 per gallon  Micro Blaze (5 gallon) $132.50  Barricade Tape $20.00 per 100' Miscellaneous  Dispatch Fee $95.00  Cellular Phone Usage (per quarter hour) $15.00  Rehab Supplies Actual cost  Disposal Charges 10% over actual rental  Rental Equipment 10% over actual rental CHAPTER 18 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 18-4 Application/Permit fee formula to operate food establishment Food establishments  Number of employees (1 to 7) $200.00  Number of employees (8 to 15) $300.00  Number of employees (16 to 30) $400.00  Number of employees (31 to 45) $550.00  Number of employees (45+) $750.00 Day care centers  Licensed number of children (13 to 40) $150.00  Licensed number of children (41 to 100) $250.00  Licensed number of children (101 or more) $300.00 If an application for any of the above food establishment or day care permits is made after the last day of June of any calendar year, the application fee shall be reduced by 50% Mobile food establishments $200.00 Temporary food establishments $50.00  Delinquency fee upon failure to timely renew permit  30-60 days after expiration date 20% of permit fee  More than 60 days after expiration date 50% of permit fee 18-6 Food handler classes  Two-year card fee if training by WCCHD in-house training $20.00  Online class (includes training and two-year registration) $20.00  Two-year card fee if training by third-party accredited food handler training provider $10.00 Variance application fee $150.00 Establishment plan review  Establishment plan review (includes the plan review and one pre-opening inspection) $250.00  Fee for additional inspection conduct at request of establishment $75.00 18-8(1) and (2)c. Compliance inspection fee $100.00 18-8(2)b. Reinstatement fee following finding of "second failure" health inspection violation $150.00 CHAPTER 20 - LIBRARY 20-1(c) Late return fee  All circulating physical materials except laptops (includes books, audiobooks, DVDs, music, magazines, etc.) $0.20 per day per item, with maximum of $8.00  Laptops $1.00 per hour with maximum of $8.00 20-1(d) Miscellaneous fees  Lost card replacement $1.00  Book reserve fee if reserved item is not picked up within 7 days $1.00 per item  Interlibrary loan for incoming materials Postage and miscellaneous user fees charged by the lending library  Interlibrary loan for outgoing materials Postage, photocopy fees, and any miscellaneous user fees shall be charged to borrowing libraries according to rates in their lending policies, if any 20-1(e) Fees for irreparable damaged items Replacement cost - price in record or current retail price Fees for replaceable audio CDs $12.00 per missing disc  Board books $5.00 20-1(f)(1) Library equipment fees  Public access computers (in-house use) $0.10 per page printed  Flash Drive $8.00  Photocopies (in-house use)   Black and white copy $0.10 per page   Color copy $1.00 per page  
Section Subject 20-1(f)(2)d. Room rates Group Type Rate Time Additional Fees Notes Henry Lathin Meeting Room - A or B Non-profit $15.00 2 hr minimum $15.00 per hour, added onto the 2 hour May be used at this rate only one time per month. Additional use is $15.00 per hr with a $120.00 daily maximum Private persons, 
organizations, 
businesses $70.00 2 hr minimum $70.00 per hour thereafter May be used at this rate only one day per month. Additional use is $70.00 per hr with a $560.00 daily maximum Additional Fees Kitchen use $10.00 Hourly rate, maximum $40.00 per day, non-refundable Security 
deposit $100.00 Non-refunded if cancellation made within 7 days of event date; non-refunded if room is not left in condition in which it was borrowed Equipment See notes Overhead projector (if reserved in advance) $10.00; if not reserved in advance, 50% increase over base rate Computer projector (if reserved in advance) $100.00; if not reserved in advance, 50% increase over base rate Henry Lathin Meeting Room - Combined A and B Non-profit $25.00 2 hr minimum $25.00 per hour, added onto the 2 hour May be used at this rate only one time per month. Additional use is $25.00 per hr with a $200.00 daily maximum Private persons, 
organizations, 
businesses $100.00 2 hr minimum $100.00 per hour thereafter May be used at this rate only one day per month. Additional use is $100.00 per hr with an $800.00 daily maximum Additional Fees Kitchen use $16.00 Hourly rate, maximum $64.00 per day, non-refundable Security 
deposit $160.00 Non-refunded if cancellation made within 14 days of event date; non-refunded if room is not left in condition in which it was borrowed Equipment See notes Overhead projector (if reserved in advance) $10.00; if not reserved in advance, 50% increase over base rate Computer projector (if reserved in advance) $100.00; if not reserved in advance, 50% increase over base rate  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES Section Subject Amount 20-1(g)(2) Computer lab fee $100.00 per hour with a maximum of $400.00 per day CHAPTER 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT Reserved CHAPTER 24 - OFFENSES Article I. In General: 24-2(b)(4)c. Discharge of firearms during permitted event  Minimum amount of insurance coverage for spectators and property $300,000.00 combined single limit CHAPTER 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION Article II. Park Regulations: 26-21 Use and rental fees: Park Facilities: Pavilions in neighborhood parks $25.00 per day 
$100.00 deposit Pavilions in community parks (excluding Play for All Abilities Park) (Lake Creek, Mesa Village, Meadowlake, RR West, Freeman Parks) $75.00 per day 
$100.00 deposit Pavilions in Old Settlers Park $200.00 for 4 hours 
$25.00 per additional hour 
$100.00 deposit Clay Madsen Recreation Center room rental rates, during operating hours:  Large meeting room, for social services or charitable organizations $70.00 per hour  Large meeting room, for private persons, organizations, businesses $140.00 per hour  Kitchen, for social services or charitable organizations $25.00 per hour  Kitchen, for private persons, organizations, businesses $50.00 per hour  Multi-purpose room, for social services or charitable organizations $20.00 per hour  Multi-purpose room, for private persons, organizations, businesses $40.00 per hour  Gym (1 full court), for social services or charitable organizations $100.00 per hour  Gym (1 full court), for private persons, organizations, businesses $100.00 per hour  Arts and crafts room, for social services or charitable organizations $10.00 per hour  Arts and crafts room, for private persons, organizations, businesses $20.00 per hour  Pool parties Room cost, plus 
$3.00 per swimmer per hour Clay Madsen Recreation Center membership fees:  Family $285.00 annually 
$75.00 quarterly 
$30.00 monthly  Couple (21-49 years) $220.00 annually 
$60.00 quarterly 
$25.00 monthly  Senior couple (50 years and over) $125.00 annually 
$40.00 quarterly 
$20.00 monthly  Individual (21-49 years) $125.00 annually 
$40.00 quarterly 
$20.00 monthly  Senior individual (50 years and over) $70.00 annually 
$25.00 quarterly 
$15.00 monthly  Youth (up to 20 years) $70.00 annually 
$25.00 quarterly 
$15.00 monthly  Corporate (20 or more people) $80.00 per person annually Clay Madsen Recreation Center walk-in fees:  Individual (21-49 years) $5.00  Senior individual (50 years and over) $2.50  Youth (up to 20 years) $1.00  For Clay Madsen Recreation Center walk-in fees, the following apply: first visit requires an additional $5.00 ID card fee; ID card must be presented on subsequent visits Allen R. Baca Center for Senior and Community Activities membership fees:  Aged 50 and over $30.00 annually 
$4.50 monthly 
$1.00 walk-in/day use  Aged 50 and over (weight room included) $60.00 annually 
$9.00 monthly  Aged 21-49 (weight room only) $80.00 annually 
$12.00 monthly 
$5.00 walk-in/day use Clay Madsen Recreation Center (CMRC) and Allen R. Baca Center for Senior and Community Activities (BCSCA) joint membership fees:  All access to both the CMRC and BCSCA facilities:  Aged 50 and over $85.00 annually  Couple (Aged 50 and over) $160.00 annually  All access to both the CMRC and BCSCA weight room:   Aged 21-49 $145.00 annually Allen R. Baca Center for Senior and Community Activities rental fees (Monday- Friday until 5:00 p.m.):  Grand meeting room with kitchen (3,200 square feet) $65.00 for 1 hour 
$195.00 for 4 hours 
$350.00 security deposit 
$60.00 additional hours  Meeting room No. 1 (1,155 square feet) $20.00 for 1 hour 
$60.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$15.00 additional hours  Meeting room No. 2 (1,155 square feet) $20.00 for 1 hour 
$60.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$15.00 additional hours  Meeting room No. 3 (756 square feet) $20.00 for 1 hour 
$60.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$15.00 additional hours  Arts and crafts room (864 square feet) $20.00 for 1 hour 
$60.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$15.00 additional hours  Dining room (2,596 square feet) $50.00 for 1 hour 
$150.00 for 4 hours 
$200.00 security deposit 
$45.00 additional hours  Music room (496 square feet) $15.00 for 1 hour 
$45.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$10.00 additional hours  All rentals of the Allen R. Baca Center for Senior and Community Activities include lobby space and parking garage access Allen R. Baca Center for Senior and Community Activities rental fees (Monday thru Friday, after 5:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday):  Grand meeting room with kitchen (3,200 square feet) $110.00 for 1 hour 
$330.00 for 4 hours 
$350.00 security deposit 
$90.00 additional hours  Meeting room No. 1 (1,155 square feet) $35.00 for 1 hour 
$105.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$25.00 additional hours  Meeting room No. 2 (1,155 square feet) $35.00 for 1 hour 
$105.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$25.00 additional hours   Computer/Meeting room No. 3 (756 square feet) $25.00 for 1 hour 
$75.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$20.00 additional hours  Arts and crafts room (864 square feet) (capacity 36) $25.00 for 1 hour 
$75.00 for 4 hours 
$50.00 security deposit 
$20.00 additional hours  Dining room (2,596 square feet) $75.00 for 1 hour 
$225.00 for 4 hours 
$200.00 security deposit 
$65.00 additional hours  Music room (496 square feet) $20.00 for 1 hour 
$60.00 for 4 hours 
$500.00 security deposit 
$15.00 additional hours Softball/baseball field rental rates:  Adult tournaments, camps and clinics:  Field rental, per field, per day $60.00  Concession stand $25.00 per day  Light fee $18.00 per hour  Deposits:  Bases $150.00 per field  Keys $50.00  Litter/damage $100.00 per field  Youth tournaments, camps and clinics:  Field rental, per field, per day $50.00  Concession stand $25.00 per day  Light fee $18.00 per hour  Deposits:  Bases $150.00 per field  Keys $50.00  Litter/damage $100.00 per field  Practices:  Old Settlers Park Field rental, per field, per day $50.00 per day 
$100.00 deposit  McNeil Park or Memorial Park Field rental, per field $25.00 for two hours 
$65.00 per day 
$100.00 deposit Pool sports:  From May 1 to the date school begins in the fall semester in accordance with the Round Rock ISD calendar, recreational swim teams shall pay the City $12.00 per hour for the Lake Creek Pool, and $18.00 per hour for the Micki Krebsbach Pool for use for practices and/or swim meets  From the date school begins in the fall semester in accordance with the Round Rock ISD calendar to April 30, recreational swim teams shall pay their pro rata share of actual costs of operating and maintaining the pool Municipal pool admission:  Daily admission fees to Rock'n River Family Aquatic Center:  Infant (2 years and under) $5.00  Youth (3-17 years) $10.00  Adult (18-49 years) $12.00  Senior (50 years and over) $10.00  Daily admission fees to Micki Krebsbach Pool:  Youth (17 years and under) $3.00  Adult (18-49 years) $4.00  Senior (50 years and over) $3.00  Daily admission fees to Lake Creek Pool:  Youth (17 years and under) $1.00  Adult (18-49 years) $2.00  Senior (50 years and over) $1.00  Season pool passes:  Youth pass (17 years and under) $60.00 
$30.00 after 6th week of season  Adult pass (18-49 years) $70.00 
$35.00 after 6th week of season  Senior pass (50 years and over) $60.00 
$30.00 after 6th week of season  Family pass (4 people) $225.00 
$112.50 after 6th week of season 
$10.00 per additional person CHAPTER 28 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS Article II. Identification Cards: 28-22 Identification card fee for each peddler $50.00 CHAPTER 30 - RESERVED Reserved > CHAPTER 32 - SOLID WASTE Article II. Collection and Disposal: 32-29(d) Brush collection by the City $25.00 for 1st 5 minutes, then $1.00 per minute thereafter, per pick-up 32-33(a)(2) Residential sanitation charge for collection of refuse and for recycling services $13.95 per month 32-33(a)(3) Discount (under delineated circumstances) for head of household 65 years or over, applicable to residential sanitation charge $1.00 per month discount CHAPTER 34 - SPECIAL EVENTS, BLOCK PARTIES AND PARADES Article II. Special Events: 34-21(a) Application fee for special event permit $50.00 34-43(a) Surety bond for special event on City property $10,000.00 34-43(b) Surety bond for special event on private property $500.00 Article III. Block Parties: 34-68(a) Application fee for street closure permit $25.00 Article IV. Parades: 34-95(a) Application fee for parade permit $50.00 CHAPTER 36 - RESERVED Reserved > CHAPTER 38 - TAXATION Reserved CHAPTER 40 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS Reserved CHAPTER 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES Reserved CHAPTER 44 - UTILITIES Reserved CHAPTER 46 - RESERVED Reserved >  
PART III - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE Section Subject Amount CHAPTER 2: ZONING DISTRICT AND USE REGULATIONS Article VI. Mixed-Use and PUD Districts: 2-93(c)(6) Mobile food establishment annual permit $150.00 2-93(c)(8) Mobile food establishment three-day permit $25.00 CHAPTER 4: SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION Article I. In General: 4-14 Subdivision fees: Concept plan and plat fees  Concept plans $500.00 plus 
$25.00 per lot  Preliminary plats $500.00 plus 
$25.00 per lot  Final plats and replats $500.00 plus 
$25.00 per lot  Minor subdivision final plat $300.00  Amending plats $500.00 plus 
$25.00 per lot  For amending plats, the $25.00 per lot fee shall not apply if the requested action is only for a street name change Notification fees (when required):  Per notified property owner $1.00  Per published notice $150.00  Per on-site public hearing notification sign $20.00 Legal review fees:  For all concept plan and plat applications $100.00  For all vacation applications $50.00 Vacation and release fees:  Release of easement $250.00  Plat vacations $500.00  Building line vacations $500.00 GIS (Geographic Information System) and recording fees $25.00 per lot Parkland fees (residential):  Single-family (SFR) $200.00 per acre  Single-family (SF-1) $1,200.00 per acre  Single-family (SF-2) $1,600.00 per acre  Two-family (TF) $2,800.00 per acre  Townhouse (TH) $3,200.00 per acre  Multifamily (MF-1, MF-2 and MF-3) $4,000.00 per acre  Senior (SR) $2,000.00 per acre Parkland fees (nonresidential) $800.00 per acre Oversize fees, reimbursement rate and interest rate:  Water oversize fee $150.00 per LUE  Wastewater oversize fee $150.00 per LUE  Reimbursement rate $2.60 per inch diameter per linear foot of over-sized main  Interest rate 5.25% per annum Inspection fees: Inspection fees for public improvements and/or private streets shall be equal to 1.5% of the actual total construction costs of installing and constructing the public improvements and/or private streets being inspected. The amount of the inspection fees for public improvements and/or private streets shall be sealed by the developer's engineer and approved by the City Engineer. Article V. Parkland Requirement: 4-62(b) Nonresidential parkland fee $800.00 per acre, with a minimum of $800.00 Article VI. Utilities: 4-76(c)(2) Fee for Fire Department water system test - hydrant flow test $100.00 per test requested Article VII. Stormwater Drainage: 4-86(b)(2) Participation fees based upon proposed land use:  Single-Family $800.00 per acre  Multi-Family $1,600.00 per acre  Commercial/Industrial $2,400.00 per acre Minimum participation fee regardless of any land use restrictions $800.00 per acre CHAPTER 8: ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Article IX. Signs: 8-83(b) Installation regulated by Zoning and Development Code: Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to erect or construct a sign of any description, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, shall pay a fee for each permit as required at the time of filing application in accordance with the following:  Total Valuation:   $2,000.00 and less $35.00   $2,001.00 to $15,000.00 $35.00 for the first $2,000.00 
plus $7.00 each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $15,000.00   $15,001.00 to $50,000.00 $125.00 for the first $15,000.00 
plus $4.00 each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00   $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $260.00 for the first $50,000.00 
plus $3.00 each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00   $100,001.00 and up $400.00 for the first $100,000.00 
plus $2.00 each additional thousand or fraction thereof  Failure to obtain permit:  Where work for which a permit is required by the Code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the Code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed by the Code Double fee 8-84 Application to the ZBA for an exception $500.00 CHAPTER 10: ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND BODIES Article I. In General: 10-1 Zoning:  Map amendment (rezoning) $750.00 for properties less than 30 acres 
$900.00 for properties 30 acres or larger  Planned Unit Development $2,000.00 plus $200.00 per acre, calculated as appears under "Notes"   Notes: $2,000.00 plus $200.00 times the number of acres or fraction thereof in excess of 1 acre, calculated on a pro rata basis. Example: a 2.75 acre tract would generate a fee of $2,350.00 calculated as follows:   $2,000.00 + ($200.00 × 1.75 = $350.00) = $2,350.00   Regardless of the foregoing, the total fee charged for a Planned Unit Development shall not exceed $5,000.00  Minor PUD amendment $500.00  Major PUD amendment $1,500.00  Variance $500.00  Special exception $500.00  Administrative Adjustment $100.00  Temporary use permit $50.00  Notification fees per property owner $1.00  On-site public hearing notification sign $20.00  Published notice $150.00  Zoning notification letter $50.00 Site plans:  Small project site plan $500.00 [see "Notes"]   Notes: Qualifying projects shall meet one of the following criteria:    Site area 0.50 acres or less;   Expansion less than 20% of total building square footage (maximum 1,500 square feet);   Temporary building or portable building as defined in Sec. 46-5 of the Code;   Wireless transmission facility as defined in Sec. 40-19 of the Code;   Area identification sign as defined in Sec. 30-9 of the Code  Standard site plan $1,000.00 plus $200.00 per acre, calculated as appears under "Notes"   Notes: $1,000.00 plus $200.00 times the number of acres or fraction thereof in excess of 1 acre, calculated on a pro rata basis. Example: a 2.75 acre tract would generate a fee of $1,350.00 calculated as follows:   $1,000.00 + ($200.00 × 1.75 = $350.00) = $1,350.00   This fee includes the review of the initial application and, if necessary, two reviews of amendments in response to staff comments   Regardless of the foregoing, the total fee from a site plan with three staff reviews shall not exceed $5,000.00  Additional review $500.00   If additional review cycles are required for either standard or small project site plan applications due to incomplete plans or plans that do not fully address comments as determined by the Chair of the Development Review Committee, an additional review fee shall be charged for each additional review required  Revision to approved site plan $500.00   Revision fees are required if a change is made to an approved site plan that requires additional review by members of the Development Review Committee  License agreements $250.00  
(Res. No. R-10-10-28-10B1, exh. A, 10-28-2010; Res. No. R-10-11-23-11B1, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. G-12-03-08-8B4, § II, 3-8-2012; Res. No. R-12-04-12-11A1, §§ I, II, 4-12-2012; Res. No. R-12-10-11-G12, § I, 10-11-2012; Res. No. R-12-12-06-F4, § I, 12-6-2012; Res. No. R-13-03-14-F4, §§ I, II, 3-14-2013; Res. No. R-13-08-08-G2, § I, 8-8-2013; Res. No. R-14-02-13-H10, § I, 2-13-2014; Res. No. R-2015-2480, § I(Exh. A), 5-15-2015; Res. No. R-2015-2757, § I, 8-27-2015; Res. No. R-2015-2896, § I, 10-8-2015; Res. No. R-2016-3422, § I(Exh. A), 5-12-2016; Res. No. R-2016-3673, § I(Exh. A), 8-11-2016; Res. No. R-2018-5346, § I(Exh. A), 4-12-2018; Res. No. R-2018-5954, § I(Exh. A), 9-27-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-6037, § III, 12-20-2018; Res. No. R-2019-0188, § I, 5-9-2019) 
CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ROUND ROCK, TEXAS, 2018 
____________ 
VOLUME II 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2018 
____________ 
Adopted: 2018 
____________ 

> 
PART III - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 1 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Short title. 
    This code shall be officially known and cited as the Zoning and Development Code of the City of Round Rock, Texas. References to "this code" or "the code" shall be interpreted as references to the zoning and development code. 
Sec. 1-2. - Authority. 
    This code is adopted under authority of the constitution and laws of the state, including particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, and pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter. 
Sec. 1-3. - Scope and purpose. 
    The purpose of this code is to place all city regulations governing the development of real property subject to the jurisdiction of the city into one place to facilitate administration and use. More specifically, this code provides regulations for zoning, subdivision platting, streets and thoroughfares, buildings, signs, tree protection, and other aspects of land development that are written in accordance with the general plan to achieve objectives that include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(b)  Encourage protection and preservation of the natural environmental and beauty of the city; 
(c)  Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; 
(d)  Secure from fire, flood, and other danger; 
(e)  Prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
(f)  Protect the social and economic stability of all parts of the city; 
(g)  Protect the character and the established pattern of desirable development in each area; 
(h)  Encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the city through appropriate growth management techniques assuring the timing and sequencing of development; 
(i)  Guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks, and other public improvements and facilities; 
(j)  Provide for the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and the circulation of traffic throughout the city; and 
(k)  Establish processes that effectively and fairly apply the regulations and standards of this code and respects the rights of property owners and the interests of citizens. 
Sec. 1-4. - Rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation of provisions in this code, the rules of this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates or requires otherwise: 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, certain terms and words are hereby defined; terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with adopted building codes or their customary usage and meaning. 
(b)  The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
(c)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this code and any caption, number, illustration or table, the text shall control, unless otherwise specifically noted herein. 
Sec. 1-5. - Jurisdiction. 
    This code shall apply to all land within the city limits. All structures and land uses constructed or commenced after the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing structures and uses occurring after the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived shall be subject to this code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Whenever the requirements of this code are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes higher standards as determined by the zoning administrator shall govern. 
(c)  The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this code shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other city, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. 
Sec. 1-7. - Round Rock Comprehensive Plan. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.002, the City Council of Round Rock, Texas has adopted a comprehensive plan which is a coordinated set of plans organized by subject and geographic area to be used to coordinate and guide the establishment of development regulations in the City of Round Rock. The coordinated set of plans shall be collectively referred to as the "Round Rock Comprehensive Plan". The Round Rock Comprehensive Plan shall consist of the following set of plans: 
(a)  General Plan 2020. The General Plan 2020 was adopted on July 22, 2010 in Ordinance No. G-10-07-22-9A4. The General Plan 2020 is referred to in this Code as the "general plan." 
(b)  Comprehensive Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan. The Comprehensive Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan was adopted on June, 25, 2009 in Ordinance No. G-09-06-25-10B1. The Comprehensive Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan is referred to in this Code as the "parks master plan." 
(c)  Comprehensive Transportation Master Plan, March 2004. The Comprehensive Transportation Master Plan, March 2004 was adopted on March 25, 2004 in Ordinance No. G-04-03-25-13E1. The Comprehensive Transportation Master Plan, March 2004 is referred to in this Code as the "transportation master plan." The transportation master plan was amended by Ordinance No. G-06-08-24-13B1. The transportation master plan was amended by Ordinance No. G-07-11-08-9A2. 
(d)  Downtown Master Plan. The Downtown Master Plan was adopted on June 24, 2010 in Ordinance No. G-10-06-24-10A1. 
(e)  Austin Executive Airport Joint Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations . The Austin Executive Airport Joint Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations, adopted on May 12, 2017, by the Austin Executive Joint Airport Zoning Board, are hereby adopted as part of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Compliance required. 
    No land shall be used and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered or moved until the following requirements are met: 
(a)  All applicable development review and approval processes have been followed. 
(b)  All applicable approvals have been obtained. 
(c)  All required permits or authorizations to proceed have been issued. 
Sec. 1-9. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this code are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law. Local regulations provided herein shall not preclude compliance with international, federal, or state building codes. 
(b)  Conflict with other city regulations. If the provisions of this code are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision or the one which imposes higher standards as determined by the zoning administrator will control. 
(c)  Conflict with private agreements. It is not the intent of this code to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this code impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of this code will control. The city shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing private agreements. 
Secs. 1-10-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 1-31. - Authority to administer the development code. 
    This code shall be enforced by the zoning administrator. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the zoning administrator, or on the part of any official or employee of the city shall legalize, authorize, or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
Sec. 1-32. - Violation and penalties. 
    The owner of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provision of this code has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which a violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part, or assists in any violation, or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation exists, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 1-33. - Remedies and enforcement powers. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this code, the appropriate city authorities, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
Secs. 1-34-1-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 1-50. - Definitions. 
    The purpose of this section is to define words, terms and phrases contained within this code, unless otherwise specifically defined elsewhere herein. Definitions for words not defined below may be defined elsewhere in the City of Round Rock Code of Ordinances or found in Webster's Dictionary of the English language, unabridged, subject to interpretation by the PDS director. 
Term Definition Abate/Abatement To end a nuisance, emergency, or nonconformance. Abandoned sign A sign which for a period of at least 90 consecutive days advertises or identifies a business establishment that has been closed or abandoned. Abutting (same as Adjoining, Contiguous) Having a common border with or being separated from such common border only by an alley. Access A means of vehicular entry to or exit from property. Accessory building/structure 
(nonresidential) A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Includes, but is not limited to, storage facilities, detached garages, parking structures or enclosures, and other similar buildings or structures. Accessory building/structure 
(residential) A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, pool houses/cabanas, workshops, decks, storage sheds, barbeque structures, detached garages, playscapes, tree houses and other similar buildings or structures. Conexes and shipping containers are not considered to be an accessory structure in residential zoning districts. Accessory dwelling unit A dwelling unit built on a legal lot in addition to a principal dwelling unit or structure. Accessory dwelling units are subordinate in size, location, and use to the principal structure. Active master electrician A licensed master electrician under the provisions of Chapter 8, article X, division 9, who is currently in good standing status. Activity centers, children's Children's participatory recreational and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include party rooms, inflatable playground equipment, other playground equipment and food service for participants. Use of the facility is generally limited to a reservation basis. Does not include bowling alleys, game arcades, pool halls, dance halls, movie theaters, other theaters or other types of indoor entertainment activities. Addition One lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the corporate limits or ETJ which is intended for development. Address The number or other designation assigned to a housing unit, business establishment, or other structure for purposes of mail delivery, emergency services, and so forth. Adjoining See "abutting". Agricultural operations Farming, including any customary agricultural buildings and structures; and uses such as field crops, orchards and horticulture. Alley A vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Alluvial fan flooding Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. Alternative standards agreement An agreement between the city and developer and/or owner of the land that modifies the regulations herein. Amenity center A private facility associated with a specific development that provides social gathering areas, recreational facilities, or other types of common space for the exclusive benefit of residents of the development. Examples include pools, fitness centers, and social rooms. Animal, small Any domesticated animal which is generally considered a household pet, such as dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish, or small nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes. Does not include livestock, caged or penned fowl or pigeons. Animated sign A sign which has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that move, scroll, rotate, revolve, change, flash, oscillate or visibly alters in appearance of the sign. This shall specifically exclude barber poles, and time/temperature signs. Apartment A self-contained dwelling unit which is located within a structure which contains three or more such units which share common walls and/or floors/ceilings with one or more units. Apartment building A residential structure consisting of three or more dwelling units sharing common walls and/or floors/ceilings with one or more units. Units may have a single access from a shared hallway or walkway, either enclosed or open directly to the outside. Apex A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. Applicable governing body The City of Round Rock, Texas, shall be the applicable governing body. Approved Approved by the zoning administrator, building official, or other authority having jurisdiction. Appurtenant structure See "Accessory building/structure" (either nonresidential or residential, whichever is applicable). Architectural concrete masonry unit (CMU) A block masonry product made from molded or cast concrete and having a split-face, stone-face, or similar decorative finish. Smooth-face, burnished, scored, and fluted CMU do not qualify as architectural CMU under this definition. Architectural feature Any element or details of a building or structure that defines its style, such as, but not limited to, windows, doors, and building material coursing patterns. Architecturally finished steel or metal A steel or metal product used for the exterior wall finish of structures that is coated or otherwise finished by the manufacturer prior to sale and has a minimum 20-year warranty. Typical products include corrugated, ribbed, or flat panels. Area identification sign/entry feature sign Any sign or entry feature identifying the name of a subdivision, district or development with multiple buildings grouped together with a distinct identity. Area of future conditions flood hazard The land area that would be inundated by the one percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. Area of shallow flooding A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. Area of special flood hazard The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. Armature sign A freestanding sign that hangs, suspended by chains, hooks, or similar means, below an arm extending horizontally from a single vertical support affixed to the ground. Assessment For the purpose of water and wastewater impact fees, "assessment" shall have the meaning set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.016(f). Assisted living A residential facility providing 24-hour care in a protected living arrangement for residents and supervisory personnel. Typical uses include nursing homes and assisted living centers, congregate living facilities for seniors, foster homes, maternity homes, and homes for the physically and mentally impaired or the developmentally disabled. Requires licensing by the state. Does not include post-incarceration facilities or facilities for those who are a danger to themselves or others. Attached wireless transmission facility (attached WTF) A wireless transmission facility (WTF) that is attached to a monopole, self-enclosed monopole, building or other permanent structure. Awning/canopy A shelter extending from the exterior wall of a building. Awning/canopy sign Any sign that is painted on or applied directly to, and contained entirely within the face, valance, or side panels of an awning/canopy. When the shelter is made from rigid materials, a sign may be mounted to the underside or top. Auto body, painting and repair shops An establishment that provides collision repair services for automobiles and light trucks and other similar motor vehicles, including body frame straightening and repair, replacement of damaged parts and painting. The term "auto body, painting and repair shops" may also include general repairs, but excludes establishments in which the principal use is service or retail sales oriented, including but not limited to quick lube, brake shops, tire replacement and muffler shops. Auto sales, rental or leasing facilities The sale or rental of automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or boats, including storage, maintenance, body painting and repair and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and boat, trailer or recreational vehicle dealerships. Auto service and repair facilities An establishment that provides service, repair and maintenance of automobiles and light trucks and other similar motor vehicles. Typical uses include gas stations (without vehicle repair/service bays), quick lube services, tire sales and installation, engine repairs, muffler shops wheel and brake shops, and inspection shops. The term "auto service and repair facilities" does not include auto body repair and auto painting. Bandit sign A temporary sign, usually made of cardboard or foam board, mounted on an angle iron or a wooden stake. Banner sign A temporary, lightweight sign that contains a message which is attached or imprinted on a flexible surface and that is typically constructed of nondurable materials, including, but not limited to, cloth, and/or plastic. Base (of a sign) The portion of a sign that is in contact with the finished grade, and acts as the sign structure. Base flood The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Base flood elevation (BFE) The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the "base flood." Basement Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. Bed and breakfast A private residence or commercial operation that offers sleeping accommodations and serves breakfasts at no extra cost to its lodgers. Berm, landscape An earthen mound designed to screen views, provide topographic variety and promote visual interest. A typical berm has a minimum height of 36 inches with a maximum side slope of four horizontal feet to one vertical foot. Billboard sign A large outdoor board for displaying advertisements which promotes or advertises commodities or services available at a location other than where the sign is located and shall include those signs whose message space is available for lease, rent or hire and exceeds the maximum allowance of sign display area for freestanding signs in this Code. Block A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. Bona fide residence The principal address and primary residence, including an accessory dwelling unit, of an occupant conducting a home occupation, as determined by one of the following criteria: The registered homestead of the occupant, voter registration (precinct), address displayed on driver's license, or other state or federal registration documents identifying the principal address. Bond Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the city council. Breakaway wall A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Brewpub An establishment containing both a restaurant and a brewery that produces beer for on-site sale. Brick A masonry building product rated SW for severe weathering and manufactured primarily from clay, shale, or similar naturally occurring earthy substances, which is subjected to a heat treatment at elevated temperatures known as firing, and which is applied unit by unit and set in mortar. Thin brick veneer does not qualify as brick under this definition. Building Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." Each portion of a building separated from other portions by a four-hour firewall shall be considered as a separate building. Building area (Building coverage) The area of a lot covered by buildings (principal and accessory) or roofed areas, as measured along the outside wall at ground level, and including all projections other than open porches, fire escapes, canopy areas and the first two feet of a roof overhang. Building construction sign A nonpermanent sign identifying persons, firms or businesses directly connected with a construction project. Building line (Setback line) The line or lines within a lot created by the intersection of the vertical planes of a building and the ground. The required building setback line is measured from the property line. Building lot A platted tract of land that, at the time of filing for a building permit, is intended by its owner or developer to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A building lot shall front upon a dedicated street. Building official The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of Chapter 8, article X (Buildings and Building Regulations), or his duly authorized representative. Building permit A permit issued by the city for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. Building, front of That exterior wall of a building that faces an adjacent street right-of-way. Building, principal A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. Building scrim sign A large non-rigid banner of a durable, mesh, fabric material that allows air and light to pass through, used to wrap a building or portion of a building with items of information. Building sign Any sign attached to any portion of a building, including accessory buildings and structures, on windows, and attached or placed on awnings/canopies. Business use Land uses classified by the zoning ordinance as commercial, and industrial, including places of worship, schools and similar institutional uses, governmental and civic uses, and multifamily projects, but not customary home occupations. Cabinet sign A sign which is typically internally lit and contains all its components and items of information within a single enclosure and whose perimeter is not shaped to the content of the sign and where the sign face is differentiated from the structure against or within which a sign face is placed. An internally lit backer board shall be considered a cabinet. Logos, pan-faced signs, raceways, taglines shall be exempt from this definition. Caliper, tree The diameter of a tree to be planted in the ground. The caliper is measured six inches above the root ball for trees that are up to and including four-inch caliper size. For trees that are larger than four-inch caliper, measurement shall be 12 inches above the root ball. Canopy sign See Awning/canopy sign. Canopy, tree The upper vegetative cover of a tree or tree grouping. Cap (of a sign) The uppermost surface or part of a sign that is usually added as a decorative feature. Caretaker residence A dwelling unit which is used exclusively by the owner, manager or operator of a principal permitted use and which is located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use. Carwash A facility for washing passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment. Includes facilities in which the washing process is automated and those in which it is manually operated. Cemetery (also Memorial Park) Land used for interment of human or animal remains or cremated remains, including a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination thereof. Certify A declaration made in any manner, oral or written, providing reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the declaration. Champion tree registry A registry containing a list of the champion tree of a species within the city limits as identified by the forestry manager and adopted by the city council. Changeable message (of a sign) Items of information that may be changed or rearranged through manual, mechanical or electrical means, including time and temperature messages and EMC's. Channel letters (of a sign) Individually constructed and individually illuminated letters, graphics, or graphic elements. Character-defining features For the purposes of historic preservation, any unique feature, typically but not limited to architectural features, whose deterioration or removal would threaten or compromise the historical integrity and significance of a structure. Chief appointing authority The person or persons designated by the laws of the local governing body as having authority to appoint persons to various boards. Chief electrical inspector That employee of the city appointed by the city manager to carry out the duties and responsibilities of Chapter 8, article X, division 9. Circulation Systems, structures, and physical improvements for the movement of people and goods by such means as streets, highways, sidewalks, and other paved improvements. City The City of Round Rock, a home rule municipal corporation in the State of Texas. City council The City Council of the City of Round Rock. City enforcing official The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the codes set forth herein, or his duly authorized representative. City engineer The individual designated by the city manager to provide civil engineering review of land development projects. City manager The individual appointed by the city council to supervise all city operations. Clearance (of a sign) The distance between the finished grade and the bottom of a sign over a public-right-of-way or walkway that shall remain clear of all obstruction. Code ("this code") The latest edition of the Round Rock Zoning and Development Code, as amended. Code enforcement Duties designated to the zoning administrator to cause property owners and others responsible for buildings and related land uses to bring their properties up to standards required by building codes, housing codes and other regulations. College or university An educational institution or other institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. Collocation, WTF The locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single mount or support structure. Columbarium A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of a deceased person or animal. Commercial kitchen An area on the premises in which food is prepared for on- or off-site consumption which includes commercial kitchen equipment consisting at a minimum of a three-compartment sink, commercial range, and appropriate exhaust and fire suppression devices. Commercial message Words and trademarked logos which identify the goods and services available at a business use. Commercial road Those roads that are specifically designated as such by the Code. Commission In general, the planning and zoning commission. For the purposes of chapter 8, article X, the term commission shall refer to the Building Standards Commission of the city as appointed by the city council. Community recreational facilities Any parks, playgrounds and sports, recreation or other community buildings owned and/or operated by the city or other governmental agency, but not including country clubs or golf courses, miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement. Community/government service Uses of a governmental, public, nonprofit, or charitable nature providing professional service of an ongoing education, training, or non-correctional counseling to the public, on a regular basis, without a residential component. Typical uses include federal, state, county, or local government offices, libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, youth club facilities, and social service facilities. Compound meter A water meter system containing two or more metering devices in parallel with each other. Comprehensive sign plan (CSP) A coordinated plan of all signs, including exempt and temporary signs for one or more business uses, located on a development site. The CSP shall include, but not be limited to, indications of the locations, dimensions, colors, letter styles and sign types of all signs to be installed on a site. Concept plan A plan submitted by a developer for implementing an integrated development scheme of a proposed addition or subdivision, and to foster general consensus regarding compliance with this Code. Condominium A form of real property ownership that combines separate ownership of individual living units with common ownership of other elements such as land or accessory buildings, in compliance with relevant State real property laws. Connectivity index A tool used to quantify how well a given transportation network connects destinations as measured by a ratio of links to nodes. Contiguous See "abutting". Conversion A change of use from single-family or two-family residential to a nonresidential use. Corporate architecture A style of architecture intended to evoke a specific brand or company and which is typically used for new construction or renovation of all or most locations of the company regardless of geography. Corporate limits The boundaries of the city. Cosmetic services Retail services focused on matters of personal cosmetic health and beauty which are typically elective in nature, such as but not limited to hair and nail salons, spas, massage therapy, waxing, permanent makeup, microblading, microdermabrasion, botox, chemical peels, facials, tanning, eyelash extensions, and eyebrow threading. This definition does not include tattoo or piercing shops. County Travis or Williamson County, Texas, whichever is applicable. Country club Any private recreational, social, and multi-purpose use associated with a private golf course for the benefit and enjoyment of members and their guests. Typical uses include clubhouses, tennis courts, playgrounds and swimming pools. Covenant, protective (see Deed Restriction) Contract made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used with a view towards protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of an area. Covenants are enforced by the parties of the contract. Creek A stream of surface water sufficient to produce a defined channel or bed. Critical feature An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. Critical root zone (CRZ), tree A region measured outward from the trunk of a tree representing the essential area of the roots that must be preserved for the tree's livelihood. The CRZ is measured as one foot of radial distance outward from the trunk for every inch of the tree's diameter, but may not be less than a radius of eight feet. Crown, tree All portions of a tree, excluding the trunk and roots. Day, business or work A work day in which the city offices are open for business, exclusive of weekends and holidays, as established by the city council. Day care (in home) A residential use in which an individual or organization provides daytime care for six or fewer children not related by blood or marriage to, or not the legal wards or foster children of, the attendant adult. Day care (all other) A nonresidential building where care, supervision, custody or control is provided for children or adults for any part of a 24-hour day, not including overnight care. Deciduous A plant or tree with foliage that sheds annually. Decorative groundcover Assorted aggregate materials that are intended to create decorative, pervious or semi-pervious areas within the landscape. Typical materials used as decorative groundcover are: decomposed granite, crushed granite gravel, river rock, pea gravel, tumbled glass and bark mulch. Decorative groundcover shall be shown graphically by a delineated boundary of the area to be covered and an associated call-out that includes the name of the material, depth of material and square footage of area to be covered. Decorative paving Modular paving or custom finishes and textures for cast-in-place concrete. Modular paving includes, but is not limited to, brick, tiles, stone and concrete pavers. Decorative paving for concrete includes textured finishes, integrated color, exposed aggregate, scoring patterns and stamped patterns. Decorative wall A wall constructed of brick, stone, stucco, concrete, or architectural concrete masonry units with a masonry cap having an exterior finish that complements and/or matches the primary architecture of a proposed or existing development. Dedication The commitment of land, or an easement therein, by the owner, for the use of the public, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. Deed A warranty deed in a form approved by the city attorney. Deed restriction (see also Covenant, Protective) An agreement that binds and restricts the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. Deed restrictions are enforced by the land owners who are parties to the agreement. Demolition by neglect Neglect in the maintenance of any structure on a property with H (Historic Overlay) district zoning that results in deterioration of the structure, including but not limited to structural defects, or threatens the preservation of the structure through the loss of any character-defining features. Density The number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land. Department of planning and development services or planning department (PDS) The offices of the city which oversee the administration of the regulations contained in this code. Design (irrigation systems) For the purposes of regulating irrigation systems, design means the act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. Design and Construction Standards (DACS) The specifications, procedures, and standards approved by the city council, as amended for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of specified public improvements, a copy of which shall be maintained by the city clerk. Designated arterial roadway The following roadways are considered designated arterial roadways: IH 35, RM 620, U.S. Hwy. 79, FM 1325, RM 1431, Old Settlers Boulevard, Greenlawn Boulevard, Double Creek Drive, Sunrise Road, University Boulevard, Sam Bass Road, Chisholm Trail, McNeil Road, Hesters Crossing Road, Gattis School Road, Louis Henna Boulevard, Mays Street, Creek Bend Boulevard, Kenney Fort Boulevard, Redbud Lane (C.R. 122), FM 1460, C.R. 172, C.R. 112, SH 45, SH 130, Wyoming Springs Drive, and A.W. Grimes Blvd. Developed lot A lot that has a fully constructed building or other site improvements, such as parking, whether occupied or not. Developer The person or entity who submits an application pursuant to this Code. A developer includes the owner of a tract of land, or an authorized agent of an owner. Development The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or land; any extension of any use of land or any clearing, grading, excavation or other movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Code. Includes reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a structure; changes in intensity of land use; alteration of shores or banks of ponds, lakes, creeks or streams; and excavation for the construction, the moving, alteration, or repair, except ordinary repairs, of any building or other structure, including an accessory structure, exceeding 100 square feet in area. Development packet The set of application procedures and fees maintained by the PDS director and on file at the planning and development services department pertaining to the various development procedures contained in this code. Directional sign A permanent freestanding sign located on private property, directing or guiding traffic onto the property and/or toward parking, exits or other identified locations on the property. Directory sign A permanent building sign identifying all building tenants and the location or suite number for each tenant using a uniform means of display. District A zoning district which is a part of the City of Round Rock, Texas, wherein the regulations of this Code are uniform. Disturb, critical root zone Conducting any hazardous activities within the critical root zone. Dog day care, indoor kennel, grooming, and training facility A facility providing services for dogs and other small animals, such as day care, boarding, obedience classes, training and grooming, in which all overnight activities occur indoors. Downtown development area The Downtown Development Area is defined geographically beginning with the eastern edge of the northbound frontage road of Interstate Highway 35 where it crosses the approximate centerline of Brushy Creek, then proceeding south along said edge of the northbound frontage road to the approximate centerline of Lake Creek, then proceeding southeast along the approximate centerline of Lake Creek to the approximate centerline of the northern most track of the Union Pacific Railroad, then proceeding northeast along the approximate centerline of the northern most track of the Union Pacific Railroad to the western line of the original P.A. Holder Survey, then proceeding north along said western line of the survey (east of College Street) to the approximate centerline of Brushy Creek, then proceeding west along the approximate centerline of Brushy Creek to the eastern edge of the northbound frontage road of Interstate Highway 35, being the point of beginning. Standards that apply in the Downtown Development Area shall not apply to properties zoned MU-1, MU-2 or MU-L. Drip line, tree The periphery of the area underneath a tree that would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the outermost edges of the canopy of the tree. The term "drip line" also includes "canopy" or "crown". Drive, connecting An authorized extension of an internal drive that links the internal drive with a similar such internal drive extension from an abutting building lot at the common lot line. Drive, external An authorized extension of an internal drive that links the internal drive with a public street, an alley, or an approved private street. Drive, internal Authorized means of vehicular access to parking and loading spaces located within a given building lot. Driveway An authorized private roadway of an impervious nature providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure. Drought-tolerant turf grasses Turf grass varieties and mixes that have been developed to minimize, once established, the requirements for irrigation, mowing, weeding and fertilizer in central Texas landscapes and have summer-dormancy capabilities. Drought-tolerant turf grasses include species such as Buffalo, Bermuda hybrids that do not produce viable seed, Zoysia, and HABITURF&reg;. St. Augustine is not considered a drought-tolerant turf grass. Dwelling unit A building or portion of it designed and used for residential occupancy by a single household and that includes exclusive sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation facilities. A building containing more than one set of cooking facilities is considered to be a multi-dwelling unit structure. The term "dwelling unit" does not include hotels, motels, lodging houses, sheds or similar accessory structures, campers or camp trailers, any recreational vehicle, or vehicle or portable structure having no permanent foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirtings. Easement A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific purposes such as the construction of utilities, drainage ways and roadways. Easement, public utility An easement dedicated by plat or separate instrument to and/or for the use by a public utility. Easement vacation The nullification of all or a portion of an easement established in a previously recorded plat or by separate instrument by recording the vacation instrument with the county. Electrical work Any act in connection with the installing, altering, or repairing of electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, or other electrical installation, designed or capable of carrying electrical energy, which act ordinarily requires the use of tools. Electronic messaging center (EMC) sign Any sign using an array of lights which can be programmed to provide items of information as a changeable message displayed through electronic means. Elevated building (1) The term "elevated building" means a non-basement building:  a. Built, in the case of a building in zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone Vl-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and  b. Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. (2) In the case of zones Al-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with opening sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. (3) In the case of zone Vl-30, VE, or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. Elevation A view of a building seen from one side. Emergency medical services A service dedicated to the treatment and ambulatory transport of patients with severe illnesses and injuries which prevent the patient from transporting themselves. Enclosed building A building surrounded on all sides by walls and with a roof. Engineer A person who is duly licensed and registered to engage in the practice of professional engineering in the State of Texas. Engineer's report A written report sealed by an engineer, including schematic diagrams as appropriate, addressing and describing utility service, drainage, streets and floodplain issues, and any other items that may be listed in the development packet. Erected Includes the terms "constructed," "moved," "located," or "relocated." Event center A facility consisting of multi-purpose rooms, outdoor courtyards, or recreational facilities used for hosting social gatherings such as weddings, parties, receptions, and dances. Evergreen Plant material with foliage that remains green year-round. Existing construction For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." Existing manufactured home park or subdivision A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. Expansion The addition of square footage to an existing building that is less than the total square footage of the existing building and associated structures. Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). Exterior wall materials The primary materials covering the outermost portions of a structure's exterior wall; may refer to a veneer such as brick or stone or to a load bearing wall such as concrete tilt-wall or concrete masonry units. As it pertains to this Code, exterior wall materials comprise the remainder of the exterior wall finish not occupied by doors, windows, and trim. External illumination (of a sign) Light shining on the outer surface of a sign. Includes backlit signs when shielding is provided. Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) The unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city as further provided for in the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. Farm An area of two or more contiguous acres, used for the growing of usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits, trees and grain, and their storage, as well as the raising thereon of usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep, chickens and swine on a limited basis, and including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal activities, and provided further that the term "farm" does not include the commercial raising or pen feeding of animals, or the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals, and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. Fascia-mounted sign A building sign mounted to the fascia of a building with a pitched roof. Feed lot A small area where livestock are confined and fed to fatten them. Fence A construction, not considered a structure, which is designed for screening or enclosing. Fence, lot A construction, not considered a structure, which is designed for enclosing a lot. Festoon A fabric suspended, draped and bound at intervals and suspended between two locations or points. Final completion The stage in the progress of the construction of public subdivision improvements when, in the PDS director's opinion, the entire construction of the public subdivision improvements has been completed, and the developer's obligations under this Code have been fulfilled, as evidenced by a Certificate of Acceptance approved by the PDS director. Finished floor elevation The lowest floor level of a building that is entirely at or above grade. Finished grade The completed elevations of lawns, walks, roads and other surfaces brought to a grade as designed. Fire wall A fire-resistant wall, having protective openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to or through the roof, with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall. Flag Any fabric, banner or bunting used as a symbol of a government, or political subdivision. Flood (flooding) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. Flood elevation study An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. Flood insurance study The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. Flood protection system Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. Floodplain (or flood-prone area) That area defined as having a one percent chance of flooding in any given year and shall include all area shown in the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or its equivalent agency; any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. Floodplain management The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. Floodplain management regulations Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. Floodproofing Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Floodway (regulatory floodway) The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Floor area, gross (GFA) The sum of the gross area for each of a building's stories under roof, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, including the following areas: (1) The area of each floor of the structure; and (2)  All attic space having headroom of seven feet, ten inches or more. Forestry manager The person who oversees the urban forestry program and all aspects of public tree planting, public tree care, and other duties as provided in chapter 8, article III, or his or her designated assignee. Fowl Any goose, pheasant, chicken, prairie chicken, peacock, guinea, duck, turkey, and other normally undomesticated fowl. Fowl raising Domesticating fowl, including any customary buildings and structures. Freestanding sign Any sign which is attached to or is a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be firmly in or below the ground surface and not attached to any building or other structure, whether portable or stationary. Freeway Limited-access highways intended to move high volumes of automobile traffic at relatively high speeds over long distances. Frontage The line where a parcel of land, lot or site abuts a street. Functionally dependent use A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. Funeral home An establishment engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses also include mortuaries. Garage A structure or part thereof, designed, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles. Garage, j-swing An attached garage for which the entry point from the street is located in front of the house and the garage door is perpendicular to the front of the house. Garage, rear access A garage that only has access to an alley and not to a street right-of-way. Garage, side entry A garage for which the entry point from the street is a secondary frontage on a side of the house and the garage door is perpendicular to the front of the house. Garage/yard sale sign Any sign advertising the sale of personal household goods in a residential zoning district or on the property of a nonprofit organization. Gas station An establishment engaged in the sale of motor vehicle fuel. May also include retail sales of goods and food and a car wash. Gated community A residential development that contains private streets and has a gated or guarded entrance that permits only residents of the development and their guests to enter the development. General plan The planning documents and related materials officially adopted by the city, as amended, containing the goals, objectives and policies pertaining to urban growth, community facilities, housing, infrastructure, parks, transportation and other subjects related to the development of the city. Glazing The portions of windows or doors containing glass. Golf course A tract of land which is laid out with at least nine holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course includes a clubhouse and shelters as accessory uses. Good standing All fees, bonds, etc., of a licensee (who is not currently under suspension or revocation) have been paid. Grading The mechanical or physical act of disturbing, moving, removing, transferring, or redistributing soil or earthen surfaces. Greenbelt A series of connected open spaces that may follow natural features such as ravines, creeks, or streams. Greenhouse A glass or plastic enclosure used for the protection and cultivation of plants. Gross floor area (GFA) The total area in square feet of all floors of a building, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Groundcover Plants, other than turf grasses, that have a growth habit ranging from six inches to 18 inches in height at maturity. Groundcover planting A groundcover consisting of live plant material that is low growing and spreading that is generally maintained at a height of six inches to 18 inches and is intended to completely cover the area with no bare earth visible between plants when established. Group home (six or fewer persons) A home-based facility providing 24-hour care in a protected living arrangement for not more than six residents. This classification includes foster homes, homes for the physically and mentally impaired, homes for the developmentally disabled, congregate living facilities for seniors, and maternity homes. Requires licensing by the state. Does not include post-incarceration facilities or facilities for those who are a danger to themselves or others. Halation illumination (of a sign)/illumination by halation Effect given off by cove or reverse channel lighting where the light source is shielded from direct view and illumination of a sign occurs as a result of the light reflecting off an adjacent background. Hanging sign Any sign suspended from an awning, canopy, eave or overhang, typically by a chain, hooks, brackets or similar devices intended to affix hanging signs to a building. Hazardous activities, tree The activities described in Sec. 8-22 which may endanger the health of a tree. Hazardous material Any substance or combination of substances that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. The term "hazardous material" includes, but is not limited to, explosives and blasting agents, compressed gasses, flammable and combustible fuels and combustible liquids, flammable solids, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophoric materials, unstable (reactive) materials, water-reactive solids and liquids, cryogenic fluids, highly toxic and toxic materials, radioactive materials, corrosives, carcinogens, irritants, sensitizers, biological agents and other health hazards. Heavy equipment and large vehicle sales, leasing and repair Retail sales, leasing and repair of self-propelled vehicles such as construction equipment and large trucks, tractor-trailers, semi-trucks, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. May include engine repair, servicing, collision repair and painting of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of 17,000 pounds or more. Heliport The area of land, water or structure used or intended to be used for the touchdown and lift-off of helicopters. Heliport, hospital A heliport limited to serving helicopters engaged in air ambulance. Highest adjacent grade The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. Historic-age sign A sign that is itself of historic significance, contributes to the historic fabric of the area, or is historically linked with the operation of a business. These signs are typically at least 50 years old and may be preserved in place as decorative features. Historic district Any district designated according to the procedures in Sec. 10-55. Historic overlay Any historic area designated according to the procedures in Sec. 10-55 of this Code. Historic structure Any structure that is: (1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. Holiday decorations Signs or displays including lighting which are a nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state and local holidays or holiday seasons. Home occupation Any occupation, profession, business or activity serving as an accessory use of a dwelling that constitutes all or some portion of the livelihood of a person or persons living in the dwelling and is conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or attached garage of the bona fide residence of that person or persons. Home occupation sign A sign located at a residence that displays the name of a customary home occupation. Hospital An institution providing primary health care services, including in-patient medical or surgical care, including related facilities such as out-patient clinics, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, maintenance and parking facilities. Typical uses include medical centers and hospitals. Hospital, Rehabilitation An institution health care services to patients recovering from medical procedures who require in-patient medical care, including related facilities such as out-patient clinics, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, maintenance and parking facilities. Does not include surgery centers or emergency room facilities. Hotel/Motel/Lodging A building or a group of buildings used for providing temporary lodging open to the public and that may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities. A hotel/motel/lodging facility may offer suites, which include kitchen facilities, sitting rooms, and bedrooms. HUD-code manufactured home A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term "HUD-code manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle as the term is defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g), as amended. Illuminance A measure of the amount of light intercepting an object at a given distance from a light source measured in foot candles. Illumination (of a sign) Any sign for which an artificial source of light is used in order to make readable the sign's message, including internally and externally lighted signs, halation, and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs. Illumination includes light sources such as neon, cold cathode, LED (light emitting diodes) incandescent lamps, fluorescent lamps, high intensity discharge lighting and photo luminescent material. Impervious surface Any hard-surfaced, manmade area that does not readily absorb or retain water, including but not limited to, building roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas. Improved soils Soil mixture that is intended to sustain plant growth within planted beds, usually a mixture of one-third organic compost, one-third sandy loam, and one-third native soil. Improvements See "Development." Incidental sign A small sign, emblem or decal (not otherwise defined herein) containing information incidental to the operation of the business, such as, but not limited to, hours of operation, telephone number, address, accepted credit cards, information signs, drive-through menu board signs, and parking signs within a parking lot or garage. Indoor entertainment activities Participatory and spectator-oriented recreation and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, game arcades, pool halls, dance halls, music venues, and movie or other theaters. Inflatable sign Any hollow sign or balloon expanded or enlarged using air or gas that contains a commercial message. Information sign Bulletin boards, changeable copy directories or temporary signs relating solely to governmental institutions (city, county, state, school district) intended for use by the institution on whose site the sign is located. Inpatient clinics A non-hospital medical facility providing inpatient care, not including emergency medical services. Typical uses include rehabilitation clinics. Internal illumination (of a sign) Lighting for a sign where conduits are housed within the sign or sign cabinet so that light shines through the surface of the signs. Institution A facility providing 24-hour supervision and counseling in a protected living arrangement for residents and supervisory personnel. This classification includes soup kitchens, halfway houses for juvenile delinquents and adult offenders, pre-parole detention facilities (not including prisons), halfway houses providing residence in lieu of incarceration, halfway houses providing residence to those needing correctional and mental institutionalization, and residential rehabilitation for alcohol and chemical dependence. This classification also includes overnight shelters for the homeless. Requires licensing by the state. Irrigation inspector A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). Irrigation system An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 251.002. Irrigator A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30. Items of information (on a sign) A word, logo, abbreviation, number, symbol, geometric shape, or similar that is intended to be part of the sign display area. Journeyman electrician A person licensed as a journeyman electrician, under the provisions of Chapter 8, article X, division 9, who does electrical work under the supervision, direction, and control of a licensed master electrician. Kennel, indoor A facility where small animals are boarded within an enclosed building or where such animals are bred or raised for sale. Kennel, outdoor A facility where small animals are boarded within open air structures or where such animals are bred or raised for sale. Landmark A structure (including any building) of unusual historical and usually aesthetic interest; especially one that is officially designated in accordance with Sec. 10-55. Landscape The improvement and enhancement of an area of land with any combination and placement of plant material (trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover, turf, or flowers), natural elements (berms, rocks, stones, boulders, or water) and/or structural features (not limited to walkways, walls, fences, pools, fountains, outdoor art work, or benches). Landscape architect A person who is licensed and registered to engage in the practice of landscape architecture in the state. Landscaping, interior parking The landscaping provided for buffering and providing visual breaks within parking areas. Landscaping, perimeter parking The landscaping provided for buffering and screening of parking areas having frontage along public rights-of-way and/or private drives. Levee A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water to provide protection from temporary flooding. Levee system A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. License An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30. Licensed electrician A person licensed and authorized to do electrical work as defined by this code who is currently in good standing status. Light industrial service, manufacturing and assembly Firms engaged in the manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, repair, processing or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Includes contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses that perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the public, come to the site. Typical uses include: (1) Welding, machine, and tool repair shops; (2) Repair of scientific or professional instruments; (3) Building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; (4) Printing, publishing, and lithography; (5) Exterminators; (6) Laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; (7) Photo-finishing laboratories; (8) Maintenance facilities; (9) Contractors and others who perform services off site, but store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or similar work on-site; (10) Vehicle and equipment maintenance facilities; (11) Fuel oil distributors; (12) Production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; (13) Large-scale catering establishments; (14) Woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing; (15) Clothing or textile manufacturing; (16) Movie production facilities; (17) Manufacture or assembly of equipment, instruments (including musical instruments), appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; (18) Production of artwork and toys; and (19) Sign making. Light pole-mounted banner A banner mounted on a vertical light pole. Light source A single, artificial source of luminescence that emits measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum. Limits of construction A line delineating the area within a project site that is to be disturbed or otherwise affected by activities related to construction of such project. Link Any portion of a street defined by a node at each end or at one end. Live/work unit A structure with a combination of uses where work activities associated with the operations of a business or trade occur as allowed in the zoning district, and includes a dwelling unit for the occupant. Such units shall have only one kitchen, at least one bathroom, and shall be occupied by the person operating the business. Livestock Any horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jenny, all species of swine, sheep, goat, llama, all species of cattle, emu, ostrich and rhea. Livestock raising Ranching, including any customary buildings and structures, and uses such as animal husbandry. Living unit equivalent (LUE) A unit of measurement used to facilitate the sizing of water, reuse water, and wastewater mains. One LUE consumes 450 gallons per day of water and produces 280 gallons per day of wastewater. Loading dock A sorting, loading or staging platform area and any loading space associated with the platform used by vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading merchandise or materials. Also includes truck wells and dock lifts. Loading space An off-street space designed on an approved site plan for the parking of a vehicle that exceeds 35 feet in length, while loading or unloading merchandise or materials at locations other than primary public entrances. Logo An emblem, letter, character, pictograph, trademark, color scheme, or symbol that is registered, trademarked, or used in media to represent any firm, organization, entity, product, or service. Lot A single, legally created parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development and having frontage on a dedicated street. Lot area The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot, excluding any street, easement for street purposes, or street right-of-way. Lot, corner A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. Lot coverage, maximum The percentage of lot area allowed to be included within the outside lines of the exterior walls of all buildings located on a lot. Lot, double frontage Any lot having frontage on two streets which are nonintersecting. Lot, flag or panhandle A lot resulting from the division of a tract of land that, before its division, did not have sufficient width on a street to create more than one lot abutting said street but had sufficient area and depth to be divided into more than one buildable lot. Lot line The boundary of a lot. Lot line, front A front lot line is the boundary of a building lot that abuts an existing or dedicated street. In cases where two or more lot lines abut an existing or dedicated street, all such lot lines are considered front lot lines for the purposes of calculating building setbacks and meeting other development requirements. In the case of lots with two parallel lot lines meeting the criteria, both shall be considered front lot lines as for the purposes of calculating building setbacks and meeting other development requirements, except where the rear setback requirement is greater than the front setback requirement, in which case one of two opposing setbacks shall be a rear setback. Lot line, rear That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot; in the case of a triangular, or an irregular lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the street lot line shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of corner lots, the rear lot line shall be opposite the lot line along which the lot takes access to a street. Lot line, side Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. Lot of record An area of land designated as a lot on a subdivision plat duly recorded with the county clerk; or an area of land held in single ownership described by metes and bounds upon a deed recorded or registered with said county clerk. Lot, interior Any lot other than a corner lot. Lot, through A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage on two nonintersecting streets. Lot, zoning A parcel of land: (1) Comprised of one or more recorded lots that are contiguous and under the same ownership; (2) Occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or buildings, or principal use or uses, along with permitted accessory buildings or uses; and (3) Meeting all the requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, and any other requirements set forth in this Code. Lots separated by streets or alleys shall not be considered contiguous for the purposes of this definition. Lot width The width of a lot at the minimum building setback line. Lowest floor The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. Low-profile sign A freestanding sign, with a base measuring 100 percent of the width of the sign which may be placed on a lot five acres or greater with at least 200 feet of contiguous lot frontage and is not required to meet spacing requirements. Maintenance The act of keeping in a state of safe operating or occupying condition. Major recreational equipment Equipment such as boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup truck campers, camping trailers, tent trailers, converted trucks and buses, recreational vehicles, and other related equipment intended for recreational purposes. Manufactured home A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Does not include recreational vehicles or mobile homes. Manufactured home park or subdivision A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. Map, zoning The official zoning map of the City, which may be a single map or a series of smaller maps. Margin, sign The area of a sign that is required to be kept free and clear of items of information and may be required around a building sign or around the items of information contained in a sign cabinet's panel in a freestanding sign. Masonry A type of construction or veneer made up of natural or man-made brick, stone, or glass products laid unit by unit and set in mortar. Maximum extent feasible The point at which all possible measures have been undertaken by the applicant, at which point further measures would involve physical or economic hardships that would render a development project infeasible or would be unreasonable in the judgment of a review or decision-making body. Mean sea level For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. Memorial park (also Cemetery) Land used for interment of human or animal remains or cremated remains, including a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination thereof. Microbrewery A facility that produces no more than 15,000 barrels of beer annually and which may include a tasting room and retail space. Microdistillery A facility that produces no more than 5,000 gallons of spirituous beverages annually and which may include a tasting room and retail space. Also referred to as craft, boutique, or artisanal distilleries. Microwinery A facility that produces no more than 50,000 gallons of wine and related beverages annually and which may include a tasting room and retail space, but does not include a vineyard. Mineral extraction The extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term "mineral extraction" also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening and washing; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as part of the extractive activity. Mini-warehouse A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented as individual leases. This term "mini-warehouse" includes self-service storage facility and mini-storage facility. Mirrored glass Glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or greater. Mixed-use The combining of complementary residential and commercial uses in the same building, on the same site, or on the same block. Mobile food establishment A motor vehicle or enclosed trailer with walls and a roof inside of which a certified food handler operates kitchen equipment that is used for cooking, preparing, and/or assembling food items for sale to the public. Mobile home A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. Does not include manufactured homes or recreational vehicles. Model home sign Any sign identifying a model home, as being a builder's or contractor's model open to the public for inspection. Modular housing A residential structure that is: (1) Designed for the occupancy of one or more families; (2) Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and (3) Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. The term "modular housing" does not include: (1) Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component; (2) A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location; or (3) Manufactured housing. Monument sign Any freestanding sign, the entire bottom of which is attached directly [in] the ground or is supported by a sign structure that is a base whose width measures at least 75 percent of the width of the sign that is placed or anchored in the ground. Multifamily For the purposes of water and wastewater impact fees, multifamily shall mean all multi-unit residential buildings, including without limitation, apartments, multifamily houses, townhouses, and single-family attached houses containing two dwelling units. Multi-occupant center Three or more separate business uses that utilize common facilities such as off-street parking and landscaping and share driveways and utilities. Three or more separate lots under single or multiple ownership that utilize common facilities may choose to be considered a multi-occupant center by entering into and agreement subject to the approval of the city which agreement is recorded in the real property records of the applicable county. Mural A picture on an exterior surface of a structure. A mural is a sign only if it is related by language, logo, or pictorial depiction, to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business. Native plant Any species that is indigenous to the central Texas region. Natural stone A naturally occurring, minimally processed block masonry product that does not include panels or tiles which are sometimes referred to as manufactured stone, simulated stone, or thin stone. Neighborhood event signs Signs promoting drives, events, or meetings related to neighborhood activities sponsored by a homeowners association or neighborhood association. Neighborhood information kiosks A sign utilized and maintained by a homeowners association or a neighborhood association with a legal entity for the purpose of conveying information related to association activities to the association members. Neighborhood road For the purposes of regulating signs, any road not listed as a freeway or commercial road in subsection 8-74. Neon sign A sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or other electrically-charged gas. New construction For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. New manufactured home park or subdivision A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. Node The terminus of a street or the intersection of two or more streets. Noise; noise pollution Continuous or episodic excessive noise in the human environment that is damaging or otherwise annoying. Nonconforming building Any building, or part thereof, lawfully existing or occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code is derived which does not comply, after the passage of this Code, with the height, yard, parking, loading, coverage area, or screening regulations of the district in which it is located. Nonconforming lot Any lot lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code is derived that does not conform, after the passage of this Code, to the width, depth, and area regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. Nonconforming sign A sign which is in conflict with the current provisions of this Code. Nonpolluting industries An industry in full compliance with federal and state regulations. Non-recorded subdivision A tract that has been divided, for which a plat has not been recorded in the official plat records of the county. Non-reflective, prefinished metal For the purposes of roofing materials, non-reflective, prefinished metal refers to metallic materials (typically steel or aluminum) that have a colored or colorless finish applied by the manufacturer and need no further processing prior to installation. Typical products include standing seam, rib, and snap or lock panels, but not corrugated metal. Nonresidential private street development A nonresidential development that contains private streets. Such development shall not contain a gated or guarded entrance. Novelty sign A sign which is irregularly shaped, whose structure does not conform to the regulations defining other types of signs. Occupant frontage That length of a wall of a building occupied by a single business or by multiple businesses with a single entrance, which faces either a dedicated public street or internally to a parking lot or driveway of a multi-occupant center. Office The use of a building or a portion of a building for the provision of executive, consulting, professional, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with office services. Office, medical A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories, or similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans on an outpatient basis, licensed for such practice by the state. Office of the recorder That office responsible for recording deeds and other legal documents or actions. Office, public The use of a building or a portion of a building for business offices of public or community service organizations and associations. Office/Warehouse An establishment engaged in both the administration and management of, and the storage and movement of, goods for themselves or other firms. Typical uses for the office portion include business functions related to the goods being stored and transferred. A limited amount of on-site sales activity with the customer present is expected. Typical uses for the warehouse portions include storage by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores, household moving and general freight storage. The office/warehouse facility's typical design has an office entry on the street-facing side of the building and a warehouse and loading entry on the rear of the building. Uses for the warehouse portion shall not include major wholesale distribution centers, cold storage plants including frozen food lockers, storage of weapons and ammunition, truck or air freight terminals, bus barns, parcel services, major post offices, grain terminals, transfer and storage businesses and the stockpiling of sand, gravel or other aggregate materials. Official filing date The date provided in a schedule adopted by the planning and zoning commission indicating when a concept plan or plat submittal may be filed with the city in order to comply with the planning and zoning commission meeting calendar. Off-premises sign Any sign normally used for promoting an interest other than that of a business, individual, products, or service available on the premises where the sign is located. Off-site Located outside the boundary area of the subject property. On-premises sign Any sign used for promoting a business, individual, product or service available on the premises where the sign is located. Open space Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Ordinary maintenance and repair Any work, the sole purpose and effect of which is to correct deterioration, decay, or damage, including repair or damage caused by fire or other disaster and which does not result in a change in the existing appearance and materials of a property. Examples of this work include, but are not limited to the following: (1) Caulking or re-glazing windows; (2) Minor repairs to windows, doors, siding, gutters, etc.; (3) Replacement of existing mechanical equipment; (4) Repairing or repaving of flat concrete work in side and rear yards; (5) Repairing or repaving of existing front yard paving, concrete work and walkways, if material the same or similar in appearance is used; (6) Roofing work, if no change in appearance occurs; (7) Foundation work, if no change in appearance occurs; and (8) Chimney work, if no change in appearance occurs. Ornamental grasses A grass-like plant grown in a landscape bed similarly to annuals and perennials which typically requires minimal maintenance and irrigation, and dies back or requires cutting back each winter. Outdoor cooking area An area outdoors used for the commercial preparation of food such as barbeque pits, grills, pizza ovens, smokers, rotisseries and other similar cooking facilities. Outdoor entertainment Participatory and spectator-oriented recreation and entertainment uses conducted in open, partially enclosed, or screened facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, amusement parks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, live music venues, and amplified live music performed in association with a restaurant or bar. Outdoor storage Any area used for the purposes of trash collection; outdoor loading and unloading spaces; docks or outdoor shipping and receiving areas; outdoor storage of bulk materials and/or parts; or areas regularly used for outdoor repair storage and/or storage of vehicles. Owner The person having the right of legal title or beneficial interest in or a contractual right to purchase a parcel of land. For the purpose of providing notices required by this Code, the owner is the person who last paid taxes on any parcel as identified by county property tax records. Paging system, outdoor Any outdoor speaker system for the provision of drive-through operations, music, advertising, or notification. Pan-faced sign An internally lit sign with an opaque frame of multi-dimensional extruded structural plastic that is shaped to the content of the sign and where the sign face is sculpted in relief. Panel (of a sign) A flat, solid surface containing the raised, recessed, or framed part of the sign display area that is separate and distinct from the background to which it is attached or from the sign's supports. Parapet The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline. Parcel Any legally described area of land. Parent tract The tract or parcel of land from which the property being platted is derived and is owned by the developer of the property being platted; provided however that the developer may exclude from the parent tract any land in excess of 500 acres including the property being platted. The PDS director may determine what portion of the developer's land will be included in the parent tract up to the 500-acre limit. Park, community A site of approximately 16 to 500 acres with a service area of several neighborhoods. Facilities included in such a park are tennis courts, separate or multi-purpose sport fields/small complexes, playgrounds, picnic areas, walking/jogging trails, swimming pools, open space, restrooms, lakes, skate parks, and/or other specified facilities (disc golf, etc.). Park, linear/linkage Usually developed around a natural resource such as a creek, river, or lakeshore. Some potential benefits of a linear park/linkage are: (1) Preserve valuable open space and natural habitat; (2) Provide a natural environment for walking, jogging, and bicycling trails; (3) Provide a transportation corridor linking neighborhoods to parks, schools, and shopping areas; and (4) Provide a variety of passive recreational opportunities all free or relatively free from automobile interference. Linear parks/linkages can also serve as a natural buffer between land uses, serve as utility (underground) easements and can usually be acquired at a relatively inexpensive price due to the potential of flooding. Park, neighborhood A site of approximately one to 15 acres which serves the area within one-fourth to one-half mile radius with both active and passive recreational opportunities. Facilities found in neighborhood parks typically include playgrounds, picnic areas, shelters, pavilions, play courts (tennis/volleyball), open space, benches, walking trails and restrooms if necessary. A playground is defined as combinations of the following: Swings, slides, climbing apparatus and play apparatus. Parking is only along collector or arterial streets for traffic safety. Park, regional/metropolitan A site of 500 or more acres which serves the area within an approximate one hour drive time of the park with a wide range of recreational opportunities. Potential facilities include sports fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools, campgrounds, bicycle and hiking trails, nature areas, a golf course, recreation center, amenity center (leisure pools, etc.), restrooms, and ample parking. As indicated by the broad range of facilities, such a park should provide both active and passive recreational opportunities. Parking bay A single row of parking between the end islands. Parking, commercial Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use. Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking garages. Parking, general Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately owned off-street parking facility that serves a principal use, but is not contiguous to or adjacent to the principal use and due to its location is not considered an accessory to a principal use. Parking space An area reserved exclusively for the parking of motorized vehicles, located outside a public right-of-way. Parks and recreation facilities Parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, and open spaces available to the public and under the management or control of a public agency. The term "parks and recreation facilities" also includes golf courses, whether public or private. Parks director The director of the parks and recreation department of the city, or an authorized representative. Park zone Areas identified on a park zone map adopted by the city council. Passenger terminal Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes and helicopters, and terminals for rail or bus service. Typical uses include bus passenger terminals, train passenger terminals, airports, and helicopter landing facilities. Paved areas An area surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar all-weather surface, not including gravel. Peak hour The time periods on a typical weekday of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., or as otherwise defined by the transportation director. Pedestal sign A ground-mounted sign with a height of less than five feet from the finished grade that has a panel mounted on a stand. Pedestrian way A right-of-way dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. Pennant Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether it contains a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string designed to move in the wind and whether existing in a series or individually. Permanent building A building attached to a permanent slab on grade or a pier and beam foundation. Permanent foundation An exterior wall and necessary support columns or piers designed to support any building for the usable life of that structure. The exterior wall of a permanent foundation shall conform to the foundation requirements of the building code. Permit An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction, authorizing performance of a specified activity. Person An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, governmental body and all other legal entities, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. Pervious The ability of a substance to allow water to permeate. Pillar sign A sign that is a stream-lined sculptural element of a single geometric shape such as an ellipse, an obelisk, or a column. Place of worship A use located in a permanent building, except where otherwise provided for in this Code, providing regular organized religious worship. Parsonages, rectories, and buildings providing classroom space for religious education shall be considered part of the permitted principal use. The term place of worship also includes the following accessory uses, which occur on the grounds of the place of worship: principal or secondary educational facilities, offices, community recreational facilities, and day care facilities. Planned unit development (PUD) A zoning district unique to one or more properties containing a single or mixed uses as approved in the PUD's adopting ordinance, and which typically contains alternative development standards not accommodated by strict interpretation of a base zoning district. Development may be done as a whole or in a definitely programmed series of development phases. Planning and development services director (PDS director) The person appointed by the city manager to oversee the planning and development services department. Planning and zoning commission The planning and zoning commission of the city which under state law has responsibility for plat approval within the corporate limits and within the ETJ. For the purposes of zoning and subdivisions, also referred to as commission. Plastic (signs) For the purpose of regulating signs, a synthetic material made from a wide range of organic polymers such as polycarbonate, acrylic, or a non-rigid material sometimes referred to as flex face or flex panel. Banners do not qualify as plastic under this definition. Plat The map describing an addition, subdivision or replat including any streets, alleys, squares, parks or parts of a tract intended to be dedicated to public use. The plat shall also describe private streets not intended to be dedicated to public use. Plat, amending A change to a recorded plat as permitted in this Code. Plat, final The plat that is presented to the planning and zoning commission for final approval. Plat, minor subdivision final The plat that is submitted to the PDS director for final approval without the submission of a concept plan or preliminary plat. Plat, preliminary The plat indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or addition that is presented to the planning and zoning commission for preliminary approval. Plat, recorded The duly approved final plat filed in the official plat records of the county. Plat vacation A recorded plat which is vacated through the procedures described in this Code. Political campaign sign Any sign that displays information which references an election or referendum, or pertains to or advocates political views and policies that may be considered during an election or referendum. Poultry farm An area where fowl are confined and fed to fatten them for commercial purposes or areas where laying fowl are confined and fed for their eggs for commercial purposes. Portable sign Any sign not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground that is designed or installed in a manner allowing the sign to be moved or relocated without any structural or support changes. This term specifically includes an advertising display affixed to or installed on a vehicle or other mobile unit, such as a trailer, wheel, or skid. Post/panel sign A freestanding sign that is not internally illuminated where the sign face is a panel that is raised off the ground by two poles with a clearance of less than four feet between the finished grade and the sign display area. Pre-submittal meeting A meeting of the developer and/or his engineer with the PDS director and other department representatives to identify and evaluate items to be addressed with the initial submittal through the review of a sketch plan. Primary facade The building frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building. Private drive Any street or road that is not publicly owned, dedicated or intended to be dedicated, and maintained and used for access by the occupants of the development, their guests, and the public. Private school, primary or secondary A private, parochial or charter school offering instruction at the elementary, middle (junior) and/or high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the state. Private street A street located within a gated community or a nonresidential private street development which is not dedicated to the public for maintenance, operation, or ownership, and which are designated as special purpose lots on a plat. Projecting sign A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall or parapet of a building with the display surface of the sign perpendicular to a wall attached by a bracket or similar device intended to affix this type of sign to a building. Promotional signs Signs and/or banners promoting drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organizations, or those promoting special events lawfully permitted pursuant to Chapter 34. Property line A line bounding a parcel which divides one parcel from another or from a street or any other public or private space (same as "lot line"). Protected tree A tree eight inches in diameter or greater, except as otherwise provided in Sec. 8-17. The following species of trees are not included in the definition of protected tree: Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry), Melia azedaragh (China-Berry), Sapium sebiferum (Chinese Tallow), Maclura pomifera (Osabe-orange), Juniperus ashei (Texas Common Cedar), and Prosopis glandulosa (Honey Mesquite). Protected tree removal permit Written authorization granted by the forestry manager, under the provisions of Sec. 8-19, for the removal or transplanting of a protected tree. Public improvement Any improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, right-of-way or easement necessary to provide transportation, drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational area or use, energy or similar essential public services and facilities, for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or ownership, or both. Public improvements include but are not limited to the following: grading, drainage facilities, streets and other rights-of-way, potable water system, reuse water system, sanitary sewerage system, survey monuments, illumination including street lights, traffic control signs and traffic signalization, landscaping and irrigation, walls, fire protection, sidewalks and curb ramps, street name signs, traffic control signs, street pavement markings, and parkland improvements. Public safety facility A facility owned or operated by a governmental entity for the purpose of public safety and emergency services. Typical facilities include police and fire stations. Public school, elementary or middle A public school offering instruction at the elementary or middle school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the state. Public school, high A public school offering instruction at the senior high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the state. Public utility An enterprise which provides to the public a utility service deemed necessary for the public health, safety and welfare; and includes all buildings, structures and facilities relating thereto. Public view A view to a subject property from a public street or an adjacent property, or from portions of a subject property that are utilized by the general public. Pylon sign A freestanding sign, that is supported by a structure extending from and permanently attached to the ground by a foundation or footing where the width of the sign structure measures less than 75 percent of the width of the sign. Raceway (on a sign) An electrical enclosure which may also serve as a mounting device for individual letters in a sign and other elements of display that are items of information. Real estate marketing sign Any nonpermanent sign pertaining to the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or availability of land, buildings, condominium and similar units, or apartments. Such signs may include building name and address, price and amenities, identity of seller or broker, and similar information. Recordation The act of recording a plat, which has been approved by the city as required by this Code, as an official record in the plat records of the office of the county clerk. Recreational vehicle A unit designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use that has a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 40 feet. Units may have their own power, or be designed to be drawn or mounted on an automotive vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" includes motor homes, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, converted buses, house boats or other similar units as determined by the zoning administrator. A recreational vehicle may or may not include an individual toilet and bath. Does not include manufactured or mobile homes. Redevelopment or redeveloping Construction activities that result in a significant modification to a previously developed site. Any one of the following activities will be considered redevelopment: (1) Replacing a previously demolished building with a newly constructed building; (2)  Demolishing a parking lot and replacing it with a newly constructed parking lot; or (3)  The removal and replacement of water and wastewater utilities to serve a more intense development. Reflectivity The degree of transparency of glass, as measured by the manufacturer's specifications. Registered landscape architect An individual currently registered or licensed by the state to practice landscape architecture. Regulatory floodway The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Regulatory sign Signs or notices erected and maintained by public officers or governmental agencies. Removal, tree As it applies to a protected tree, the uprooting, severing the main trunk or any activity which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause a tree to die. Activities are included, such as, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; or paving with concrete, asphalt, or impervious materials within the drip line in a manner which may reasonably be expected to destroy the tree. Replat To re-subdivide all or any part of a recorded plat, which does not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat, but not including an amending plat. Research and development A business that engages in research and/or development of innovative ideas and products. The business may include testing laboratories for product development, including the construction and testing of prototypes. Typical uses include biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation and computer hardware and software. Allowed uses do not include the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing or on-site retail sale of products. Research involving the use of animals or human cadavers is prohibited unless conducted wholly within a building. Reserve specialist An individual holding the designation of a "reserve specialist" issued by the Community Associations Institute. Residential to office conversion A single-family or two-family residential structure that is converted into an office or medical office. Restaurant/Bar An establishment engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages for on-premises sale or consumption. Uses include sit-down restaurants, fast-food restaurants with or without drive-through lanes, diners, cafeterias, bars, brewpubs, and taverns. Retail sales and service An establishment primarily engaged in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products to the public, including those providing personal services, entertainment, product repair or sales of consumer goods, but excluding those establishments more specifically defined in this section. The following are typical uses:   Sales-oriented: Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods including alcoholic beverages, antiques, appliances, art, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, books, cameras, carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, flowers, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, medical supplies, musical instruments, pet food and/or pets, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, prepared foods, printed material, produce, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco and related products, vehicle parts, and videos.   Personal service-oriented: Banks; Business, driving, martial arts and other trade schools; Dance, art, or music studios or classes; Dry-cleaning and laundry drop-off establishments; Athletic or health clubs; Laundromats; Mortuaries; Photographic studios; Photocopy, blueprint, and quick-sign services; Psychics and mediums; Security services; Small animal day care, training, and grooming facilities; Taxidermists;   Entertainment-oriented: Private lodges or service clubs; Membership clubs and lodges;   Repair-oriented: Locksmith; Repair of appliances, bicycles, canvas products, clocks, computers, guns, jewelry, musical instruments, office equipment, radios, shoes, televisions, and watches; Tailor; Upholsterer. Retail sales and service consisting of predominantly outdoor storage or consumer loading areas An establishment primarily engaged in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products to the public that consists of goods that are stored and distributed outdoors. Typical uses include lumber yards and wholesale landscaping materials sales. Right-of-way (ROW) A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, and/or other public utilities or facilities. Riverine Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. Road type The hierarchy of roadways used herein to regulate sign types and sizes. Roadway The paved area of a street between the face of the curb lines, including the driving, parking and bicycle lanes. Roof-mounted sign Any sign erected upon a roof or roof-mounted structure and extending above the roof or parapet of a building or structure, except for building signs that are attached flush to the parapet, on a mansard roof, and signs mounted on a building canopy but do not extend above the top of the wall or parapet. Root collar, tree An encircling structure of swollen tissue or a marked color change (from the tree bark) located at the highest part of the root system joining the trunk of a tree at or slightly below the soil line. Rough-in work Initial work of installing, altering, repairing or maintaining of electrical wires, conduits, apparatus or other electrical installation, performed so that all such work is easily visible and may be easily corrected or changed. Row house Multiple housing units often two or 21/2 stories tall and often having a narrow front facade with raised front steps off the sidewalk to access the main entrance built adjacent to one another with common walls, separate access to each unit from the street and parking access from the rear. Sandwich board A moveable, portable, pedestrian-oriented, temporary sign that is supported by its own frame, and that is not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. Sometimes referred to as A-frame signs or sidewalk signs. School, business or trade A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college, university, or public or private educational facility. Screening A method of visually obscuring nearby structures or land uses (i.e., parking, vehicle use areas, outdoor storage) from another land use by using one or a combination of fencing, walls, dense vegetation, and berming. Self-enclosed monopole, WTF A wireless transmission facility (WTF) constructed as a freestanding structure which consists of a single vertical pole, fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation with no guy wires, containing one or more antennas and associated equipment no larger than 36 inches in diameter at any given point with no externally mounted or visible antennae. Self-service storage Storage services primarily for personal and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding use as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehouses. Senior housing Housing that is occupied solely by seniors; or that houses at least one person who is age 55 or older in at least 80 percent of the total number of residential units, and which adheres to a policy that demonstrates an intent to house persons who are 55 years of age or older. Sometimes referred to as independent living. Seniors Persons 55 years of age or older. Service area The area on-site used by a business to service the building with deliveries or other necessary services associated with the maintenance and operation of the building and may include, but is not limited to, a loading space, loading dock, or outdoor storage, trash dumpster and mechanical equipment. Service unit One Living Unit Equivalent (LUE). Setback, front A setback extending the full width of a lot between the street lot line and the front building line. Setback, rear A setback extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building line. Setback, side A setback extending the full length of the lot in the area between a side lot line and a side building line. Setback (of a sign) The horizontal distance between a sign and the front or side property line, as measured from any part of the sign, including its extremities, supports, and sign structure. Setback, street side A setback extending the full width of a lot between the street lot line and a side building line. Setback line (Building line) The line or lines within a lot created by the intersection of the vertical planes of a building and the ground. The required building setback line is measured from the property line. Sewage treatment plant, public Any facility designed for the collection, removal, treatment, and disposal of waterborne sewage that serves in excess of two dwelling units and is operated by a publicly regulated board/organization. Shade structure Gazebos, arbors, pergolas or similar structures intended as decorative features to provide respite from the sun and partial protection from the elements while still out of doors. Shade structures may include vines that are native or adapted to the central Texas region. Shared parking A parking facility such as a parking lot or parking garage that is used jointly by one or more uses, in accordance with an executed shared parking agreement. Shooting and archery range A facility at which archery is practiced and firearms, as defined in Chapter 6, Article IV of the Code of Ordinances, are discharged at targets and which is designed so that projectiles fired from firearms at targets are prevented, by means of backstops or other barriers, from going beyond the boundaries of the area for the discharge of firearms. This definition excludes an archery range where only toy bows and soft rubber tip arrows are used. Shrub, large A woody, ornamental landscape plant whose natural form is generally maintained at a height and spread of greater than six feet and is a species that is native or adapted to the central Texas region. Shrub, medium A woody, ornamental landscape plant whose natural form is generally maintained at a height of three to six feet and is a species that is native or adapted to the central Texas region. Shrub, small A woody, ornamental landscape plant whose natural form is generally maintained at a height and spread of three feet or less and is a species that is native or adapted to the central Texas region. Sight visibility triangle Where one street intersects with another street or a primary vehicle circulation route for large retail developments, the triangular area formed by extending two curb lines a distance of 40 feet from their point of intersection, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. If there are no curbs existing, the triangular area shall be formed by extending the property lines a distance of 30 feet from their point of intersection, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. Where a street intersects with an alley or driveway, the sight visibility triangle is the triangular area formed by measuring eight (8) feet to a point along the property lines and adjoining said points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. Sign Any device or surface on which letters, numbers, illustrations, designs, figures or other symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, projected or in any manner outlined or attached that is used for the purpose of advertisement, announcement, declaration, demonstration, way-finding, display, identification or expression, The sign shall include any device, or structure supporting the same, or any other device of similar nature design to attract attention outdoors, and shall include all parts, portions, units, and materials composing the same, together with the frame, background, and supports or anchoring thereof. Sign display area The surface or face of a sign, as measured in accordance with Sec. 8-43, that can be used to identify, display, advertise, communicate, or otherwise represent items of information, exclusive of the sign structure. Sign structure Any pole, pylon, post, foundation or other supporting materials or fixtures, including decorative elements, which are used to hold, secure or support a sign, or part thereof to the finished grade and is not considered part of the sign display area when items of information are not displayed on it. Simulated stone A manufactured cementitious masonry product a minimum of one and a half inches thick set in mortar such as to appear as natural stone. Thin veneer products applied to a lath or panel with adhesive or by a tongue-and-groove system shall not qualify as simulated stone under this definition. Single-family, attached A single dwelling unit located on its own lot which shares one or more common or abutting walls with one other dwelling unit. Single-family, detached A single dwelling unit located by itself on a single lot with no other dwelling units attached. Single-family, village residential A single dwelling unit located on its own lot not attached to any other dwelling unit, and with a rear-access garage. Single-family, zero lot line A single dwelling unit located on its own lot not attached to any other dwelling unit and set on or within two feet of one interior side lot line. Single-story mixed-use residential A residential unit in a single-story building containing nonresidential uses. Site A parcel of land for which a permit is issued pursuant to this Code. Site furniture Permanently installed commercial grade site features such as benches, tables, trash receptacles, bike racks with a minimum of five spaces, umbrellas, and similar features. Site plan, small project A site plan with a limited development scope that does not require a traffic impact analysis, a floodplain analysis, and construction of subdivision improvements, and consists of at least one of the following development activities: (1) The construction on a vacant legal lot or redevelopment of a previously developed legal lot with an area of .5 acres or less; (2) The expansion or addition of not more than 20 percent of the existing building square footage of a previously developed legal lot; (3) The conversion of a single-family or two-family residence to a commercial use; (4) The expansion or addition of a parking lot; or (5) The construction of a temporary building or a wireless telecommunication facility. Site plan, standard A site plan with a complex development scope that requires any of the following: (1) A traffic impact analysis; (2) A floodplain analysis; (3) Construction of subdivision improvements; (4) Construction on a lot that is larger than .5 acres that is either vacant or being redeveloped; or (5) An expansion or addition of more than 20 percent of the existing building square footage of a previously developed site. Sleep clinic A medical office for the diagnosis and monitoring of sleep and/or respiratory breathing disorders, where patients may be monitored for symptoms during an overnight stay at the clinic. Small scale-alcohol production The production of limited amounts of alcoholic beverages for on-site and/or off-site consumption. Includes facilities such as microbreweries, microdistilleries, and microwineries, plus brewpubs in which the restaurant aspect of the establishment is accessory to the brewing aspect. Solar energy system A system of components designed to produce electrical or mechanical power by collecting, transferring or storing solar-generated energy. Spacing, sign The distance required between signs of the same category or, between freestanding signs located on the same lot or multi-occupant center. Special area, sign Areas of the city identified in this Code as having different requirements than and superseding those requirements associated with road type, as identified in Sec. 8-74. Sports training facility/specialty gym A facility designed for individual training in team sports or fitness-related activities. Includes baseball, gymnastics, martial arts, cheerleading, and fitness facilities. Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. Stealth wireless transmission facility (stealth WTF) A wireless transmission facility (WTF) that is screened, disguised, concealed or otherwise camouflaged as a natural structure, or part of a structure, such that the WTF is indistinguishable from other natural structures, or the structure that it is attached to or within. Stop work order An order issued by the zoning administrator to the owner to cease and desist with work being performed on a site. Stormwater The runoff or flow of water caused by rainfall. Stormwater drainage facilities The system of pipes, appurtenances and open channels used to collect and transport stormwater. Also includes water quality facilities. Stormwater management The control and management of stormwater to minimize the detrimental effects of stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff Surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth but flows overland to flowing or stagnant bodies of water, measured in depth of inches. Story A set of rooms on one floor level of a building. Includes mezzanines or other occupiable levels but not rooftop decks or patios. Story, half A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level, and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath. Street Street shall mean the right-of-way or, for private streets, a special purpose lot, and all associated improvements including, but not limited to, driveways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm sewers, drainage facilities, medians, roadway and landscaped areas. As used herein, the term "street" shall include private streets as well as public streets. Street, arterial Continuous routes intended to serve high volume needs of both the local area and the region. Arterial streets are identified on the Transportation Master Plan Map. Street, collector An intermediate major vehicular thoroughfare that is typically designed to carry moderate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets. Street, cul-de-sac A street having one open end to vehicular traffic and the other end permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround. Street design The location of streets, alignment of streets, grades, and widths of streets, alignment of easements, grades and widths of easements, alignment and right-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers, and the designation of minimum lot area, width and length. Street right-of-way line The dividing line between a privately owned lot or parcel of land and the outside boundary of a public or private street. Street, stub A nonpermanent dead end street intended to be extended in conjunction with the subdivision and development of the adjacent un-platted land. Street tree landscaping The placement of large canopy trees in a linear or staggered layout that visually creates a corridor along or within a public right-of-way or private drive. Street yard For the purpose of this Code, the area of a lot which lies between the property line adjacent to street or right-of-way and any wall line of the building, as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street. Street yard, front For the purpose of this Code, the area of a lot which lies between the property line adjacent to street or right-of-way and the wall line of the Primary Façade of the building, as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street.  

Term Definition Structural alterations Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. Structure Anything manmade constructed, erected, or placed, which has location in or on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Stucco An exterior wall finish made of an aggregate, a binder, and water which is applied over a lath in a minimum of two coats. Subdivision The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts. Subdivision development permit A permit issued by the PDS director, after the recording of a final plat, authorizing a developer to proceed with the next step in the development process of the lot(s) within the recorded final plat, as set forth in subsection 10-28(f). Subdivision improvement construction plans Engineering plans required by the city for the construction and installation of public improvements necessary to provide required services for proper development including, but not limited to, plans for grading, drainage facilities, water, reuse water and sewer, open space, parks or other recreational space, streets and illumination of streets. Substantial completion The stage in the progress of the construction of public subdivision improvements when the construction work may still require some additional work, minor modifications, and/or adjustments, but in the PDS director's opinion the construction work has progressed to the point that permits may be issued for initial homes as provided in Sec. 8-109. Such opinion of the PDS director shall be evidenced by a Certificate of Substantial Completion issued to the developer. Substantial damage Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to the condition it was in prior to becoming damaged would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial improvement Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Surround (of a sign) The area framing the sign display area that is typically constructed of the same material of the sign's supports for freestanding signs and is required when using a cabinet sign. Surrounding (see Adjacent or Abutting) Surrounding shall mean properties located immediately adjacent to or abutting the subject property. Surveyor A person who is a registered professional land surveyor and licensed by the State of Texas. Swooper flag sign A temporary, freestanding, vertical sign consisting of a loose poly-knit sign face that flutters in the wind from a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground for support. TCEQ The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor. Tagline sign A secondary sign that is rectilinear in shape with rounded ends and displays a single line of text where the text size is too small to use channel letters. Temporary building An enclosed building which complies with the provisions of Sec. 2-92 or an enclosed building, the use of which is incidental to construction work on the premises, which enclosed building shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work and which complies with the provisions of Sec. 2-92. Temporary sign Any sign which conforms to the requirements stated in this Code and the use of which is for a limited time. Temporary tree protection device Physical barriers installed prior to construction for the purpose of preventing damage to trees. Theater Movie or other theaters that meet the definition of an indoor entertainment activity in this section. Townhouse A residential structure consisting of three or more dwelling units sharing one or more wall(s) with an abutting unit, each unit occupying space from ground to roof and having front and rear walls open directly to the outside for access. Townhouse, common-lot A townhouse development having more than one dwelling unit per lot. Townhouse, single-lot A townhouse development having only one dwelling unit per lot. Traffic, average daily (ADT) The average number of vehicles that pass a specified point during a 24-hour period. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) A report analyzing current and future traffic movements with and without an addition's or subdivision's impact, which includes an analysis of mitigation measures and which shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer. Trailhead The point or place where a trail begins. Transportation director The director of the transportation services department of the city, or an authorized representative. Tree A self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk with a diameter of no less than two inches at maturity, measured at one foot above grade, and which normally grows to an overall height of no less than 12 feet in central Texas. Tree, champion The largest tree of a species that is registered by the forestry manager in the champion tree registry, is designated as a monarch tree by the city council, and shall serve as the guide for the designation of other monarch trees of that same species. Tree inventory A drawing showing the tag number, species, size, and approximate location of all existing protected trees. Tree, large Any species of tree that typically reaches a height of 40 feet or more upon maturity, and is included in the city's list of approved large species trees as identified in the Tree Technical Manual. Tree, medium Any species of tree that typically reaches a height of 25 feet to 40 feet upon maturity, and is included in the city's list of approved medium species trees as identified in the Tree Technical Manual. Tree, monarch (1) A tree of a specific size or species that is designated as a monarch tree pursuant to Sec. 8-18; (2) A champion tree; (3) A tree of historic or unique significance that is specifically designated as a monarch tree by the city council; or (4) A tree whose monarch designation requires additional restrictive protections over and above those described for protected trees. Tree protection plan A plan submitted by the owner in a form or manner specified by the forestry manager, or zoning administrator or planning and zoning commission, whichever is applicable, providing the method of protecting trees during construction that may or may not include protection details, standards, notes and construction plans in accordance with generally accepted methods such as those provided in the Tree Technical Manual. Tree removal Uprooting, severing the main trunk of the tree, or any act which causes or may reasonably be expected to cause the tree to die including, without limitation, damage inflicted on the root system by machinery, storage of materials or soil compaction; substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; or paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill the tree. Tree replacement plan A plan submitted by the owner in a form and manner specified by the forestry manager, or zoning administrator or planning and zoning commission, whichever is applicable, providing the method of replacement for the proposed protected trees to be removed that identifies the location, size, and species of all new trees proposed as replacement for the protected trees being removed and fees in lieu of replacement trees. Tree, small Any species of tree that typically reaches a height of eight feet up to 25 feet upon maturity, and is included in the city's list of approved small species trees as identified in the Tree Technical Manual. Tree, specimen A tree that is of exceptional quality in terms of form, structure, health and general condition, from the city's list of approved species trees in the Tree Technical Manual, or is otherwise approved by the zoning administrator. A specimen tree shall have a caliper of at least six inches at the time of planting. Tree survey A drawing showing the size, location, species, critical root zone of all existing protected trees, any protected tree to be removed or transplanted, a table summarizing all protected trees and the total number of caliper inches of protected trees, in accordance with generally accepted methods such as those provided in the Tree Technical Manual. Tree survey, partial A drawing showing all protected trees within the limits of construction, easements, rights-of-way, and a 20-foot strip abutting rights-of-way. Tree Technical Manual The standards and specifications based on generally accepted practices developed by the forestry manager for sound arboricultural practices, techniques and procedures which shall serve as guidelines for trees regulated by this article, including but not limited to, tree selection, planting, pruning, alteration, treatment, protection, and removal, as approved by city council and maintained by the city clerk. Tree topping The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the crown of a tree to such a degree that removal of the top canopy disfigures and invites disease to the tree. Trim Portions of an exterior wall not finished by the primary exterior wall materials, doors, or windows. Also referred to as an accent feature. Tuck under garage A garage that is fully incorporated into a residential structure at ground level and is located below the living levels. Ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain The area of land that would be inundated by a flood having a one percent chance of occurring in any given year based on the expected fully developed state of the upstream contributing drainage area. Sometimes referred to as the 100-year floodplain. Ultimate 4% annual chance floodplain The area of land that would be inundated by a flood having a four percent chance of occurring in any given year based on the expected fully developed state of the upstream contributing drainage area. Sometimes referred to as the 25-year floodplain. Unsafe building Any building or structure that has any of the following conditions, such that the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered: (1) Any means of egress or portion thereof that is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. (2) Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire-resistive ratings, that is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. (3) The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, that exceeds the stresses allowed in the International Building Code for new buildings. (4) The building, structure or portion thereof that has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the International Building Code for new buildings. (5) Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure that is not securely fastened, attached, or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the International Building Code for new buildings. (6) If for any reason the building, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used. (7) The building, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is such that it is likely to fully or partially collapse. (8) The building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the International Codes or of a city, county or state law. (9) Any building, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance. (10) Any building, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or, which in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. Upper-story residential Dwelling units located on the upper floors in a building with ground-level nonresidential uses. Urgent care facility A medical facility staffed and equipped for the reception and treatment of persons with conditions requiring immediate medical care, such as broken bones, severe illness or trauma, which may require ambulatory transport to a hospital. Such establishments are detached from a hospital and are typically located in commercial centers or as freestanding structures on pad sites. Includes uses such as urgent care clinics and local emergency rooms. Use, principal The purpose or activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. Use, accessory A use that: (1) Is subordinate to and services a principal building or a principal use legally existing on the same zoning lot; (2) Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or principal use; (3) Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants, business or industry of the principal structure or principal use served; and (4) Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or principal use served. Use, temporary A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue the use upon the expiration of the time. Utility director The director of the water/wastewater utility department of the city, or an authorized representative. Utility, intermediate Services necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures, such as lines, poles, minor electrical switching facilities, lift stations, and gas regulated facilities. Utility, major Primary substations, generating plants, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities. Utility, minor Service necessary to support a principal development and involving only ground-mounted mechanical equipment. Vacation The termination of or termination of an interest in, an easement, right-of-way, or public dedication of land. Variance For zoning purposes, a relief granted by the zoning board of adjustment from the literal requirements of the zoning and development regulations where strict enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. Vehicle reclamation yard Any area, lot, land or parcel used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, or abandonment of inoperable motor vehicles. Vehicle service canopy A covered structure which shelters a vehicle service use and is detached from the building to which it is an accessory, and is open on two or more sides. Vehicle storage and towing Includes short-term (six months or less) storage of operable vehicles for sale or lease. Includes towing service and associated storage. Vehicle trip A single directional trip that has one origin and one destination regardless of the number of occupants in the vehicle. Vehicular use areas Paved surface areas used for vehicular circulation, parking and storage. Veterinary clinic, 
livestock A facility for the care, diagnosis and medical treatment by a licensed veterinarian for livestock and small animals. Veterinary clinic, 
small animals A facility for the care, diagnosis and medical treatment by a licensed veterinarian for small animals. Violation For flood damage prevention purposes, the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Wall sign Any sign, erected flush against the exterior wall of a building, supported by the wall, and having the sign face parallel to the wall or painted directly onto a wall. Warehouse and freight movement An establishment engaged in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present. Typical uses include: Separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; Household moving and general freight storage; Cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; Storage of weapons and ammunition; major wholesale distribution centers; Truck, or air freight terminals; Bus barns; Parcel services; Major post offices; Grain terminals; Transfer and storage businesses where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred; and The stockpiling of sand, gravel or other aggregate materials. Waste-related service Uses that receive solid or liquid waste from others for transfer to another location; uses that collect sanitary waste; or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. Typical uses include solid or liquid waste transfer or composting facilities and recycling centers. Wastewater Solids, liquids, or gaseous materials discharged into an approved wastewater collection and treatment system. Wastewater facility A capital improvement or facility expansion for providing wastewater service including but not limited to, land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, and interceptor mains. The term "wastewater facility" does not include wastewater lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of facilities and which are maintained in dedicated trusts. The term "wastewater facility" also does not include dedication of easement or rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site wastewater collection facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to new development. Wastewater system The system of pipes and appurtenances used to collect and transport wastewater. Water Potable water and/or reuse water. Water conservation For the purposes of regulating irrigation systems, the design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. Water facility Improvements for providing water and/or reuse water service including but not limited to, land or easements, water and/or reuse water supply facilities, treatment facilities, pumping facilities, storage facilities or transmission mains. The term "water facility" does not include water and/or reuse water lines or mains constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities maintained in dedicated trusts. The term "water facility" also does not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site water and/or reuse water distribution facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to new development. Water surface elevation The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. Wholesale trade An establishment engaged in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the public, but sales to the public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Typical uses include sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment and store fixtures; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware. Window, area of The area of a single window including all the window panes in a larger frame that is separated by mullions or other dividers. Window sign Any items of information affixed in any manner to a window or exterior glass door such that is intended to be viewable from the exterior. Wireless transmission facility (WTF) An antenna and associated equipment intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave cellular, telephone or similar forms of electronic communication. Written notice A notification in writing delivered in person to the individual or parties intended, or delivered at, or sent by certified mail or registered mail to the last residential or business address of legal record. Zoning administrator The director of planning and development services who is appointed by the city manager and who has the duty of administering this development code. Zoning board of adjustment The board that has been created by the city council to hear and determine appeals of administrative decisions, special exceptions, and variances.  
(Ord. No. O-2019-0202, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Chapter 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter, supplemented with the subsequent chapters in this code, provides for the division of land into different districts that, in combination with the regulations pertaining to such districts, are written in accordance with the goals of the general plan to fulfill the following purposes: 
(1)  Promote the beneficial and appropriate development of all land and the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan; 
(2)  Prevent or minimize land use incompatibilities and conflicts among different land uses; and 
(3)  Maintain property values by stabilizing expectations and ensuring predictability in development. 
Sec. 2-2. - Establishment of districts. 
(a)  Districts. For the purpose of this code, portions of the city, as specified on the official zoning map of the city, are hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Base Zoning Districts Residential Zoning Districts AG Agricultural SF-R Single-Family - Rural SF-1 Single-Family - Large Lot SF-2 Single-Family - Standard Lot SF-3 Single-Family - Mixed Lot SF-D Single-Family - Downtown MH Manufactured Housing TF Two-Family TH Townhouse SR Senior MF-1 Multifamily - Low Density MF-2 Multifamily - Medium Density MF-3 Multifamily - Urban Commercial Zoning Districts C-1 General Commercial C-1a General Commercial - Limited C-2 Local Commercial Employment and Industrial Zoning Districts OF-1 General Office OF-2 Mid-Rise Office BP Business Park LI Light Industrial I Industrial MI Mining Public and Civic Use Zoning Districts PF-1 Public Facilities - Low Intensity PF-2 Public Facilities - Medium Intensity PF-3 Public Facilities - High Intensity OS Open Space Mixed-Use and PUD Districts MU-1 Mixed-Use Historic Commercial Core MU-2 Mixed-Use Downtown Medium Density MU-L Mixed-Use Limited MU-R Mixed-Use Redevelopment and Small Lot MU-G Mixed-Use Greenfield and Large Lot PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay Zoning Districts H Historic Overlay CT Chisholm Trail Overlay PV Palm Valley Overlay  
(b)  Official zoning map. 
(1)  The city is hereby divided into the zoning districts provided in subsection (a) of this section, as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city secretary and bearing the seal of the City of Round Rock under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in section 2-1(b) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Round Rock, Texas, 2010." 
(2)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map within five business days after the amendment has been approved by the city council and signed by the mayor. 
(3)  Approved zoning changes shall be entered on the official zoning map by the zoning administrator and each change shall be identified on the map with the date and number of the ordinance making the change. 
(4)  No change of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with procedures set forth in this code. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this code and punishable as provided under chapter 1, article II of this code. 
(5)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the city. The official zoning map shall be available to the public at all hours when the city hall is open to the public. 
(c)  Replacement of official zoning map. 
(1)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature and/or number of changes and additions, the city council shall, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city secretary, and bearing the seal of the city and date under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of Ord. No. ____________ of the City of Round Rock, Texas." 
(2)  Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(d)  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and, in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (d)(1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated in a classification amendment shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (d)(1) through (6) of this section, the zoning administrator shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(e)  Uniform application of district regulations. The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Except for residential uses in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, and TF districts, no person shall initiate any development or construction activity, including site preparation, foundation forming, sign erection, construction, improvement, repair or demolition within the city limits without first applying for and obtaining a certificate of zoning compliance as required in Sec. 10-2. 
(2)  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 2-3. - Treatment of property without a zoning classification. 
    Property that was annexed without a zoning classification, or property existing within the city limits without a zoning classification, shall be treated as follows: 
(a)  A parcel of land that is less than ten acres shall be treated as if it were zoned SF-R (Single-family - Rural); and 
(b)  A parcel of land that is ten acres or more shall be treated as if it were zoned AG (Agricultural). 
Sec. 2-4. - Permitted and prohibited uses. 
    The following sections describe the types of permitted uses, density and development standards, and any other development standards for each zoning district: 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right (P). Uses listed as permitted by right are permitted. Such uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this code. 
(2)  Uses permitted subject to special standards (P/S). Uses listed as permitted with conditions are permitted, provided that the use meets the supplementary use standards referenced in the far right special standards column of the summary table contained within each zoning category. Such uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this code. 
(3)  Special exceptions (SE). Uses listed as permitted subject to special exception criteria are allowed only if approved as a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures of Sec. 10-53. Special exception uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this code, including the additional listed standards contained in Sec. 2-91. 
(4)  Special standards. The final column titled special standards contains a cross-reference to supplementary use standards that apply to specific uses in Sec. 2-91 or other applicable standards elsewhere in this chapter. 
(5)  Uses not allowed. Any use, structure, or improvement not specifically permitted is not allowed. 
(6)  Uses not listed. The zoning administrator shall use the criteria in subsection (b) of this section to assist in determining how an unlisted use should be treated. 
(b)  Considerations regarding principal uses. 
(1)  Determination of the appropriate category for a proposed principal use shall be made by the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 10-4. 
(2)  The following shall be used to determine the appropriate classification of any use not listed in this chapter and whether a use is considered principal or accessory: 
a.  The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relationship to the stated characteristics of each use category. 
b.  The relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity. 
c.  Relative amounts of sales from each activity. 
d.  The customer type for each activity. 
e.  The relative number of employees in each activity. 
f.  Hours of operation. 
g.  Building and site arrangement. 
h.  Vehicles used and their parking requirements. 
i.  The relative number of vehicle trips generated. 
j.  Required signage. 
k.  How the use is advertised. 
l.  The likely impact on surrounding properties. 
m.  Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site. 
(3)  When considering appropriate districts for a use not listed in the use table, the district purpose statements shall be taken into consideration. 
(c)  Multiple principle uses on a single parcel or lot. Where more than one principal use is permitted in the following use tables, such uses may be developed on a single site. Where such mixed uses include any use subject to special exception review, the entire project shall be subject to the special exception review process. Any supplementary use standards shall continue to apply in a mixed-use development. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited, as determined by the zoning administrator, building official, or fire marshal: 
(1)  Uses which constitute a hazard, danger or nuisance to the public because of noise, odor, glare, particulate matter, traffic impediments or similar reasons; 
(2)  Uses which may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illnesses; and 
(3)  Uses which involve hazardous materials, as defined in section 1-50, and by the National Fire Protection Association Guide or any successor publication thereto officially used by the building official or fire marshal. 
(e)  Other uses, structures, or improvements prohibited. The following uses are considered noxious and/or inappropriate and are therefore prohibited within the city limits: 
(1)  Battery manufacturing or recycling; 
(2)  Concrete and asphalt batch plants (except temporary units for the express purpose of constructing SH 45 and SH 130); 
(3)  Intensive agriculture and animal husbandry; 
(4)  Meat packing; 
(5)  Petroleum drilling, refining and terminal storage; 
(6)  Plastics manufacturing; 
(7)  Pulp and paper manufacturing; 
(8)  Rubber manufacturing; 
(9)  Tanneries; 
(10)  Temporary buildings and structures except those described in section 2-92; 
(11)  Toxic waste storage or disposal; 
(12)  Vehicle recycling and reclamation yards; 
(13)  Off-premises signs and billboards; and 
(14)  Outdoor kennels. 
Sec. 2-5. - Austin Executive Airport Joint Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations. 
    The Austin Executive Airport Joint Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations ("Airport Zoning Regulations"), adopted on May 12, 2017, by the Austin Executive Joint Airport Zoning Board, apply to the appropriate areas of the city and may restrict land use beyond the regulations contained in this Code. A copy of the Airport Zoning Regulations and a map depicting its area of impact shall be maintained by the Planning and Development Services Department. 
Sec. 2-6. - Interpretation. 
    Any use that is not specifically listed as permitted by this code shall be prohibited. Appeals may be made in writing to the zoning administrator in accordance with Sec. 10-4. Appeals of the zoning administrator's interpretation regarding permitted and prohibited uses shall be made to the zoning board of adjustment. 
Sec. 2-7. - Transitional provisions and vested rights. 
(a)  Violations continue. Any violation of the previous zoning regulations of the city shall continue to be a violation under this code and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement under article II of this code, administration, unless the use, development, construction or other activity is consistent with the express terms of this code, in which case enforcement action shall cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived. 
(b)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, a completed application submitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived will be reviewed on the basis of any regulations or requirements in effect at the time the completed application is filed; unless, at the applicant's option, the applicant elects to proceed under the new regulations or requirements. 
(c)  Vested rights. Any applicant that claims exception from any provision of this code based upon a claim of vested rights shall file a request for vested rights determination with the zoning administrator demonstrating: 
(1)  In reliance upon properly issued permits or approvals: 
a.  The applicant made substantial financial commitments or assumed substantial financial obligations within the purview of the activities authorized by said permit or approval; and 
b.  The applicant has proceeded in good faith, and no approvals or permits have lapsed or been revoked; or 
c.  The applicant has established any other factor which may establish vested rights under state or federal law; or 
(2)  The applicant used its property or filed an application as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002 prior to annexation, and that the regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002(c); or 
(3)  The applicant filed an application as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 prior to adoption of the regulations against which vested rights are claimed, that the regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.004 and that the project has not become dormant as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.005 and this code. 
(d)  After receiving a request for vested rights determination, the zoning administrator shall review the request and approve, deny or request additional information to be provided for consideration of the request within 20 working days. Upon review of the request, if the zoning administrator finds that the applicant has provided sufficient information to establish that one or more permits exists on a project, the administrator shall issue a certificate to the applicant recognizing vested rights for the project and the terms and conditions required for the continuance of the vested rights. 
(e)  This section shall not extend the time of validity for any permit. Any rights recognized by the application of this section shall not extend beyond the time periods prescribed for the validity or the permit or permits that were submitted for recognition except by the granting of a variance from the time limit as provided herein. 
(f)  Projects from which no completed application has been submitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this code is derived shall be subject to all requirements and standards of this code. 
Secs. 2-8-2-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-11. - In general. 
    Residential zoning districts provide for dwelling units of varying densities. Single-family neighborhoods are preserved and protected by compatibility buffers from more intense development, while townhouse, low-density multifamily, and senior living developments serve as transitional uses between single-family neighborhoods and areas of commercial and employment activity. 
Sec. 2-12. - AG (Agricultural) district 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-intensity land use primarily devoted to agricultural activities and having the potential of becoming urban areas in the future. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the AG district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the AG district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this code, the following regulations apply to the AG district: 
(1)  Limits on residential buildings. For parcels having 40 acres or less, a maximum of two buildings may be used for residential purposes. For parcels more than 40 acres, one building per 20 acres, with a maximum of five buildings, may be used for residential purposes. 
(2)  Livestock structures . For new development of barns, stables, corrals, sheds, pens, or other similar structures where livestock may be housed, fed, or confined, or where food for livestock is stored shall not be located within 150 feet of the property line of any residence, business or commercial establishment or office (other than the livestock owner's residence, business or commercial establishment or office), grocery store, school building, church, hospital, assisted living home, or restaurant or other food service establishment. 
(3)  Confinement of livestock . Livestock shall be enclosed with adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from damaging shrubbery or other property situated on adjacent property. Such fences or barriers shall be sufficient to prevent the livestock from escaping the enclosure. 
Sec. 2-13. - SF-R (Single-Family - Rural) district 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-intensity land use primarily devoted to large lot rural residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-R district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SF-R district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  No accessory buildings of any kind are permitted in any street yard. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SF-R district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials. Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal pre-finished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Garage conversions . Where otherwise permitted, garage conversions are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The converted area shall not operate as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  The converted area shall not include additional utility meters. 
c.  The converted area shall not include an exterior entry door. 
d.  If garage doors are removed, they must be replaced with a wall with new exterior materials that match the existing structure's primary exterior materials. If the replaced doors are less than 14 linear feet, then at least one window is required. If the replaced doors are 14 linear feet or more, then at least two windows are required. If only one window is installed, it shall be centered on the wall. If two or more windows are installed, they shall be installed symmetrically on the wall. 
(3)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the SF-R district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
Sec. 2-14. - SF-1 (Single-Family - Large Lot) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-intensity land use primarily devoted to large lot single-family residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SF-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SF-1 district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials. Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal pre-finished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Garage conversions . Where otherwise permitted, garage conversions are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The converted area shall not operate as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  The converted area shall not include additional utility meters. 
c.  The converted area shall not include an exterior entry door. 
d.  If garage doors are removed, they must be replaced with a wall with new exterior materials that match the existing structure's primary exterior materials. If the replaced doors are less than 14 linear feet, then at least one window is required. If the replaced doors are 14 linear feet or more, then at least two windows are required. If only one window is installed, it shall be centered on the wall. If two or more windows are installed, they shall be installed symmetrically on the wall. 
(3)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the SF-1 district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
Sec. 2-15. - SF-2 (Single-Family - Standard Lot) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low intensity land use primarily devoted to traditional single-family residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SF-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SF-2 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Side-entry garages may have may have a 15-foot setback from the street (ROW). 
(2)  Where SF-2 lots are subdivided abutting existing homes on lots 10,000 square feet or larger, the SF-2 lots that abut the large lots shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SF-2 district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials. Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal pre-finished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Garage door width. No single garage door facing a public street shall exceed 18 feet in width. 
(3)  Garage conversions . Where otherwise permitted, garage conversions are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The converted area shall not operate as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  The converted area shall not include additional utility meters. 
c.  The converted area shall not include an exterior entry door. 
d.  If garage doors are removed, they must be replaced with a wall with new exterior materials that match the existing structure's primary exterior materials. If the replaced doors are less than 14 linear feet, then at least one window is required. If the replaced doors are 14 linear feet or more, then at least two windows are required. If only one window is installed, it shall be centered on the wall. If two or more windows are installed, they shall be installed symmetrically on the wall. 
(4)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the SF-2 district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
(5)  Landscaping . Landscaping requirements apply to the development of new single-family homes as outlined in Sec. 8-10(l). 
(e)  Special standards for zero lot line. 
(1)  Open space requirement. Although lot size and dimensions may be reduced for zero lot line lots, the reduced lot size shall be compensated by providing common open space equal to the difference between the minimum required lot area for conventional single-family lots and the smaller lots. This common open space requirement is not credited toward the parkland dedication requirements specified in the City subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Eaves. The eaves on the side of a house with a reduced setback may project a maximum of 24 inches over the adjacent property line. In this case, an easement for the eave projection shall be recorded on the deed for the lot where the projection occurs. 
(3)  Maintenance easement. An easement between the two property owners to allow for maintenance or repair of the house is required when the eaves or side wall of the house are less than five (5) feet from the adjacent property line. The easement on the adjacent property shall provide at least five (5) feet of unobstructed space between the furthermost projection of the structure and the edge of the easement. 
(4)  Privacy. If the side wall of the house is on the property line, or within three (3) feet of the property line, windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side setback of the adjacent lot are prohibited. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side setback of the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent window, are permitted. 
(5)  One side setback may be zero (0) feet; the other side setback shall be at least 12 feet. 
(6)  Accessory buildings are permitted in a side or rear street yard. 
(f)  Special standards for village residential. 
(1)  All village residential lots shall provide garages with rear access to an alley. 
(2)  Garages on village residential lots may not face or have direct access to the front right-of-way. 
(3)  Garage doors shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the alley. 
(4)  Fencing located within 10 feet of an alley right-of-way or common lot boundary shall be constructed of materials which will not impede the visibility of drivers backing into the alley. 
(5)  The minimum setback for an accessory building shall be five (5) feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0204, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-16. - SF-3 (Single-Family - Mixed Lot) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low intensity land use primarily devoted to low density residential development on lots of various sizes and with increased design standards than other single-family residential zoning districts. This district is intended for subdivisions that can accommodate a variety of lot sizes and detached housing types. 
(b)  Permitted uses . Uses permitted in the SF-3 district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SF-3 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Alleys . Lots less than 45 feet in width shall provide garages with rear access to an alley. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling area . The living area of the primary residential structure exclusive of porches and garages. 
(3)  Compatibility standard . Where SF-3 lots are subdivided abutting existing homes on lots 10,000 sq. ft. and over, the SF-3 lots that immediately abut the large lots shall be a minimum of 10,000 sq. ft. 
(4)  Lot composition . Except as provided below, each new subdivision with SF-3 zoning shall meet the following lot size composition: 
a.  Estate lots shall compose no less than 40% of the total number of residential lots. 
b.  Standard lots shall compose no less than 30% of the total number of residential lots. 
c.  Small lots shall compose no more than 30% of the total number of residential lots. 
d.  A subdivision may contain fewer estate lots or more small lots than outlined above if it has a connectivity index of 1.4 or greater and includes the following features, as further described in subsection (e) below: 
1.  Arterial and collector road landscaping; 
2.  Enhanced detention facilities and bridge/culvert design; 
3.  Usable open spaces (such as parks, amenity centers, and trails) which exceed the parkland requirement by a minimum of 25%; or 
4.  Brick or natural stone subdivision walls. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SF-3 district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials . 
a.  The exterior wall finish shall be a minimum 75% stone, simulated stone, brick, or stucco. No more than 50% shall be stucco. Up to 25% of the exterior wall finish may be fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels). 
b.  An alternative wall finish consisting of 100% stucco may be permitted only in conjunction with a tile roof. 
c.  The use of materials such as wood shingles, wood siding, and architectural steel or metal shall be limited to accent features. 
d.  Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from the percentage and materials requirements listed above. 
(2)  Garage and driveway treatment . 
a.  No single garage door facing a public street shall exceed 18 feet in width. 
b.  An upgraded garage door, defined as a metal door with the addition of window panels, a faux wood garage door with decorative hardware, or a wood clad garage door, shall be required for all garages facing the street. 
c.  Swing in, side entry garages are permitted as a primary garage or 3rd car garage with the following standards: 
1.  The exterior wall of the garage facing any public street shall include a minimum of one (1) three-foot (3') by five-foot (5') window for every nine (9) linear feet in width; and 
2.  There shall be a minimum of 30 feet between garage doors and the side lot line which they face. 
(3)  Front Elevation Requirements. The front elevation of all homes shall conform with subsection (3)a. or b. below: 
a.  A street-facing garage shall not extend beyond the front building façade; or 
b.  The front elevation shall contain a minimum of two of the following elements of wall plane articulation, to be identified on the architectural plans submitted for a building permit: 
1.  A minimum of two wall planes on the front elevation, offset a minimum of 18 inches. 
2.  A covered front porch or patio with a minimum of 60 square feet. 
3.  A shed roof at least 18 inches deep above garage door for an additional architectural detail. 
4.  A combination of at least two roof types (e.g., hip and gable) or two different roof planes of varying height and/or direction. 
5.  Two or more masonry finishes to complement the architectural style of the home. 
6.  The addition of one or more dormers on the front elevation to complement the architectural style of the home. 
(4)  Fencing. 
a.  Single-family lot fencing shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, stone, reinforced concrete, decorative masonry, wrought iron, tubular steel, redwood, or cedar with a picket size of 1" x 6" with metal posts and treated rails, or other equivalent materials approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
b.  Fences that abut parks, trails, or similar public or private open spaces shall be of wrought iron or tubular steel. Masonry bases not exceeding three (3) feet in height and/or masonry columns are permitted in conjunction with a wrought iron or tubular steel fence. 
c.  Fence requirements and maintenance. 
1.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
i.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
ii.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
2.  Fences are not required in the SF-3 district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
i.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
ii.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
iii.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
iv.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
v.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
(5)  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements apply to the development of new homes in the SF-3 district as outlined in Sec. 8-10(l). 
(e)  Subdivision features . 
(1)  Arterial and collector road landscaping is defined as the following: 
a.  A minimum 10-foot landscape easement from each side of the right-of-way to the abutting public utility easement. Exceptions may be granted by the zoning administrator for limited site specific variations where a reduction of the 10 feet is requested. The landscape easement shall contain sidewalks, street tree plantings, plant beds, subdivision walls, and neighborhood entry monuments. 
b.  The landscaping within the landscape easement shall comply with Sec. 8-10(g)(1)b.1 and 8-10(g)(1)b.2. 
c.  Meandering five (5) foot sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of the arterial and collector streets. The sidewalks shall be permitted to meander inside and outside the collector right-of-way and landscape easement. 
(2)  Enhanced detention facilities includes the following: limestone cladding on cement walls; a minimum of 25% greater trees and shrubs than is required by the code; and if any permanent bodies of water are proposed they shall be curvilinear, non-rectangular shapes and which provide passive or active recreation opportunities. Enhanced bridge/culvert design includes colored concrete or a masonry veneer to complement the subdivision walls. 
(3)  The size and number of usable open spaces shall be clearly defined in the preliminary plat of the subdivision. 
(4)  The brick or natural stone subdivision wall shall conform to the regulations found in Sec. 4-30. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0203, § I, 5-9-2019; Ord. No. O-2019-0204, § II, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-17. - SF-D (Single-Family - Downtown) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of land use primarily devoted to low density residential development. This district provides for traditional residential development and includes standards to reinforce the scale and design of an established residential neighborhood with numerous historic structures. 
(b)  Permitted uses . Uses permitted in the SF-D district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SF-D district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  The front setback from the street shall be the same as adjacent buildings +/- 5 feet. If the two setbacks on either side of the subject property are greater than 10 feet different from one another, the owner of the subject property may choose which adjacent property to use to establish the contextual setback. 
(2)  All portions of a garage and garage doors shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the front elevation of the main structure. 
(3)  Floor to floor heights shall be the same as adjacent structures in a block. 
(4)  Fences may be up to eight (8) feet in height to accommodate topographical changes, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SF-D district: 
(1)  Parking requirements . 
a.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
b.  On-site parking is not required for single-family dwelling units, but is required for the following uses: 
1.  A bed and breakfast shall provide one on-site parking space for each guest room. 
2.  Other uses shall provide on-site parking in accordance with chapter 8, article VI. 
c.  Garages shall not be required. When a garage is constructed, it shall be complementary in materials and design to the primary structure on the lot. 
d.  Where an alley exists and is clear of man-made obstructions, new garages shall be oriented toward the alley. If no alley exists, new garages shall be oriented toward an available secondary frontage. If the garage is oriented toward the secondary frontage, the facade that faces the primary frontage shall include articulation such as windows. 
e.  A driveway constructed to access a new garage shall be no wider than 18 feet within the setback, and no wider than the garage at any point. 
f.  No single garage door facing a public street shall exceed 18 feet in width. 
g.  On-site parking placement. 
1.  Where access is available from an alley or secondary frontage, parking shall be located at the rear of the property behind the principal structure. 
2.  If a property has an existing driveway, it may be utilized to meet any on-site parking requirement but may not be expanded in the street yard to accommodate additional parking. Slight modifications may be made to the existing driveway to access additional parking located at the rear of the structure. A driveway shall be no wider than 18 feet within the required front or side setback. 
(2)  Exterior wall finish . 
a.  Permitted exterior wall materials include wood siding (novelty, tongue and groove, shiplap, or equivalent), stone (such as rough-faced limestone), brick, and lapped fiber cement siding that is smooth and without a drop in the panel (not cottage lap). 
b.  Stone and masonry bonding patterns, size, and color shall be similar to existing structures in the district. Limestone shall have an ashlar pattern, and other stone shall be installed in uniform patterns and shapes. 
c.  Exterior insulation and finishing systems (EIFS), concrete tilt-wall, concrete block, artificial brick, simulated stone, and synthetic wood shingles are prohibited. 
d.  Accessory structures less than 150 square feet are exempt from exterior wall finish requirements. 
e.  Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Height, massing and placement requirements. 
a.  Front facades of the primary structure shall be parallel to the street. 
b.  The scale of a new building or addition shall reflect the scale of adjacent buildings. 
c.  The scale and placement of façade elements such as doors, windows, porches, columns, and other architectural features shall be similar to surrounding buildings. 
(4)  Additions to the primary structure on a lot . Additions shall be compatible and secondary in size, design, proportion, and detail to the primary residential structure on a lot. 
(5)  Roofs . 
a.  Roof pitch shall be a minimum of 4:12. 
b.  Synthetic wood shingles or synthetic clay tile roofs are prohibited. 
(6)  Lot fencing . 
a.  Fences shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, stone, wrought iron, or wood. Other decorative masonry materials, reinforced concrete, or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Fence posts shall be constructed of wood, rust-resistant metal parts, concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars. 
c.  Fence posts and fence panels for non-wood fences shall be capped. 
d.  All fences shall provide a finished face to all public rights-of-way. 
e.  Fences shall not conflict with sight triangles at street intersections or obstruct views from adjacent driveways. 
(7)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the SF-D district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
(8)  Mechanical equipment and trash receptacles for nonresidential uses . 
a.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be set back from the edges of roofs and screened so as not to be visible from public view. 
b.  No mechanical or service areas shall be placed in the street yard. 
c.  Trash receptacles shall be screened from the street and pedestrian areas with fencing or appropriate height landscaping. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0204, § III, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-18. - MH (Manufactured Housing) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and provide for the inclusion of manufactured housing on single lots at locations which are suitable for such housing and to provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MH district may be found in Sec. 2-25, with the following supplementary note: 
(1)  Mobile homes are prohibited within the corporate limits of the City. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MH district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Side-entry garages may have a 15-foot setback from the street (ROW). 
(2)  Stacking of manufactured homes is prohibited. 
(3)  Where manufactured housing lots are subdivided abutting existing homes on lots 10,000 square feet and over, the manufactured housing lots that immediately abut the large lots shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  All manufactured housing shall be constructed on lots subdivided in conformance with the subdivision regulations of this code. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the MH district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials . Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal prefinished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Garage door width. No single garage door facing a public street shall exceed 18 feet in width. 
(3)  Garage conversions . Where otherwise permitted, garage conversions are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The converted area shall not operate as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  The converted area shall not include additional utility meters. 
c.  The converted area shall not include an exterior entry door. 
d.  If garage doors are removed, they must be replaced with a wall with new exterior materials that match the existing structure's primary exterior materials. If the replaced doors are less than 14 linear feet, then at least one window is required. If the replaced doors are 14 linear feet or more, then at least two windows are required. If only one window is installed, it shall be centered on the wall. If two or more windows are installed, they shall be installed symmetrically on the wall. 
(4)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the MH district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0204, § IV, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-19. - TF (Two-Family) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-medium intensity land use primarily devoted to moderate density residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the TF district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the TF district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  The minimum lot size of 3,500 square feet depicted in Sec. 2-26 is for a fee simple lot containing one dwelling unit in a two-dwelling unit building. 
(2)  The side and rear setbacks shall be five (5) feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the TF district: 
(1)  Exterior wall materials . Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal prefinished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  Garage door width. No single garage door facing a public street shall exceed 18 feet in width. 
(3)  Garage conversions . Where otherwise permitted, garage conversions are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The converted area shall not operate as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  The converted area shall not include additional utility meters. 
c.  The converted area shall not include an exterior entry door. 
d.  If garage doors are removed, they must be replaced with a wall with new exterior materials that match the existing structure's primary exterior materials. If the replaced doors are less than 14 linear feet, then at least one window is required. If the replaced doors are 14 linear feet or more, then at least two windows are required. If only one window is installed, it shall be centered on the wall. If two or more windows are installed, they shall be installed symmetrically on the wall. 
(4)  Fence requirements and maintenance . 
a.  These regulations shall apply only to fences that: 
1.  Face a public street, a public park, a public recreation facility, a school, a library, or a government office; or 
2.  Are adjacent to a public drainage facility and are visible from a public street. 
b.  Fences are not required in the TF district. However, the owners of fences subject to this section shall maintain fences in a safe condition and in good repair, with all components free from deterioration, dilapidation, rot, rust, loosening, or leaning. Fences shall be able to withstand the wind load for which they were designed. In addition, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  A fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the vertical measured at the top of the fence, with the exception of fencing measuring four (4) feet or less in height, which vertical alignment shall not be more than six (6) inches from the vertical measured at the top of the fence. 
2.  A fence shall not have any broken, loose, damaged or rotted components having a combined total area of twenty (20) square feet or more, said area being calculated over any 50 contiguous linear foot section of fence. 
3.  A fence shall not have any missing posts, panels, or pickets. 
4.  Painted fence components shall be regularly maintained to prevent rusting, peeling, or blistering surfaces. 
5.  If the city determines a fence is unsafe, dilapidated or a public nuisance, or otherwise in violation of this chapter, it shall be repaired, replaced or demolished within 60 days upon first notification of non-compliance. Repairs shall be made with materials comparable in composition, color, size, shape and quality to the original fence. Products not intended to be used as fencing are prohibited from being used in the repair of a fence. 
(5)  Landscaping . Landscaping requirements apply to the development of new homes in the TF district as outlined in Sec. 8-10(l). 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0204, § V, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-20. - TH (Townhouse) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use devoted to moderate density residential development. This district often provides a transition between lower intensity residential uses and more intensive uses. Townhouses may be developed in either a common-lot or single-lot (fee simple) configuration. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the TH district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the TH district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Townhouses shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  A side setback of zero feet is allowed only for internal attached units with a common wall. 
(3)  End units shall have a 10 foot side setback. 
(4)  Accessory buildings shall have a five (5) foot setback, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(5)  Parking areas for common-lot townhouses shall be separated from adjacent properties by a 15-foot wide landscape buffer, in accordance with Sec. 8-10. 
(6)  Recreational uses with overhead illumination such as swimming pools, tennis courts, ballfields, or playground areas are prohibited within 50 feet of any adjacent SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, or TF district lot line. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the TH district: 
(1)  Garages. Garages shall not face a public street, nor shall garages be permitted in any street yard. 
(2)  Fences . Lot fences shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, natural stone, simulated stone, architectural CMU, or wrought iron. A brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or architectural CMU fence shall be installed abutting single-family or two-family uses. Wrought iron or an equivalent view fencing material shall be installed where abutting a park, trail, or open space. 
(3)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  Townhouse design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the TH district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. These standards supplement any district-specific standards. Alternative design standards may be approved by the zoning administrator in order to permit a more flexible or creative design. 
(1)  Building elevation variation . Any wall in excess of 60 feet in length shall include offsets of at least two feet in depth, to preclude a box design. There shall be no less than one offset for every 40 feet of horizontal length. 
(2)  Exterior wall color finishes . Day-glo, luminescent, iridescent, neon or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Exterior wall materials . The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows and trim. The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. Other wall finishes or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
a.  The ground floor of all buildings shall be a minimum of 75 percent natural stone, simulated stone, or brick. 
b.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each structure, and each material used shall comprise no less than 20 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
c.  No more than 33 percent of the building facade may be fiber cement siding or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
(4)  Glass . Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(5)  Orientation requirements . Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or entrance areas. 
(6)  Windows . Windows shall be provided with trim. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb, header and sill. 
(7)  Roofing materials . Roofing materials shall consist of 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, or reflective metal such as copper or other similar metals as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. 
(8)  Special design features . All buildings, other than garages, shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. A minimum of five (5) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Bow window. 
b.  Bay window. 
c.  Arched window. 
d.  Gable window. 
e.  Oval or round windows. 
f.  Shutters. 
g.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
h.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
i.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
j.  Decorative tile. 
k.  Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony. 
l.  Projected wall or dormer. 
m.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
n.  Decorative caps on chimneys. 
o.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Amenities . At least one (1) amenity accessible to all residents shall be provided for each new townhouse development with 30 or more dwelling units. Additional amenities shall be included at the following rate: 
Number of dwelling units Minimum number of amenities 0-29 0 30-59 1 60-89 2 90-120 3 Greater than 120 4  
    Amenities include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Playground equipment, 
(2)  Fenced dog park, to measure no smaller than 2,500 square feet, with minimum depth 25 feet, 
(3)  Private fitness facility*, 
(4)  Picnic area, to contain no fewer than two tables and two cooking grills, 
(5)  Swimming pool, 
(6)  Business center, to contain no less than one computer, printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner (printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner may be integrated into a single device), available for resident use*, 
(7)  Tennis court, 
(8)  Basketball court, 
(9)  Volleyball court, 
(10)  Kitchen available for resident use*, 
(11)  Social room available for resident use*, 
* These amenities may be located in the amenity center and each one qualifies toward the amenity requirement. 
(g)  Single-lot (fee simple unit) additional restrictions . 
(1)  Garage requirements . Garages shall not protrude toward the street greater than six (6) feet beyond the ground floor of the front building façade. All garages that protrude beyond the ground floor of the front building façade shall contain living space above them. 
Sec. 2-21. - SR (Senior) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and provide locations for living facilities that primarily serve the community's aging population. This district serves as an additional option for transition from lower intensity residential uses to commercial uses. Proximity to neighborhood commercial activities is desired. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the SR district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the SR district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  The maximum height shall be four (4) stories with the exception of facilities that share a common lot line with a single-family or two-family use, in which case the maximum height shall be three (3) stories. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall have a five (5) foot setback, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(3)  Parking shall be permitted in the setback more than 15 feet from the property line where a compatibility buffer is required. 
(4)  Recreational uses with overhead illumination such as swimming pools, tennis courts, ballfields, or similar facilities are prohibited within 50 feet of any adjacent SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, or TF district lot line. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the SR district: 
(1)  Covered parking. A minimum of 25% of the required parking spaces for senior apartment developments shall be covered. Garage enclosed spaces shall count toward this requirement. 
(2)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  Senior design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the SR district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. These standards supplement any district-specific standards. Alternative design standards may be approved by the zoning administrator in order to permit a more flexible or creative design. 
(1)  Building elevation variation . Any wall in excess of 60 feet in length shall include offsets of at least two feet in depth, to preclude a box design. There shall be no less than one offset for every 40 feet of horizontal length. 
(2)  Exterior wall color finishes . Day-Glo, luminescent, iridescent, neon or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Exterior wall materials . The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or architecturally finished steel or metal except for doors, windows and trim. The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. Other wall finishes or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
a.  The ground floor of all buildings shall be a minimum of 75 percent natural stone, simulated stone, or brick. 
b.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each structure, and each material used shall comprise no less than 20 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
c.  No more than 33 percent of the building facade may be fiber cement siding or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
(4)  Glass . Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(5)  Orientation requirements . Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or entrance areas. 
(6)  Windows . Windows shall be provided with trim. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb, header and sill. 
(7)  Roofing materials . Roofing materials shall consist of 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, or reflective metal such as copper or other similar metals as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. 
(8)  Special design features . All buildings, other than garages, shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. A minimum of five (5) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Bow window. 
b.  Bay window. 
c.  Arched window. 
d.  Gable window. 
e.  Oval or round windows. 
f.  Shutters. 
g.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
h.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
i.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
j.  Decorative tile. 
k.  Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony. 
l.  Projected wall or dormer. 
m.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
n.  Decorative caps on chimneys. 
o.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 2-22. - MF-1 (Multifamily - Low Density) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use primarily devoted to low density multifamily residential development that is compatible with abutting and nearby single-family neighborhoods. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MF-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MF-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 sq. ft. for buildings with four (4) or fewer units and 20,000 sq. ft. for buildings with more than four (4) units. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall be setback 20 feet from abutting SF and TF zoned property when a pre-cast concrete panel fence is used and 15 feet from abutting SF and TF zoned property when a masonry fence is used. 
(3)  For all properties abutting SF and TF zoned property a minimum 15-foot landscape buffer is required. No other use is permitted within the buffer. 
(4)  A side setback of zero (0) feet is permitted only for internal attached units with a common wall. End units shall have a 10-foot side setback. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the MF-1 district: 
(1)  Unit limit . Density shall not exceed 12 units per acre. No more than 120 dwelling units shall be permitted in any single apartment complex. No more than 12 dwelling units shall be permitted in any single residential structure. 
(2)  Low density multifamily separation requirement . No more than 120 apartment units can be grouped on the same or separate but adjacent lots unless they are separated by open space, natural features such as a creek or stand of trees, or OF or C-2 zoning (with the exception of a gas station use). If the separation requirement is fulfilled in the form of open space, it shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The open space shall measure no smaller than 100 feet wide on average and at no point shall be less than 75 feet wide. 
b.  The open space shall contain a minimum of one (1) large tree and one (1) medium tree for every 5,000 square feet. 
c.  The open space may be used as space for an outdoor recreational amenity for the abutting low density multifamily complexes. 
d.  The open space shall comply with all compatibility standards. 
(3)  Amenities . At least one (1) amenity accessible to all residents shall be provided for each low density multifamily complex with 30 or more dwelling units. Amenities shall be included at the following rate: 
Number of dwelling units Minimum number of amenities 0-29 0 30-59 1 60-89 2 90-120 3  
Amenities include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Playground equipment, 
b.  Fenced dog park, to measure no smaller than 2,500 square feet, with minimum depth 25 feet, 
c.  Private fitness facility*, 
d.  Picnic area, to contain no fewer than two tables and two cooking grills, 
e.  Swimming pool, 
f.  Business center, to contain no less than one computer, printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner (printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner may be integrated into a single device), available for resident use*, 
g.  Tennis court, 
h.  Basketball court, 
i.  Volleyball court, 
j.  Kitchen available for resident use*, 
k.  Social room available for resident use*, 
* These amenities may be located in the amenity center and each one qualifies toward the amenity requirement. 
(4)  Garage requirements . Garages shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Garages shall not be located within 15 feet of any SF or TF property. 
b.  Only garages that are integrated within the dwelling structures shall be permitted to face a public street, and they shall not extend beyond the front building facade of the dwelling structure. 
c.  Street-facing garage doors shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the facade width of each dwelling unit. 
d.  Street-facing driveways located adjacent to one another shall be separated by a landscaped area measuring a minimum of six (6) feet wide. 
e.  Detached garages are prohibited in the front street yard and shall be constructed with the same materials and with similar architectural features as the residential structure. 
f.  No garage door shall face a SF or TF district or lot within 200 feet, with the exception of SF or TF lots located across an adjacent public street. 
g.  Garages contained within a detached structure shall contain no more than eight (8) parking spaces. 
(5)  Additional parking. Additional parking that is not within a garage is prohibited in any street yard, with the exception of parking on driveways in front of garages that have been integrated into the dwelling structures. Additional parking shall not be located within 15 feet of any SF or TF property line. 
(6)  Landscaping. In addition to the regulations located in Sec. 8-10, a linear area with improved soils and planted with annuals, perennials, and small shrubs shall be installed and maintained along the foundation of all elevations facing the public right-of-way. This area shall measure a minimum of four (4) feet wide on average, and at no point shall be less than two (2) feet wide. This requirement shall not apply where sidewalks and driveways meet the building perpendicularly. 
(7)  Lot fencing . A wrought-iron or equivalent fence in the front street yard shall be permitted to reach a height of six (6) feet. 
(8)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet in parking areas and 12 feet in pedestrian areas. 
(e)  Low density multifamily design standards. The following design standards apply to all residential buildings in the MF-1 (Multifamily - Low Density) district. Other recognized architectural designs may be approved by the zoning administrator in order to permit a more flexible, compatible or creative design: 
(1)  Building orientation. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or entrance areas. 
(2)  Building elevation variation. Any wall in excess of 40 feet in length shall include offsets of at least two feet in depth. There shall be no less than one offset for every 30 feet of horizontal length. 
(3)  Building design variation. The design of individual buildings within multi-building developments shall vary. No two identical buildings shall be located adjacent to one another. 
(4)  Exterior wall color finishes. Day-Glo, luminescent, iridescent, neon or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(5)  Exterior wall materials. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), glass, or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows, accents and trim. The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. Other wall finishes or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
a.  The ground floor of all buildings shall be a minimum of 75 percent natural stone, simulated stone, or brick. 
b.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each structure, and each material used shall comprise no less than 20 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
c.  No more than 33 percent of the building facade may be fiber cement siding or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
(6)  Exterior stairwells. Exterior stairwells shall be permitted provided that the design, color, and materials complement the architectural theme of the dwelling structure. Final exterior stairwell design shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(7)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(8)  Windows. Windows shall be incorporated on every elevation that is visible from a public street. Windows shall be provided with trim and shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with an architectural surround at the jamb, header and sill. 
(9)  Roofing materials. Roofing materials shall consist of 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, or reflective metal such as copper or other similar metals as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. 
(10)  Special design features. A minimum of five (5) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Bay window. 
b.  Arched window. 
c.  Gable window. 
d.  Oval or round windows. 
e.  Shutters. 
f.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
g.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
h.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
i.  Decorative tile. 
j.  Veranda, terrace, patio, porch or balcony. 
k.  Projected wall or dormer. 
l.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
m.  Decorative caps on chimneys. 
n.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Multifamily house design standards. A multifamily house is a structure that is designed to appear as a large, custom-built single-family home but may contain up to six (6) dwelling units inside. Individual dwelling units are indistinguishable within the larger building form. Design aspects not specifically addressed below shall be regulated by subsection (e) above. Other recognized architectural designs may be approved by the zoning administrator in order to permit a more flexible, compatible or creative design. 
(1)  Access. Each building shall have a singular principal entryway on the front that is in scale with the overall mass of the building. Secondary entrances shall be located along the rear or side of the building. 
(2)  Additional setback requirements. Chimneys, roof overhangs, bay windows, and other architectural elements approved by the zoning administrator may encroach into the setback by a maximum of 24 inches. Porches and patios may encroach into the front setback by up to eight (8) feet and into the side setback by up to five (5) feet. 
(3)  Porch/patio/balcony requirement. Each unit shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of outdoor living space in the form of a patio, porch or balcony adjacent to its principal living space. The minimum depth of the space shall be six (6) feet. This space shall qualify as one of the required special design features. 
(g)  Applicability to PUDs . Design and development standards specifically addressed in planned unit developments (PUDs) adopted prior to October 25, 2012 shall prevail. 
Sec. 2-23. - MF-2 (Multifamily - Medium Density) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use primarily devoted to medium density multifamily residential development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MF-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-25. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MF-2 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-26, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Detached garages shall be set back from the street a minimum of 50 feet. 
(2)  Residential structures shall be permitted to reach four (4) stories in height provided that the first level is garage parking and the upper three (3) stories are dwelling units. In situations where there is a natural gradient change that can accommodate walk-out living units, the zoning administrator may permit four (4) stories of dwelling units. In no case shall a structure exceed four (4) stories. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the MF-2 district: 
(1)  Unit limit . Density shall not exceed 20 units per acre. Apartments shall not exceed 400 units per complex. Any parcel with MF (Multifamily) district zoning prior to October 25, 2012 is not subject to this limit. 
The open space shall comply with all compatibility standards. 
(2)  Amenities . At least one amenity accessible to all residents shall be provided for each medium density multifamily complex with 50 or more dwelling units. Additional amenities shall be included at the following rate: 
Number of dwelling units Minimum number of amenities 0-49 0 50-99 1 100-149 2 150-199 3 200-249 4 250 or more 5  
Amenities include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Playground equipment. 
b.  Fenced dog park, to measure no smaller than 2,500 square feet, with minimum depth 25 feet. 
c.  Private fitness facility*. 
d.  Picnic area, to contain no fewer than two tables and two cooking grills. 
e.  Swimming pool. 
f.  Business center, to contain no less than one computer, printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner (printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner may be integrated into a single device), available for resident use*. 
g.  Tennis court. 
h.  Basketball court. 
i.  Volleyball court. 
j.  Kitchen available for resident use*. 
k.  Social room available for resident use*. 
* These amenities may be located in the amenity center and each one qualifies toward the amenity requirement. 
(3)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  No less than 50 percent of the required residential parking shall be covered or in garages, and no less than 25 percent of all required residential parking shall be in garages. 
b.  No parking shall be permitted in any street yard. 
c.  Driveways in front of "tuck under" garages, if they are at least 20 feet deep, shall count toward the required residential parking. 
d.  If a flat roof is installed as a canopy for covered parking it shall have a minimum six-inch wide decorative banding. 
(4)  Garage requirements . Garages shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Detached garages shall be constructed of the same exterior materials and include similar roof pitch to the residential structures. 
b.  Detached garages shall not consist of more than six (6) garage doors, with the exception of double-sided garages that have doors on opposite sides of the structure with a dividing wall in the middle, for a maximum total of 12 garage doors on a single structure. 
c.  No detached garage shall be placed between a residential building and its adjacent drive aisle. 
d.  Where a detached garage is placed adjacent to a residential building, a landscaped area no less than 10 feet wide shall be installed between the garage and the building. 
e.  No garage door shall face a single-family home within 250 feet or be permitted in a street yard. 
(5)  Landscaping. In addition to the regulations located in Sec. 8-10, a linear area with improved soils and planted with annuals, perennials, and small shrubs shall be installed and maintained along the foundation of all elevations facing the public right-of-way. This area shall measure a minimum of four (4) feet wide on average, and at no point shall be less than two (2) feet wide. This requirement shall not apply where sidewalks and driveways meet the building perpendicularly. 
(6)  Lot fencing . A wrought-iron or equivalent fence in the front street yard shall be permitted to reach a height of six (6) feet. 
(7)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet in parking areas and 12 feet in pedestrian areas. 
(e)  Multifamily - medium density design standards. The following design standards apply to all residential buildings in the MF-2 (Multifamily - medium density) district: 
(1)  Building elevation variation. Any wall in excess of 60 feet in length shall include offsets of at least two feet in depth. There shall be no less than one offset for every 40 feet of horizontal length. 
(2)  Exterior wall color finishes. Day-Glo, luminescent, iridescent, neon or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Exterior wall materials. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), glass, architecturally finished steel or metal, or a combination thereof, except for doors, windows, accents and trim. The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. Other wall finishes or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
a.  The ground floor of all buildings shall be a minimum of 75 percent natural stone, simulated stone, or brick. 
b.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each structure, and each material used shall comprise no less than 20 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
c.  No more than 33 percent of the building facade may be fiber cement siding or architectural steel or metal. 
(4)  Exterior stairwells. Exterior stairwells facing the public right-of-way shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  They shall be concealed within a fully enclosed structure, except for appropriately sized cutouts to allow for ventilation and pedestrian access; 
b.  The landing shall be recessed a minimum of five (5) feet into said structure; and 
c.  The stairwell structure shall not protrude more than eight (8) feet beyond the facade of the residential structure. 
(5)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(6)  Orientation requirements. Buildings adjacent to a public street shall be oriented such that their longest facade faces the street, unless a building is located on the corner of a lot where two (2) streets intersect. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows, balconies and/or stairwells. Alternative orientation due to physical site constraints such as topography or natural features may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(7)  Windows. Windows shall be provided with trim and shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment unless approved by the zoning administrator as part of a recognized architectural style. 
(8)  Roofing materials. Roofing materials shall consist of 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, or reflective metal such as copper or other similar metals as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. Alternative roof designs associated with recognized architectural styles may be permitted by the zoning administrator. 
(9)  Special design features. A minimum of five (5) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Bay window. 
b.  Arched window. 
c.  Gable window. 
d.  Oval or round windows. 
e.  Shutters. 
f.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
g.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
h.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
i.  Decorative tile. 
j.  Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony. 
k.  Projected wall or dormer. 
l.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
m.  Decorative caps on chimneys. 
n.  Entry onto the public facade for ground floor units facing the public ROW. 
o.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Applicability to PUDs . Design and development standards specifically addressed in planned unit developments (PUDs) adopted prior to October 25, 2012 shall prevail. 
Sec. 2-24. - MF-3 (Multifamily - Urban) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of high intensity land use primarily devoted to high density residential development combined with general commercial and office activities by means of a planned unit development (PUD). 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MF-3 district shall be found in each PUD. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MF-3 district shall conform to the standards found in each PUD. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in each PUD, the following elements are required of each MF-3 development. Certain elements may be waived or altered at the discretion of the zoning administrator in order to properly implement the specific features and infrastructure of each PUD. 
(1)  Structured parking. All required residential parking shall be provided within a parking structure that is directly attached to the residential structure. 
(2)  Balconies. No less than 25 percent of all dwelling units shall have a balcony. 
(3)  Stairways. All stairways shall be located completely within the residential structure. 
(4)  Amenities. At least one amenity accessible to all residents shall be provided for each urban multifamily complex. Additional amenities are required at the following rate: 
Number of dwelling units Minimum number of amenities 0-99 1 100-199 2 200-299 3 300 or more 4  
Amenities include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Playground equipment. 
b.  Fenced dog park, to measure no smaller than 2,500 square feet, with minimum depth 25 feet. 
c.  Private fitness facility*. 
d.  Picnic area, to contain no fewer than two tables and two cooking grills. 
e.  Swimming pool. 
f.  Business center, to contain no less than one computer, printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner (printer, fax machine, copier, and scanner may be integrated into a single device), available for resident use*. 
g.  Tennis court. 
h.  Basketball court. 
i.  Volleyball court. 
j.  Kitchen available for resident use*. 
k.  Social room available for resident use*. 
* These amenities may be located in the amenity center and each one qualifies toward the amenity requirement. 
(5)  Open space. A landscaped open space shall be provided immediately adjacent to or across a local street from each residential building containing 100 or more dwelling units. If located across a local street, a pedestrian crosswalk shall be provided. 
(6)  Special streetscape and landscape features. A minimum of four (4) of the following streetscape and landscape features shall be installed along the public right-of-way: 
a.  Benches. 
b.  Bicycle racks. 
c.  Public art to be installed or displayed along the primary street frontage. 
d.  Courtyards or plazas. 
e.  Decorative paving. 
f.  Water features such as fountains. 
g.  Other feature as approved by zoning administrator. 
(e)  Applicability to existing PUDs . Design and development standards specifically addressed in planned unit developments (PUDs) adopted prior to October 25, 2012 shall prevail. 
Sec. 2-25. - Permitted Uses in the Residential Districts. 
    Summary use table by residential zoning district 
Use Zoning District AG SF-R SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-D MH TF TH SR MF-1 MF-2 Supplementary
Use Standard P = Permitted  P/S = Permitted with supplementary use standards  SE = Special Exception needed  - = Prohibited Residential Uses Apartment - - - - - - - - - P/S P P 2-91(c) Assisted Living - - - - - - - - - P/S - - 2-91(d) Group Home (six or fewer persons) - P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S - P/S P/S 2-91(o) Modular Housing - - - P - - - - Multifamily House - - - - - - - - - - P - Single-Family, Attached - - - - - - - P - - - - Single-Family, Detached P P P P P P - P/S - - - - 2-91(hh) Single-Family, Detached Manufactured Home - - - - - - P - - - - - Single-Family, Zero Lot Line - - - P - - - - - - - - Single-Family, Village Residential - - - P - - - - - - - - Townhouse, Single Lot or Common Lot - - - - - - - - P P/S P P 2-91(jj) Public and Civic Uses Amenity Center - P/S P/S P/S P/S - P/S P/S P/S P/S P P 2-91(b) Community/Government Service - - - - - - - - - P/S - - 2-91(k) Day Care (in home), six or fewer children - P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S - - - 2-91(l) Day Care, all other - - - - - - - - - - P/S P/S 2-91(l) Park, Community - P/S P/S P/S P/S P P/S P/S P/S P P/S P/S 2-91(x) Park, Linear/Linkage - P/S P/S P/S P/S P P/S P/S P/S P P/S P/S 2-91(y) Park, Neighborhood - P P P P P P P P P P P Place of Worship - P P P P P P P P P P P Place of Worship (with accessory uses not exceeding 2,500 sq. ft.) - P/S P/S P/S P/S - P/S P/S P/S - P/S P/S 2-91(aa) Place of Worship (with accessory uses between 2,500 sq. ft. and 10,000 sq. ft.) - - - - - - - - - - P/S P/S 2-91(aa) Public Safety Facility P P P P P P P P P P P P Private School, Primary or Secondary - - P/S P/S P/S - - - - - - - 2-91(ff) Public School, Elementary or Middle - - P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S - P/S P/S 2-91(ff) Self-Enclosed Monopole - P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S - - - - - - 2-91(gg) Utility, Minor P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Intermediate P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) WTF, Attached P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) WTF, Stealth P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) Commercial Uses Bed and Breakfast - P/S - P/S - P/S - - - - - - 2-91(h) Other Uses Agricultural Operations P - - - - - - - - - - - Fowl Raising P - - - - - - - - - - - Livestock Raising P P/S - - - - - - - - - - Chapter 8  
Sec. 2-26. - Residential lot and building dimensional standards. 
(a)  Residential zoning districts lot and building dimensional standards chart: 
Description Zoning District AG SF-R SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-D MH TF TH SR MF-1 MF-2 Conventional Zero 
Lot Line Village 
Residential Estate 
Lot Standard 
Lot Small Lot Single-lot 
(fee simple 
units) Common- 
lot Minimum lot area 10 acres 2 acres 10,000 sq. ft. 6,500 sq. ft. 5,500 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 6,500 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. 4,356 sq. ft. 6,500 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 2,500 sq. ft./unit 20,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft./20,000 sq. ft. 1 acre Minimum lot width 200 ft. 200 ft. 70 ft. 50 ft. 45 ft. 40 ft. 70 ft. 50 ft. 40 ft. - 50 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft./unit 150 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft. 200 ft. Minimum lot depth - - - - - - 110 ft. - - - - - - - - - - Minimum width of principal building 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 30 ft. - 20 ft. - - - - - - Minimum dwelling unit area - - - - - - 2,000 sq. ft. - - - - - - - - - - Minimum setback from street (ROW) 50 ft. 50 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. Context- 
ual 20 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. Minimum garage setback from street (ROW) 50 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft./15 ft. 25 ft./15 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft./15 ft. 25 ft./15 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. - 25 ft. 50 ft. Minimum garage setback from street (ROW) for side entry garages - - - - - - 20 ft. 20 ft. - - - - - - - - - Minimum rear setback 50 ft. 50 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when pre-cast concrete panel fence is used - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 story: 25 ft. 
2 stories: 50 ft. 
3 stories: 75 ft. 
4 stories: Not 
permitted 25 ft. 1 story: 25 ft. 
2 stories: 50 ft. 
3 stories: 80 ft. 
4 stories: 100 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when masonry fence is used - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 story: 20 ft. 
2 stories: 40 ft. 
3 stories: 65 ft. 
4 stories: Not 
permitted 20 ft. 1 story: 20 ft. 
2 stories: 40 ft. 
3 stories: 80 ft. 
4 stories: 100 ft. Minimum side setback 20 ft. 20 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft./12 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft./ 
5 ft. 5 ft./20 ft. 10 ft./20 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when pre-cast concrete fence is used - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 story: 25 ft. 
2 stories: 50 ft. 
3 stories: 75 ft. 
4 stories: Not 
permitted 25 ft. 1 story: 25 ft. 
2 stories: 50 ft. 
3 stories: 80 ft. 
4 stories: 100 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when masonry fence is used - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 story: 20 ft. 
2 stories: 40 ft. 
3 stories: 65 ft. 
4 stories: Not 
permitted 20 ft. 1 story: 20 ft. 
2 stories: 40 ft. 
3 stories: 80 ft. 
4 stories: 100 ft. Minimum setback for accessory building 20 ft. 20 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft./ 
5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 15 ft./20 ft. 15 ft. Maximum height of principal building 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 2.5 stories 4 stories 2.5 stories 4 stories Maximum height of accessory building 35 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. Maximum lot coverage for buildings 10% 10% 40% 40% 50% 50% 40% 50% 55% 60% 40% 50% 50% 50% 40% 40% 40%  
(b)  Special purpose lots exemption. Special purpose lots, including but not limited to, landscape lots and utility lots, may be exempted from these requirements. 
(c)  Encroachments in setbacks. Except as specified in (d) below, all required setbacks shall be free from any encroachments, including but not limited to, eaves, roof overhangs, bay windows, and fireplaces. Air conditioning units and other similar ground-mounted equipment are exempt from this requirement. 
(d)  Permitted limited encroachments. In the SF-R, SF-1, SF-2 and SF-3 districts, limited encroachment into the front and rear setbacks by a maximum of two (2) feet shall be permitted for the following: eaves; roof overhangs; and minor architectural details such as fireplaces and bay windows. 
(e)  Accessory buildings prohibition. Accessory buildings are prohibited in the front street yard. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0080, § I, 2-14-2019) 
Secs. 2-27-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-31. - In general. 
    The commercial zoning districts provide for areas of commercial activity serving regional, local, and neighborhood users. General commercial districts accommodate a wide variety of uses, intensities, and a depth of goods and services not available in neighborhood shopping centers. The nature of the uses that locate in general commercial districts are active at most times of day, particularly in evenings, making them more suited for property along freeways, highways, and designated arterial roadways and in limited areas near residential neighborhoods. The local commercial district serves as a lower intensity district accommodating smaller commercial sales and services as well as offices. Such uses are active only during the day and are not disruptive to local residents, making it a suitable transitional use along collectors and some arterials. 
Sec. 2-32. - C-1 (General Commercial) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use primarily devoted to general commercial activities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-35. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the C-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-36, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-36. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the C-1 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 25 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Developments in existence prior to the adoption of this code which have light fixtures exceeding 25 feet may maintain the existing fixture height. 
(e)  General commercial design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the C-1 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  For all buildings, except for concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU); and 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of stucco, fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
b.  For buildings utilizing concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU), or stucco. 
i.  Where stucco exceeds 75% of the total exterior wall finish, a minimum of four-foot (4') wainscot of stone, simulated stone, or brick shall be incorporated. 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
c.  New or emerging materials not explicitly permitted herein may comprise a maximum of 25% of the total exterior wall finish if approved in writing by the zoning administrator based upon the product's durability and longevity. 
d.  All CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
e.  Glass with steel framing shall not exceed 25% of the total exterior wall finish for buildings less than three (3) stories tall. Buildings that are three (3) stories or taller may consist of a maximum 50% glass with steel framing. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Orientation requirements. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
(4)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Sloped or unique roof features (e.g., parapets, mansard). 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Building elevation variation . The following regulations shall apply to the primary façade and all building elevations facing a public street (right-of-way): 
a.  Changes in wall planes shall be provided with a minimum depth of 12 inches at intervals of not more than 80 feet. A depth of 24 inches is recommended. 
b.  Building elevations shall include a change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material at horizontal intervals of not more than 80 feet. 
c.  Building elevations shall include vertical articulation by means of a minimum of one (1) change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material for any structure exceeding 20 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0207, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-33. - C-1a (General Commercial - Limited) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-medium intensity land use primarily devoted to limited general commercial activities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C-1a district may be found in Sec. 2-35. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the C-1a district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-36, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-36. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the C-1a district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 25 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(e)  General commercial - limited design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the C-1a district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  For all buildings, except for concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU); and 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of stucco, fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
b.  For buildings utilizing concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU), or stucco. 
i.  Where stucco exceeds 75% of the total exterior wall finish, a minimum four-foot (4') wainscot of stone, simulated stone, or brick shall be incorporated. 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
c.  New or emerging materials not explicitly permitted herein may comprise a maximum of 25% of the total exterior wall finish if approved in writing by the zoning administrator based upon the product's durability and longevity. 
d.  All CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
e.  Glass with steel framing shall not exceed 25% of the total exterior wall finish for buildings less than three (3) stories tall. Buildings that are three (3) stories or taller may consist of a maximum 50% glass with steel framing. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Orientation requirements. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
(4)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Sloped or unique roof features (e.g., parapets, mansard). 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Building elevation variation . The following regulations shall apply to the primary façade and all building elevations facing a public street (right-of-way): 
a.  Changes in wall planes shall be provided with a minimum depth of 12 inches at intervals of not more than 80 feet. A depth of 24 inches is recommended. 
b.  Building elevations shall include a change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material at horizontal intervals of not more than 80 feet. 
c.  Building elevations shall include vertical articulation by means of a minimum of one (1) change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material for any structure exceeding 20 feet in height. 
(6)  Roofing materials. Roofing materials for pitched roofs shall consist of 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, or reflective metal such as copper or other similar metals as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0207, § II, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-34. - C-2 (Local Commercial) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low-medium to medium intensity land use primarily devoted to local commercial and office uses on sites of two (2) acres or less. Development projects larger than two (2) acres may be permitted if comprehensively designed as a village center. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-35. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the C-2 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-36. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the C-2 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  Local commercial design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the C-2 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Selection of materials, color, building orientation, articulation, and windows shall reflect the design themes established in the neighborhood which the proposed development borders. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  At least 50 percent of the exterior wall finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, or brick, except for doors, windows and trim. 
b.  Other materials allowed for the exterior wall finish are: stucco; fiber cement siding; architecturally finished steel or metal; glass with steel framing; or architectural concrete masonry units (CMU). These materials shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the total exterior wall finish (breezeways are not included in this calculation). However, 100 percent stucco may be permitted in conjunction with a tile roof. The use of materials other than those listed in this section and in subsection (e)(1)a, above, shall be limited to accent features. 
c.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 25% of the total exterior wall finish. Flat, unarticulated panels are prohibited. 
d.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(4)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
b.  Main entrances shall be visible to pedestrians from the street or a public plaza on the primary frontage. 
c.  Buildings with multiple street frontages shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
(5)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Offset in building elevation. 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Building elevation variation . The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line, or change in exterior wall finish. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0206, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-35. - Permitted Uses in the Commercial Districts. 
    Summary use table by commercial zoning district 
Use Zoning District C-1 C-1a C-2 Supplementary Use Standard P = Permitted  P/S = Permitted with supplementary use standards  SE = Special Exception needed
 - = Prohibited Residential Uses Accessory Dwelling Unit - - P/S 2-91(a) Single-Family, Attached P/S P/S - 2-91(hh) Single-Family, Detached P/S P/S - 2-91(hh) Upper-Story Residential P/S P/S P/S 2-91(kk) Public and Civic Uses Colleges and Universities P P - Community/Government Service P P P/S 2-91(i) Day Care P P P/S 2-91(j) Day Care over 10,000 sq. ft. located on an arterial roadway P P SE Funeral Home P P - Park, Community P P P Park, Linear/Linkage P P P Park, Neighborhood P P P Passenger Terminal P/S P/S - 2-91(z) Place of Worship P P P Place of Worship (with accessory uses not exceeding 2,500 sq. ft.) P/S P/S P/S 2-91(aa) Place of Worship (with accessory uses between 2,500 sq. ft. and 10,000 sq. ft.) P/S P/S - 2-91(aa) Public Safety Facility P P P Schools: Business and Trade P P - Self-Enclosed Monopole P/S P/S - 2-91(qq) Utility, Minor P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Intermediate P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) WTF, Attached P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) WTF, Stealth P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) Commercial Uses Auto Body and Painting Shops SE - - Auto Sales, Rental, or Leasing Facilities P/S P/S - 2-91(f) Auto Service Facilities P/S P/S - 2-91(g) Bed and Breakfast P/S - P/S 2-91(h) Call Center P P - Carwash P/S P/S - 2-91(i) Children's Activity Centers P P - Cosmetic Services P P P/S 2-91(ee) Dog Day Care, Indoor Kennel, Grooming, and Training Facility P P P/S 2-91(m) Event Center P P - Fuel Sales P P P/S 2-91(ee) Hotel/Motel/Lodging P P - Indoor Entertainment Activities P P - Indoor Shooting and Archery Ranges P/S P/S - Chapter 6, 
Article IV Microbrewery (with annual production not exceeding 6,000 barrels) P P - Microbrewery (with annual production between 6,000-15,000 barrels) SE SE - Office P P P/S 2-91(u) Office, Medical P/S P/S P/S 2-91(v) Office/Warehouse P - - Outdoor Entertainment SE SE - 2-91(w) Parking, Commercial P/S P/S - 2-91(j) Residential to Office Conversion P/S P/S P/S 2-91(cc) Restaurants/Bars P/S P/S P/S 2-91(dd) Retail Sales and Services P/S P/S P/S 2-91(ee) Self-Service Storage P/S - - 2-91(gg) Sexually Oriented Businesses P/S - - Chapter 6, 
article III Shooting and Archery Ranges SE SE - Small-Scale Alcohol Production P P - Sports Training Facilities/Specialty Gyms P P - Urgent Care Facility P/S P/S - 2-91(ll)  
Sec. 2-36. - Commercial Lot and Building Dimensional Standards. 
    Commercial zoning districts lot and building dimensional standards chart 
Description Zoning District C-1 C-1a C-2 Standard IH-35/SH-45 frontage Standard IH-35/SH-45 frontage Minimum lot width 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Minimum setback from street (ROW) 15 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft. Minimum rear setback 0 ft./10 ft 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. for 1-story 
buildings; 
100 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a masonry fence is used 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. for 1-story 
buildings; 
80 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories Minimum side setback 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. for 1-story 
buildings; 
100 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a masonry fence is used 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. for 1-story 
buildings; 
80 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories Minimum setback for accessory building 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. Maximum height of principal building 5 stories 12 stories 5 stories 12 stories 2 stories Maximum height of accessory building 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft.  
Additional notes: 
(1)  Special purpose lots, including but not limited to landscape lots and utility lots, may be exempted from these requirements. 
(2)  All required setbacks shall be free from any encroachments, including but not limited to, accessory buildings or structures, eaves, roof overhangs, box windows, and fireplaces. Air conditioning units and other similar ground-mounted equipment are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  The minimum rear and side setbacks shall be 10 feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. The setback may be increased based on current fire and building codes. 
(4)  The minimum setback for accessory buildings shall be five (5) feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures are prohibited in any street yard, except for portable buildings being used by public or private schools or places of worship, which may be located in a side or rear street yard. 
Secs. 2-37-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-41. - In general. 
    The employment and industrial districts are intended to serve as areas where large numbers of people are employed on a daily basis. These areas see slightly less activity during midday hours than commercial districts and little activity during evening and overnight hours. They accommodate a range of buildings including single offices, business parks, and industrial parks, and uses that include professional services, call centers, research and development, and manufacturing and assembly, among others. Compatibility buffers are always required for the less intense developments that are adjacent to residential neighborhoods, and more intense developments are prohibited from locating adjacent to neighborhoods altogether. 
Sec. 2-42. - OF-1 (General Office) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use primarily devoted to offices and related accessory uses. This district often serves as a transition between more intense commercial uses and residential areas. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the OF-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the OF-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-49. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the OF-1 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  General office design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the OF-1 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Selection of materials, color, building orientation, articulation, and windows shall reflect the design themes established in the neighborhood which the proposed development borders. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  At least 50 percent of the exterior wall finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, or brick, except for doors, windows and trim. 
b.  Other materials allowed for the exterior wall finish are: stucco; fiber cement siding; architecturally finished steel or metal; glass with steel framing; or architectural concrete masonry units (CMU). These materials shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the total exterior wall finish (breezeways are not included in this calculation). However, 100 percent stucco may be permitted in conjunction with a tile roof. The use of materials other than those listed in this section and in subsection (e)(1)a, above, shall be limited to accent features. 
c.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 25% of the total exterior wall finish. Flat, unarticulated panels are prohibited. 
d.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(4)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
b.  Main entrances shall be visible to pedestrians from the street or a public plaza on the primary frontage. 
c.  Buildings with multiple street frontages shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
(5)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Offset in building elevation. 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Building elevation variation . The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line, or change in exterior wall finish. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0206, § II, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-43. - OF-2 (Mid-Rise Office) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium to high intensity land use primarily devoted to offices and related accessory uses. This district is intended to allow for more intense development that is compatible with commercial and employment zoning districts. 
(b)  Location criteria. 
(1)  New OF-2 zoning is prohibited adjacent to existing or planned single-family neighborhoods. 
(2)  OF-2 zoned properties shall front on a designated arterial roadway or freeway/tollway. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the OF-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(d)  Lot and building dimensional standards . In addition to the standards found in Sec. 2-49, the following regulations apply to the OF-2 district: 
(1)  The maximum height shall be five (5) stories or 75 feet, whichever is less, except that properties with frontage on and taking access from IH 35, SH 45, or SH 130 shall be permitted to reach 12 stories. 
(e)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the OF-2 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 25 feet. 
(f)  Mid-rise office design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the OF-2 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. 
(1)  Exterior wall materials. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. Building materials shall be harmonious and compatible with adjacent developments. 
a.  The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, architectural concrete masonry unit (CMU), glass with steel framing, or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows and trim. The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. 
b.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Color schemes shall be harmonious and compatible with adjacent developments. Accent colors shall be compatible with the main color theme. 
(3)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(4)  Orientation requirements. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 25 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
Sec. 2-44. - BP (Business Park) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium-high intensity land use primarily devoted to office, research and development, and light industrial uses with limited support services in a campus-like setting. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the BP district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the BP district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-49, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-48. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the BP district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 30 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Developments in existence prior to the adoption of this code which have light fixtures exceeding 25 feet may maintain the existing fixture height. 
(e)  Business park building design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the BP district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  The exterior finish of all buildings shall be brick, natural stone, simulated stone, stucco, architecturally finished steel or metal, architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), concrete tilt wall, or glass with steel framing. 
b.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Color schemes shall be harmonious and compatible with adjacent developments. Accent colors shall be compatible with the main color theme. 
(3)  Building articulation. Architectural relief shall be used in building design to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadow to provide visual relief to the building. The following methods of providing building articulation shall be incorporated: 
a.  All buildings shall have horizontal and vertical articulation. Any wall in excess of 100 feet in length facing a public right-of-way shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two (2) feet and extending a minimum of 20 feet in length. No façade facing a right-of-way shall have an uninterrupted length exceeding 100 horizontal feet. 
b.  Buildings that exceed 40 feet in height shall incorporate a change in material application that creates an architectural delineation between the base of the building, the upper levels, and the roof silhouette. Such base delineation shall not be less than 30 percent or more than 40 percent of the overall height of the building. 
c.  Entries shall be recessed or covered with canopies. 
(f)  Business park site design standards . New business park developments shall be designed in a manner that accommodates features such as plazas, courtyards, and similar pedestrian-oriented open spaces between buildings. Each new business park development shall incorporate a minimum of one such feature for every four (4) buildings, and each feature shall be adjacent to a centrally located building. 
Sec. 2-45. - LI (Light Industrial) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of high intensity land use primarily devoted to light manufacturing, assembly and other nonpolluting industries. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the LI district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the LI district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-49. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the LI district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 30 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Developments in existence prior to the adoption of this code which have light fixtures exceeding 25 feet may maintain the existing fixture height. 
(e)  Light industrial design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the LI district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved by the zoning administrator to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, stucco, concrete masonry units (CMU) having a split-face, stone-face, or burnished finish, concrete tilt wall, architectural steel or metal, other steel or metal, or similar material approved in writing by the zoning administrator, except for doors, windows, and trim. 
a.  Architectural steel or metal shall not exceed 33% of the total exterior wall finish. 
b.  Other steel or metal, such as unfinished corrugated aluminum and similar products, shall be prohibited on elevations that face public streets, access drives, or lots zoned for residential uses. 
c.  Quonset style buildings and structures are prohibited. 
Sec. 2-46. - I (Industrial) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To accommodate areas of high intensity land use primarily devoted to traditional industrial uses and vehicle repair facilities, and other nonpolluting industries. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the I district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the I district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-49, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Location. New industrial development is prohibited within 500 feet of single-family and two-family uses or within 500 feet of designated arterial roadways, as defined in Sec. 1-50, or any future designated arterial roadways identified in the general plan, as defined in Sec. 1-50. 
(2)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-48. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the I district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 30 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Developments in existence prior to the adoption of this code which have light fixtures exceeding 25 feet may maintain the existing fixture height. 
Sec. 2-47. - MI (Mining) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To accommodate existing mining operations. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MI district may be found in Sec. 2-48. 
(c)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the MI district: 
(1)  Landscaping . A 250-foot vegetative buffer is required from the property line to active mining operations and buildings. This buffer shall be required for all operations abutting any other district. The buffer may be left in a natural, undisturbed state or may include added plant materials. 
Sec. 2-48. - Permitted Uses in the Employment and Industrial Districts. 
    Summary use table by employment and industrial zoning district 
Use Zoning District OF-1 OF-2 BP LI I MI Supple-
mentary
Use Standard P = Permitted  P/S = Permitted with supplementary use standards  SE = Special Exception needed  - = Prohibited Residential Uses Accessory Dwelling Unit P/S - - - - - 2-91(a) Public and Civic Uses Amenity Center - - P/S - - - 2-91(b) Colleges and Universities - P P - - - Community/Government Services P/S P 2-91(k) Day Care P/S P/S P - - - 2-91(l) Day Care Facilities over 10,000 sq. ft. with frontage on a designated arterial roadway SE - P - - - Monopole - - - P/S P/S - 2-91(qq) Park, Community P P P P P P Park, Linear/Linkage P P P P P P Park, Neighborhood P P P P P P Public Safety Facility P P P P P P Schools: Business or Trade - P P - - - Self-Enclosed Monopole - P/S P/S P/S P/S - 2-91(qq) Utility, Minor P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Intermediate P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Major - - - P/S P/S - 2-91(mm) WTF, Attached P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) WTF, Stealth P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) Commercial Uses Activity Centers, Children's - - - SE - - Auto Body and Painting Shops - - - P/S P/S - 2-91(e) Auto Sales, Rental, or Leasing Facilities - - P/S - - - 2-91(f) Call Center - P P - - - Carwash - - - P/S P/S - 2-91(i) Cosmetic Services P P/S - - - - 2-91(ee) Heavy Equipment and Large Vehicle Sales and Leasing - - - - P - Large Vehicle and Equipment Repair - - - - P/S - 2-91(e) Office P P P P P - Office, Medical P/S P/S P/S - - - 2-91(v) Office/Warehouse - - - P P - Outdoor Shooting and Archery Ranges - - - P/S P/S - Chapter 6, Article IV Parking, Commercial - P/S P/S P P - 2-91(j) Residential to Office Conversion P/S - - - - - 2-91(cc) Restaurant/Bar - P/S P/S - - - 2-91(dd) Retail Sales and Services consisting of predominantly outdoor storage or consumer loading areas - - - P P - Retail Sales and Services - P/S P/S - - - 2-91(ee) Self-Service Storage - - - P/S P/S - 2-91(gg) Shooting and Archery Ranges - - - SE SE SE Small-Scale Alcohol Production - - P/S P P 2-91(ii) Sports Training Facilities/Specialty Gyms - - - SE - - Urgent Care Facility P/S - - - - - 2-91(ll) Vehicle Storage and Towing - - - - P - Industrial Uses Light Industrial Services, Manufacturing, and Assembly - - P/S P P - 2-91(s) Mineral Extraction - - - - - P Warehouse and Freight Movement - - - P P - Waste-Related Services - - - P/S - - 2-91(qq) Wholesale Trade - - P P P -  
Sec. 2-49. - Employment and Industrial Districts Lot and Building Dimensional Standards. 
    Employment and industrial zoning districts lot and building dimensional standards chart 
Description Zoning District OF-1 OF-2 BP LI I Minimum lot width 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Minimum lot size - 2 acres - - - Minimum setback from street (ROW) 20 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. Minimum rear setback 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. for buildings with 1 story; 
100 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories - 50 ft. 100 ft. 50 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a masonry fence is used 40 ft. for buildings with 1 story; 
80 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories - 40 ft. 80 ft. 40 ft. Minimum side setback 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. for buildings with 1 story; 
100 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories - 50 ft. 100 ft. 50 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a masonry fence is used 40 ft. for buildings with 1 story; 
80 ft. for buildings with 2 or more stories - 40 ft. 80 ft. 40 ft. Minimum setback for accessory building 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. Maximum height of principal building 2 stories 5 stories or 
75 feet, 
whichever is less/ 
12 stories 5 stories 2 stories 1 story Maximum height of accessory building 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft.  
Additional notes: 
(1)  Special purpose lots, including but not limited to landscape lots and utility lots, may be exempted from these requirements. 
(2)  All required setbacks shall be free from any encroachments, including but not limited to, accessory buildings or structures, eaves, roof overhangs, box windows, and fireplaces. Air conditioning units and other similar ground-mounted equipment are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  The minimum rear and side setbacks shall be 10 feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. The setback may be increased based on current fire and building codes. 
(4)  The minimum setback for accessory buildings shall be five (5) feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures are prohibited in any street yard, except for portable buildings being used by public or private schools or places of worship, which may be located in a side or rear street yard. 
Secs. 2-50-2-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-55. - In general. 
    The public and civic use zoning districts are intended to accommodate uses drawing large numbers of people at various times of day, typically for non-commercial purposes. Uses include government facilities, hospitals and similar medical institutions, large educational facilities, places of worship, and public open spaces. The public facilities districts are specifically designed for large uses requiring significant amounts of parking, and thus require compatibility buffers when adjacent to residential neighborhoods. The open space district applies to both passive and active recreational areas including parks, floodplains, trails, and scenic areas, and may or may not be developed with low-intensity structures. 
Sec. 2-56. - PF-1 (Public Facilities - Low Intensity) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of low intensity land use primarily devoted to places of worship and other public uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PF-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-60. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the PF-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-61, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-61. 
(2)  Additional height requirement . Places of worship buildings, gyms, or auditoriums shall have a maximum height of 70 ft. provided they do not contain more than two stories. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the PF-1 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  Public facilities - low intensity design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the PF-1 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Selection of materials, color, building orientation, articulation, and windows shall reflect the design themes established in the neighborhood which the proposed development borders. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  At least 50 percent of the exterior wall finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, or brick, except for doors, windows and trim. 
b.  Other materials allowed for the exterior wall finish are: stucco; fiber cement siding; architecturally finished steel or metal; glass with steel framing; or architectural concrete masonry units (CMU). These materials shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the total exterior wall finish (breezeways are not included in this calculation). However, 100 percent stucco may be permitted in conjunction with a tile roof. The use of materials other than those listed in this section and in subsection (e)(1)a, above, shall be limited to accent features. 
c.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 25% of the total exterior wall finish. Flat, unarticulated panels are prohibited. 
d.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(4)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
b.  Main entrances shall be visible to pedestrians from the street or a public plaza on the primary frontage. 
c.  Buildings with multiple street frontages shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
(5)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Offset in building elevation. 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Building elevation variation . The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line, or change in exterior wall finish. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0206, § III, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-57. - PF-2 (Public Facilities - Medium Intensity) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of medium intensity land use primarily devoted to public offices, religious campuses, educational facilities, and assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PF-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-60. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the PF-2 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-61, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-61. 
(2)  Additional height requirement . Places of worship buildings, gyms, or auditoriums shall have a maximum height of 70 ft. provided they do not contain more than two stories. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the PF-2 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(e)  Public facilities - medium intensity design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the PF-2 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Selection of materials, color, building orientation, articulation, and windows shall reflect the design themes established in the neighborhood which the proposed development borders. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  At least 50 percent of the exterior wall finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, or brick, except for doors, windows and trim. 
b.  Other materials allowed for the exterior wall finish are: stucco; fiber cement siding; architecturally finished steel or metal; glass with steel framing; or architectural concrete masonry units (CMU). These materials shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the total exterior wall finish (breezeways are not included in this calculation). However, 100 percent stucco may be permitted in conjunction with a tile roof. The use of materials other than those listed in this section and in subsection (e)(1)a, above, shall be limited to accent features. 
c.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 25% of the total exterior wall finish. Flat, unarticulated panels are prohibited. 
d.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Glass. Mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of all buildings and structures. 
(4)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
b.  Main entrances shall be visible to pedestrians from the street or a public plaza on the primary frontage. 
c.  Buildings with multiple street frontages shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
(5)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Offset in building elevation. 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Building elevation variation . The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line, or change in exterior wall finish. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0206, § IV, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-58. - PF-3 (Public Facilities - High Intensity) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas of high intensity land use primarily devoted to offices, institutions, religious campuses, educational facilities, hospitals, and assisted living facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the PF-3 district may be found in Sec. 2-60. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the PF-3 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-61, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Additional setback requirement . All uses which contain structures in excess of 20 feet in height and which also abut SF (Single-Family) or TF (Two-Family) zoned property, shall be required to meet the following additional setback requirement: for each one foot of height in excess of 20 feet, the structure shall be set back from said abutting property line one extra foot in addition to the minimums set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards in Sec. 2-61. 
(2)  Additional height requirements . 
a.  For buildings located within 500 feet of IH-35 or SH-45, the maximum height of the principal building shall be 12 stories. 
b.  For buildings located within 1,000 feet of a designated arterial roadway, as defined in Sec. 1-50, and more than 500 ft. from SF and TF lots, the maximum height of the principal building shall be 12 stories. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the standards found in chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the PF-3 district: 
(1)  Light fixture height . The height of a light fixture shall not exceed 30 feet, however if a light fixture is within 25 feet of a residential lot line, it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Developments in existence prior to the adoption of this code which have light fixtures exceeding 25 feet may maintain the existing fixture height. 
(2)  Noise. The noise regulations of the Code shall apply, along with the following additional standards: Outdoor paging systems, speakers, and remote ordering appliances shall not be located within 150 feet of any residential district. This standard shall not apply to face-to-face drive-up windows where the following conditions exist: 
a.  Cashiers and customers have direct, face-to-face contact; and 
b.  Drive aisles are adjacent to the principal structure. 
(e)  Public facilities - high intensity design standards. The following design standards apply to all buildings in the PF-3 district. These standards are intended to ensure an attractive built environment in Round Rock. Alternative designs may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator in order to implement a specific, recognized architectural style not accommodated by the design standards below, excluding corporate architecture. Additions to sites and projects with existing buildings may continue the design style that has been previously established. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The building materials of a project shall be durable, require low maintenance, and be of the same or higher quality as surrounding developments. 
a.  For all buildings, except for concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU); and 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of stucco, fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
b.  For buildings utilizing concrete tilt-wall construction: 
1.  At least 75% of the total exterior wall finish, except for doors, windows, and trim, shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stone-face or split-face concrete masonry unit (CMU), or stucco. 
i.  Where stucco exceeds 75% of the total exterior wall finish, a minimum of four-foot (4') wainscot of stone, simulated stone, or brick shall be incorporated. 
2.  No more than 25% may consist of fiber cement siding, architectural steel or metal, CMU other than split-face or stone face, or glass with steel framing, except as modified by subsection (e)(1)e, below. 
c.  New or emerging materials not explicitly permitted herein may comprise a maximum of 25% of the total exterior wall finish if approved in writing by the zoning administrator based upon the product's durability and longevity. 
d.  All CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
e.  Glass with steel framing shall not exceed 25% of the total exterior wall finish for buildings less than three (3) stories tall. Buildings that are three (3) stories or taller may consist of a maximum 50% glass with steel framing. 
(2)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(3)  Orientation requirements. Building elevations that face a public street shall have at least 15 percent of the wall facing the street consist of windows and/or pedestrian entrance areas. 
(4)  Building articulation. All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide substantial architectural interest and style. A minimum of four (4) features from the following list shall be incorporated into the building design: 
a.  Arcades/colonnades. 
b.  Decorative cornices. 
c.  Eaves. 
d.  Sloped or unique roof features (e.g., parapets, mansard). 
e.  Variation of roof lines. 
f.  Arched and/or recessed entryway. 
g.  Arched windows. 
h.  Gable windows. 
i.  Oval or round windows. 
j.  Transom windows. 
k.  Stone coursing around windows. 
l.  Shutters. 
m.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
n.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
o.  Decorative tile or metal. 
p.  Awnings. 
q.  Canopies. 
r.  Storefronts. 
s.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Building elevation variation . The following regulations shall apply to the primary façade and all building elevations facing a public street (right-of-way): 
a.  Changes in wall planes shall be provided with a minimum depth of 12 inches at intervals of not more than 80 feet. A depth of 24 inches is recommended. 
b.  Building elevations shall include a change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material at horizontal intervals of not more than 80 feet. 
c.  Building elevations shall include vertical articulation by means of a minimum of one (1) change in color, texture, and/or exterior wall finish material for any structure exceeding 20 feet in height. 
(6)  The use of a steel framed fabric tension structure or a tensile fabric membrane structure shall be allowed for community recreational facility buildings which contain a minimum of 40,000 square feet of enclosed area. The provisions contained in subsections (e)(1) through (5) of this section shall not apply to such buildings. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0207, § III, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-59. - OS (Open Space) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve land for public and private uses which consist of primarily open space. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the OS district may be found in Sec. 2-60. 
(c)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the OS district: 
(1)  Screening . 
a.  Screening shall be required if a structure or facility is less than 200 feet from a public right-of-way or residential district. 
b.  Wood may be used as a screening material in lieu of the materials required in Sec. 8-40. 
(2)  Outdoor storage. Maintenance yards in the OS district must meet the provisions for general outdoor storage in Sec. 8-65 except that wood may be used as a screening material in lieu of the materials required in Sec. 8-65. 
Sec. 2-60. - Permitted Uses in the Public and Civic Use Districts. 
    Summary use table by public and civic use zoning district 
Use Zoning District PF-1 PF-2 PF-3 OS Supplementary
Use Standard P = Permitted  P/S = Permitted with supplementary use standards  SE = Special Exception needed  - = Prohibited Residential Uses Assisted Living - P P - Dormitory - - P - Pubic and Civic Uses Cemetery, Mausoleum, Columbaria, Memorial Park P P P SE Colleges and Universities - - P/S - 2-91(ff) Community/Government Service - P P P/S 2-91(k) Day Care, all other - - P - Golf Course/Country Club - - - P/S 2-91(n) Hospital - - P - Hospital Heliport - - P/S - 2-91(p) Inpatient Clinic - P P - Institution - - SE - Park, Community P P P P Park, Linear/Linkage P P P P Park, Neighborhood P P P P Park, Regional/Metropolitan - - - P Place of Worship P P P - Place of Worship (with accessory uses not exceeding 2,500 sq. ft.) P/S - - - 2-91(aa) Place of Worship (with accessory uses between 2,500 sq. ft. and 10,000 sq. ft.) P/S - - - 2-91(aa) Place of Worship (with accessory uses not exceeding 20,000 sq. ft.) - P/S - - 2-91(aa) Place of Worship (with unrestricted sq. ft. of accessory uses) - - P/S - 2-91(aa) Private School, Primary or Secondary - P/S - - 2-91(ff) Public Safety Facility P P P P Public School, Elementary or Middle P/S P/S - - 2-91(ff) Public School, High - - P/S - 2-91(ff) Schools: Business or Trade - - P/S - 2-91(ff) Self-Enclosed Monopole - - P/S - 2-91(qq) Utility, Minor P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Intermediate P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Major P/S P/S P/S - 2-91(mm) WTF, Attached P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) WTF, Stealth P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) Commercial Uses Office, Medical - - P - Office, Public P P P - Outdoor Entertainment - - - SE Parking, Commercial - - P/S - 2-91(j) Parking, General P/S P/S P/S - 2-91(j) Research and Development - - P -  
Sec. 2-61. - Public and Civic Use Districts Lot and Building Dimensional Standards. 
    Public and civic use zoning districts lot and building dimensional standards chart 
Description Zoning District PF-1 PF-2 PF-3 Standard IH-35/SH-45 frontage Standard IH-35/SH-45 frontage Standard IH-35/SH-45 frontage Minimum lot width 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Minimum setback from street (ROW) 15 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft. Minimum rear setback 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Minimum rear setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a masonry fence is used 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. Minimum side setback 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. 0 ft./10 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Minimum side setback adjacent to SF/TF lots when a precast concrete panel fence is used 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. Minimum setback for accessory building 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. 0 ft./5 ft. Maximum height of principal building 2 stories 2 stories 2 stories 2 stories 5 stories 12 stories Maximum height of accessory building 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft 15 ft.  
Additional notes: 
(1)  Special purpose lots, including but not limited to landscape lots and utility lots, may be exempted from these requirements. 
(2)  All required setbacks shall be free from any encroachments, including but not limited to, accessory buildings or structures, eaves, roof overhangs, box windows, and fireplaces. Air conditioning units and other similar ground-mounted equipment are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  The minimum rear and side setbacks shall be 10 feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. The setback may be increased based on current fire and building codes. 
(4)  The minimum setback for accessory buildings shall be 5 feet, except that common walls are not required to have a setback. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures are prohibited in any street yard, except for portable buildings being used by public or private schools or places of worship, which may be located in a side or rear street yard. 
Secs. 2-62-2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MIXED-USE AND PUD DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-70. - In general. 
    The intent of the mixed-use and planned unit development (PUD) districts is to permit flexibility in uses and densities not accommodated by traditional zoning districts. This allows a variety of uses to locate on the same building, site, or block, and in structures of varying size and design. Commercial and residential uses, which are usually separated into discrete zoning districts, are encouraged to be combined, along with offices and public open spaces. The close proximity of the different land uses fosters increased pedestrian activity, as residents are able to accomplish a wide variety of tasks in a relatively small area without the continuous need for a vehicle. Additionally, this type of development, whether built in a mixed-use district or in a PUD, allows for the more efficient provision of infrastructure and natural resources. 
Sec. 2-71. - MU-1 (Mixed-Use Historic Commercial Core) district. 
(a)  Purpose . 
(1)  To establish areas of mixed land uses primarily devoted to combining low to moderate density commercial development with limited residential uses. 
(2)  Mixed-use zoning for this district refers to the combining of a variety of complementary commercial uses, such as retail, office, restaurant and entertainment uses, in the same building, on the same site, or in the same block with limited residential on upper stories or as live/work units, creating an active and pedestrian-friendly streetscape. 
(3)  The standards herein are intended to encourage high-quality construction and development that fits the proportions and functional characteristics of a mixed-use district with a traditional block structure. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MU-1 district may be found in Sec. 2-77. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MU-1 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-78, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  The minimum lot width shall be 20 feet for common-wall buildings and 24 feet for freestanding buildings. 
(2)  When courtyards, patios with outdoor seating, and plazas are incorporated into a site, the facade of the building may be recessed. Elements of building articulation such as recessed storefront entries, steps, stoops, and other access features shall qualify as portions of a facade that meet the zero-foot setback. 
(3)  Side wall requirements for separation from adjacent structures, wall construction, and allowable openings for elements such as windows and doors shall be regulated by the Fire Code. 
(4)  Buildings and courtyards, patios with outdoor seating, and plazas shall qualify towards the frontage occupancy. 
(5)  Side setback areas that are part of the required frontage occupancy may include outdoor areas such as courtyards, patios with outdoor seating, and plazas. These areas may also serve as access to an alley or rear parking areas. 
(6)  Maximum setbacks shall be permitted to be adjusted to accommodate conflicts with utility easements. 
(7)  When courtyards, patios with outdoor seating, and plazas are incorporated into the front of a structure, the maximum front setback line shall be defined with a low wall, fence/gate, or other defining feature. 
(8)  Site furniture shall be permitted within the required setbacks. 
(9)  The minimum height of a principal building shall be 20 feet. 
(10)  Designated historic structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or 30 feet in height. 
(11)  The frontage occupancy shall be a minimum of 90%. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this code, the following regulations apply to the MU-1 district: 
(1)  Parking. 
a.  Parking requirements. Except as provided in subsection (2) below, on-site parking is not required for any use in the MU-1 district. 
b.  On-site surface-level parking. 
1.  If on-site surface-level parking is proposed or required it shall be in accordance with the following requirements in addition to standards provided in chapter 8, article VI of this code: 
i.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
ii.  Wherever possible, alleys shall be utilized to access on-site parking areas. 
iii.  If a property owner desires vehicular access from the alley and the alley is not improved, the property owner shall be responsible for the necessary improvements from the alley entrance to the entrance of the parking area. 
iv.  Vehicular entrances and exits for all parking areas shall be no wider than the minimum standard allowed by the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
v.  On-site parking areas are prohibited in any street yard, and all parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any street-facing building facade. 
vi.  All existing driveways that are no longer required for parking access shall be removed and replaced with landscaping at the time of site plan review and street improvements installed to match adjacent areas. 
vii.  On-site parking areas visible from a public street shall be screened by a building or wall, hedge or other landscaping screen that is at least three feet in height. 
c.  On-street parking. 
1.  The applicant for a building permit may provide interim on-street parking adjacent to the property if the existing right-of-way will accommodate it. The materials, design and location of the interim parking improvements shall be in accordance with the downtown master plan and approved by the city. 
d.  Structured parking. All structured parking garages where any of the parking is above grade shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The first 20 feet in height of the frontage of a garage that faces a public street, except for pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress areas, shall require either a ground-level use or vehicle parking areas to be screened from public view by means of landscaping or manufactured materials. 
2.  Exterior garage building materials shall be limited to natural stone, simulated stone, brick, or split-face or stone-face concrete masonry units (CMU). In addition, architectural steel or metal may be used as accent features. 
3.  The glazing percentage requirements provided in subsection (e)(6) shall apply to ground-level occupant spaces, if any. 
4.  Pedestrian access. 
i.  Pedestrian ingress and egress to all parking structures shall provide access directly to a street or public frontage except for underground parking levels, where pedestrians may exit the parking area directly into a building. 
ii.  Pedestrians shall have direct access from parking areas to the street on the primary frontage. 
iii.  There shall be direct access to the street from commercial uses. 
5.  Vehicular access shall be from the secondary frontage where possible. 
6.  Service access shall be from an alley where possible. Where an alley does not exist, service access shall be from a secondary frontage where one exists. 
(2)  Traffic impact and parking generation studies. 
a.  A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall not be required for any development in the MU-1 district. 
b.  A parking generation study shall be required for any new development, conversion, or change of use within a building that has a gross floor area of greater than 10,000 square feet, and for an assembly use of any size, such as an event center. The parking generation study shall include the following: 
1.  A demand analysis of parking need based on industry standards; and 
2.  Characteristics of those using parking, including turnover rate. 
c.  In instances where a required parking generation study determines that a use will utilize ten or more on-street parking spaces at a turnover rate of greater than every two hours, the use shall be required to identify alternative parking solutions. Alternative solutions may include a shared parking agreement as described in Sec. 8-47, on-site parking, or other solution as approved by the transportation director. 
(3)  Access and circulation. 
a.  Vehicle access and circulation standards provided in Sec. 8-60 apply to development in the MU-1 district. These include requirements for connections to existing and future roads, connection to adjacent development, and design requirements for driveways. 
b.  New drive-through services shall be prohibited. Buildings with existing drive-throughs shall be permitted to change the location or configuration of a drive-through in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Off-street vehicle stacking spaces are prohibited in any front street yard and shall meet the stacking area standards and design provided in subsection Sec. 8-54. 
2.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be no wider than the minimum required for one vehicle and shall be in accordance with the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
(4)  Fencing design standards. The following standards apply to fencing in the MU-1 district, in addition to the applicable portions of Sec. 8-35: 
a.  Lot fences shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or wrought iron. Other decorative masonry materials or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the zoning administrator. Single-family uses may install new wood fencing or replace existing wood fencing with the same or similar material in accordance with subsection (d)(4)e, below. 
b.  A wrought-iron or equivalent fence in the street yard shall be permitted to reach a height of six (6) feet. 
c.  Opaque fencing shall be permitted in the street yard for the purpose of screening service areas containing supplies, equipment and restrooms, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
d.  Fences in all other yards shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
e.  All fences shall provide a finished face to the exterior of the property. 
f.  Decorative fencing around patios and decks may be of a material other than one specified above, but shall be approved by the zoning administrator. Galvanized steel or similar welded wire materials shall be no smaller than 14-gauge, and shall be framed on all sides with wood or metal rails and posts. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be required to be installed in the MU-1 district only in conjunction with outdoor courtyards, patio and plaza areas on private property. A linear length equal to 50 percent of the perimeter of said courtyard, patio or plaza exclusive of gates, entryways and the building facade shall include plantings of shrubs at a rate of one shrub per four linear feet and ornamental trees at a rate of one tree per 15 linear feet. Shrubs and trees shall be installed in planters or in the ground along the perimeter or integrated into the courtyard, patio or plaza, and shall be maintained in accordance with Sec. 8-10. 
b.  Pervious concrete and pervious pavers for parking and maneuvering areas are permitted. Other permeable surfaces may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
c.  For landscaping for expansions in subsection (f) or a change of use and conversions in subsection (g), foundation treatment in accordance with the Category 3 requirement in Sec. 8-10 shall be required when the structure does not meet the front and side setback requirements. 
d.  Minor modifications to design and development standards may be permitted to protect and accommodate protected trees as identified in chapter 8, article III. 
e.  Decorative walls for the screening of stages or bandstands shall be wood, natural stone, simulated stone, or brick and shall provide a finished face to abutting properties and rights-of-way. 
(6)  Outdoor display and storage. 
a.  General outdoor storage is prohibited. 
b.  Outdoor display and limited outdoor storage shall be allowed in accordance with Sec. 8-65. 
c.  Limited outdoor storage is prohibited in the street yard. 
(7)  Ground-mounted equipment . All ground-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view and adjacent properties by a stone or brick wall. 
(8)  Site furniture. 
a.  Site furniture, as defined in Sec. 1-50, shall be required to be of a commercial grade and manufactured for exterior use. 
b.  Site furniture may also include moveable outdoor site features such as outdoor cafe tables and planters. 
c.  No plastic site furniture shall be permitted. 
(9)  Special conditions for public open space including parks, trails, creeks, and public plazas. 
a.  No opaque fences shall be allowed on the portion of a lot abutting any public open space. Wrought iron fencing or equivalent may be used. 
b.  There shall be no loading or service areas between the buildings and public open spaces. 
c.  An eight-foot wide linear landscaped area in accordance with Sec. 8-10(g)(4) shall be required on lots abutting public open space that have their parking between the buildings and the public open space. If site constraints inhibit the incorporation of the required landscaped area, alternative landscaping may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(10)  Light fixture height . The height of a freestanding light fixture shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(11)  Noise . Exterior speakers are only permitted for service and gathering areas at restaurants/bars and public plazas. Said speakers shall be oriented in such a manner to minimize the amount of sound audible to adjacent properties and in the right-of-way. 
(e)  Mixed-use historic commercial core design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the MU-1 district, except for certain expansions, as addressed in subsection (f). Alternate design standards may be approved by the zoning administrator to permit a more flexible or creative design that still meets the intent of the MU-1 district design standards. 
(1)  Exterior wall materials. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, brick, and/or stucco, except for doors, windows, accents, and trim. The use of wood shingles or wood siding shall be limited to accent features. 
(2)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Buildings shall have their main entrance off a public street or plaza. Entrances shall be easily accessible for pedestrians from the street, a plaza or the sidewalk. 
b.  Where ramps or other accessibility-related structures are installed, they shall be integrated into the building design by facing the structure with the same exterior materials as the building, using the same masonry material that was used in the landscape if applicable, or screening structures behind planters and other landscape features. 
(3)  Exterior color. 
a.  Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
b.  Color schemes shall be compatible with the era and architectural style of the building. 
(4)  Building elevation variation. 
a.  The design of the primary facade of the ground floor of all buildings shall be symmetrical by the placement of windows, doors and other architectural features. 
b.  The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line or architectural materials. 
c.  The composition of windows and other major features shall relate to the wall plane between each offset or other feature identified in subsection (e)(4)b. 
d.  A horizontal design feature between the first and second floors of a building shall be indicated on the building's primary facade. Examples of design features delineating first and second floors include awnings, canopies, transoms, moldings, balconies, pergolas, wainscoting, decorative stone or brick band, or changes in color or texture. 
e.  Where a single occupant occupies more than 60 feet of street frontage on the primary facade of a building, the primary facade shall appear to have multiple primary entrances with no more than 50 feet between entries. 
(5)  Building articulation. 
a.  All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide architectural interest and style. 
b.  The following is a list of design features that may be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of five (5) of the following: 
1.  Decorative cornices. 
2.  Eaves. 
3.  Arched windows. 
4.  Gable windows. 
5.  Transom windows. 
6.  Multiple sashed and/or multiple-paned upper story windows. 
7.  Shutters. 
8.  Recessed entryways. 
9.  Forecourt. 
10.  Storefront. 
11.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
12.  Decorative tile. 
13.  Arcade/gallery. 
14.  Veranda, porch or balcony. 
15.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
16.  Stone coursing around windows. 
17.  Simply designed secondary facades when compared to primary facades. 
18.  Metal canopies. 
19.  Fabric awnings that relate to window and door bays. 
20.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
c.  For buildings with a primary facade length of greater than 120 feet, offsets of at least two feet shall be required for every 60 feet of building facade. 
(6)  Windows. In order to ensure appropriate proportion, shape, position, location, pattern and size of windows on a building, the following shall be required: 
a.  Windows shall be provided with relief. Examples include architectural surround, trim, changes in color, and changes in texture or coursing. 
b.  The ground floor of the primary facade shall have a minimum of 60 percent glazing with a minimum light transmittance of 70 percent. The maximum sill height shall be 24 inches; however, 18 inches is recommended. 
c.  Upper floors of the primary facade shall have a minimum of 30 percent glazing. 
d.  At least 25 percent of the wall area on any side or rear elevation facing a public street, alley, park, or plaza shall consist of glazing or as permitted by the building code, whichever is less. 
e.  Mullions shall not be placed between panes of glass in windows and doors. 
f.  To assist with energy efficiency and solar gain the requirements in this subsection may be reduced by the zoning administrator to the extent that the required level or location of glazing conflicts with the standards of the building code, a recognized green building program, or the functionality of the structure. 
(7)  Glass. Except for photovoltaic cells, mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings and structures. 
(8)  Roof pitch. The roof pitch for a structure that shares a common or immediately abutting wall with another structure shall not be visible from any portion of an adjacent right-of-way. 
(9)  Roofing materials. 
a.  Roofing materials for pitched roofs shall consist of a minimum 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, copper or other similar materials as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. 
b.  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by parapets so as to not be visible from an abutting street, public plaza or public open space. The parapet shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
(10)  Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies attached to buildings shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so as to avoid obscuring details of the building facade. 
b.  Fabric awnings for windows shall be a drop-front style, except at arched window openings, and shall relate to each window or bay. 
c.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so that there is a minimum clearance of eight feet at its lowest point when over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway. 
d.  Awnings and canopies may encroach up to 10 feet or 66 percent of the distance from the building face to the curb, whichever is less. 
(f)  Expansions. 
(1)  Expansions that are less than 35 percent of the existing gross floor area shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Expansions shall reflect the architectural style of the original building, including roof, articulation, windows, doors, and exterior finish. If the existing style is not desired for the expanded portion of the structure, the expansion shall meet the design standards provided in subsection (d), as applicable. 
b.  Newly constructed portions of the building shall meet all applicable density and development standards in subsection (c). 
(2)  The cumulative expansion of over 35 percent of the gross floor area over any five-year period shall be required to incorporate a minimum of three improvements to each street-facing facade in accordance with subsection (d). 
(g)  Conversions. 
(1)  Conversions in the MU-1 district from single-family residential to a nonresidential use shall meet the above density and development standards pertaining to the following: 
a.  Parking (subsection (d)(1)); 
b.  Traffic impact and parking generation studies (subsection (d)(2)); 
c.  Access and circulation (subsection (d)(3)); 
d.  Fencing design standards (subsection (d)(4)); 
e.  Landscaping (subsection (d)(5)); 
f.  Outdoor display and storage (subsection (d)(6)); 
g.  Site furniture (subsection (d)(7)); and 
h.  Special conditions for public open space (subsection (d)(8)). 
(2)  The following requirements from the district design standards (subsection (e)) may apply when changes to the exterior of a building are being made to a conversion: 
a.  Exterior wall finish (subsection (e)(1)); 
b.  Orientation requirements (subsection (e)(2)); 
c.  Exterior color (subsection (e)(3)); 
d.  Glass (subsection (e)(7)); 
e.  Roofing materials (subsection (e)(9)); 
f.  Awnings and canopies (subsection (e)(10)); and 
g.  Signs (subsection (e)(11)). 
(3)  Expansions in the gross floor area during the conversion process shall meet the standards in subsection (f) above, as applicable. 
(4)  Driveways that access garages and carports shall no longer be permitted to be used for that purpose. Driveways may still be used for access to on-site parking in permitted locations if access from an alley or secondary frontage is not possible. 
(h)  If a structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent by a natural or manmade disaster, not including damage caused intentionally or negligently by the owner, the site layout and building footprint may be rebuilt to the pre-existing building and site form, and the structure may be expanded up to 35 percent of the pre-existing gross floor area. However, if the building official has not issued a certificate of occupancy within five years following the date of destruction of the structure, all future use of the property must conform to all MU-1 standards. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0205, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-72. - MU-2 (Mixed-Use Downtown Medium Density) district. 
(a)  Purpose . 
(1)  To establish areas of mixed land uses primarily devoted to combining moderate density residential development with moderate density commercial development. Mixed-use zoning for this district refers to the combining of complementary residential and commercial uses in the same building, on the same site, or in the same block. 
(2)  The standards herein are not intended to be of a particular style or period, but to encourage high-quality construction and development that fits the proportions and functional characteristics of a mixed-use district with a traditional block structure. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MU-2 district may be found in Sec. 2-77, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  In order for a day care to qualify for a special exception, an existing day care shall not be located within a 750-foot radius of the proposed day care, measured from property line to property line. 
(2)  In order for an eating establishment with an outdoor cooking area to qualify for a special exception, no outdoor cooking areas shall be permitted to share a common lot line with an existing single-family use. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MU-2 district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-78, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Steps, stoops and other access features are allowed in the front setback. For courtyard multifamily, the setback may be more than the maximum as long as the courtyard fills the space from the maximum setback to the facade of any building. 
(2)  When a garage for an existing single-family dwelling takes access from the front of the property, it shall be set back from the primary facade of the house. 
(3)  Side wall requirements for separation from adjacent structures, wall construction, and allowable openings for elements such as windows and doors shall be regulated by the fire code. 
(4)  Height (number of stories) includes mezzanines or other occupiable levels. Rooftop decks and patios shall not be included in the number of stories, but structures placed on rooftop decks and patios shall qualify towards the height requirement. 
(5)  Maximum setback shall be permitted to be adjusted to accommodate conflicts with utility easements. 
(6)  Site furniture shall be permitted within the required setbacks. 
(7)  For properties within 300 feet of the Interstate 35 frontage road, the maximum height shall be eight (8) stories. For properties beyond 300 feet but within 1,100 feet of the Interstate 35 frontage road, the maximum height shall be six (6) stories. For properties beyond 1,100 feet but within 1,750 feet of the Interstate 35 frontage road, the maximum height shall be four (4) stories. All other properties shall have a maximum height of three (3) stories. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this code, the following regulations apply to the MU-2 district: 
(1)  Parking. In accordance with the downtown master plan, the following standards are meant to encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment by minimizing curb cuts and the presence of on-site parking. Where on-site parking is incorporated, it shall be placed in an unobtrusive location that minimizes impacts to pedestrian circulation. 
a.  On-site parking. 
b.  On-site parking may consist of surface-level or structured parking. 
1.  On-site parking is not required for nonresidential establishments, with the following exceptions: 
i.  Overnight accommodations at the ratio provided in Sec. 8-46. 
ii.  The residential portion of a live/work unit. 
iii.  Parking determined to be required as a result of a parking generation study performed in accordance with subsection (2) below. Alternative solutions may include a shared parking agreement as described in Sec. 8-47, on-site parking, or other solution as approved by the transportation director. 
2.  On-site parking shall be required for all residential uses, or residential portions of any building. 
i.  Required residential parking. 
Single-family detached: Two spaces 
Other residential units (multifamily, upper-story residential): 
1 Bedroom: One space 
2 Bedrooms or more: Two spaces 
For residential units without defined bedrooms, including the residential portion of live/work units: 
Under 800 square feet: One space 
800 square feet or more: Two spaces 
ii.  New garages for residential units. 
(i)  The location of new garages and their associated driveways shall be approved by the city. 
(ii)  Garages are prohibited in any street yard. 
c.  If on-site surface-level parking is proposed or required, it shall be in accordance with the following requirements in addition to standards provided in chapter 8, article VI of this code: 
1.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
2.  Wherever possible, alleys shall be utilized to access on-site parking areas. 
3.  If a property owner desires vehicular access from the alley and the alley is not improved, the property owner shall be responsible for the necessary improvements from the alley entrance to the entrance of the parking area. 
4.  Vehicular entrances to all parking areas shall be no wider than the minimum standard allowed by the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
5.  On-site parking areas are prohibited in any street yard, and all parking shall be setback a minimum of five feet from any street-facing building facade. 
6.  All existing driveways that are no longer required for parking access shall be removed and replaced with landscaping at the time of site plan review and street improvements installed to match adjacent areas. 
7.  On-site parking areas visible from a public street shall be screened by a building or wall, hedge or other landscaping screen that is at least three feet in height. 
d.  For lots located on Brushy Creek or Lake Creek, on-site parking is permitted in the street yard in order to minimize the presence of parking along the creek frontage. Parking lots with more than 30 spaces shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 8-10(f)(1) and (g)(1). 
e.  On-street parking. 
1.  The applicant for a building permit may provide interim on-street parking adjacent to the property, if the existing right-of-way will accommodate it. The materials, design and location of the interim parking improvements shall be in accordance with the downtown master plan and approved by the city. 
f.  Structured parking. All structured parking garages where any of the parking is above grade shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The first 20 feet in height of the frontage of a garage that faces a public street, except for pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress areas, shall require either a ground-level use or vehicle parking areas to be screened from view from a public street by means of landscaping or manufactured materials. 
2.  Exterior garage building materials shall be limited to natural stone, simulated stone, brick, or split-face or stone-face concrete masonry units (CMU). In addition, architectural steel or metal may be used as accent features. 
3.  The glazing percentage requirements provided in subsection (e)(7) shall apply to ground-level occupant spaces, if any. 
4.  Pedestrian access. 
i.  Pedestrian ingress and egress to all parking structures shall provide access directly to a street or public frontage except for underground parking levels, where pedestrians may exit the parking area directly into a building. 
ii.  Pedestrians shall have direct access from parking areas to the street on the primary frontage. 
iii.  There shall be direct access to the street from commercial uses. 
5.  Vehicular access shall be from the secondary frontage where possible. 
6.  Service access shall be from an alley where possible. Where an alley does not exist, service access shall be from a secondary frontage where one exists and shall be enclosed or screened from view. 
g.  Off-site parking. Off-site parking shall be permitted on a limited basis in accordance with the standards found in subsection (d)(2)c. below. 
(2)  Traffic impact and parking generation studies. 
a.  A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall not be required for any development in the MU-2 district. 
b.  A parking generation study for nonresidential uses shall be required for any new development, conversion, or change of use within a building that has a gross floor area of greater than 10,000 square feet, and for an assembly use of any size, such as an event center. 
1.  The parking generation study shall include the following criteria: 
i.  A demand analysis of parking need based on industry standards. 
ii.  Characteristics of those using parking, including turnover rate. 
2.  In instances where a required parking generation study determines that a use will utilize ten or more on-street parking spaces at a turnover rate of greater than every two hours, the use shall be required to identify alternative parking solutions. Alternative solutions may include a shared parking agreement as described in subsection Sec. 8-47, on-site parking, or other solution as approved by the transportation director. 
c.  The purpose of this subsection is to permit, on a limited basis, private parking on a lot without buildings and/or not on the same site as the land use or uses associated with the parking. 
1.  In order to determine whether parking may occur on a lot separate from its associated land use(s), a parking generation study shall be submitted by an applicant when parking demand for proposed land use(s) in a development exceeds available parking based on the commercial parking standards in Sec. 8-46 for the proposed use(s). 
2.  Available parking is determined by the number of spaces on private property outside of the street yard and improved parking spaces in the right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
3.  A parking generation study for this analysis shall include the following criteria: 
i.  The parking demand of the proposed use or uses based on the standards found in Sec. 8-46; 
ii.  The number of on-site parking spaces associated with a development that are not located in the street yard; and 
iii.  The number of spaces that will be improved in the right-of-way in accordance with the City's downtown parking plan for any road frontage associated with a development. These spaces may or may not be determined to meet demand depending on the timeline for public improvement. 
4.  If the parking generation study determines that additional parking is necessary, the applicant may be required to provide that parking at an alternate location. Parking may be provided through a shared parking agreement or if the need is demonstrated, parking may be located on a separate private lot for the associated use even if the parking is located in the street yard. Private parking lots shall meet the following standards: 
i.  Parking lots shall be designed in accordance with City standards including parking space design and surfacing requirements. 
ii.  Driveways shall be no greater than the minimum width required by City standards. 
iii.  Parking lots shall meet the following requirements for interior parking lot landscaping and landscape buffers: 
(i)  Interrupting islands shall not be required. 
(ii)  End islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking bay and shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet from face of curb to face of curb. Head-to-head parking bays shall include two (2) such end islands. Each end island shall have one (1) large three (3) inch caliper shade tree and meet additional planting requirements for end islands in accordance with Sec. 8-10(f). In lieu of end islands, an island at each corner of a lot may replace end islands but shall have the same planting requirements. Existing healthy trees of a protected species in appropriate locations may be used as credits for these required trees as described in Sec. 8-10(f)(1)f. 
(iii)  Perimeter vegetation consisting of a solid hedge row of evergreen shrubs planted at three (3) feet on-center shall provide screening from the ground to a minimum height of 36 inches, except for walkway and driveway access areas. 
(iv)  Parking lots with greater than 30 spaces shall meet the interior parking lot landscaping and landscape buffers in Secs. 8-10(f) and (g), rather than those in this section. 
(v)  All parking lot landscaping shall be irrigated in accordance with Sec. 8-10(i). 
iv.  Any parking lot that shares a property line with a single-family use shall install a six (6) foot tall masonry fence to screen vehicles from view in lieu of perimeter vegetation. This requirement does not alter the requirement of end islands along the affected property lines. 
v.  Parking shall not be used for commercial, for-profit purposes. 
vi.  Trucks, tractor-trailers, semi-trucks, and semi-trailers shall not be parked in parking lots. Panel trucks, pickup trucks, and those motor vehicles necessary and accessory to the operation of the associated use may utilize the parking lot as long as the vehicle has no more than two (2) axles. 
(3)  Access and circulation. 
a.  Vehicle access and circulation standards provided in Sec. 8-60 apply to all new development. These include requirements for connections to existing and future roads, connection to adjacent development, and design requirements for driveways. 
b.  Drive-throughs shall be prohibited except on lots fronting on Mays Street. The following conditions shall apply to any site where a drive-through is incorporated: 
1.  Only one business on a site shall have a drive-through. 
2.  Drive-throughs shall be part of a building containing two or more occupants or uses. 
3.  The principal use associated with the drive-through shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of a single-story building. For multi-story buildings, the principal use may occupy the entire first floor. 
4.  Off-street vehicle stacking spaces are prohibited in any front street yard and shall meet the stacking area standards and design provided in Sec. 8-54. 
5.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be no wider than the minimum required for one vehicle and shall be in accordance with the city's Design and Construction Standards. 
(4)  Lot fencing design standards. The following standards apply to fencing in the MU-2 district, in addition to the applicable standards of Sec. 8-35: 
a.  Fences shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or wrought iron. Other decorative masonry materials, reinforced concrete, or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the zoning administrator. Wood fending may be permitted if deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator based on the architecture and exterior materials of the principal building. Single-family uses may install new wood fencing or replace existing wood fencing with the same or a similar material and in accordance with subsection (d)(4)b, below. 
b.  All fences shall provide a finished face to abutting single-family or townhouse uses. 
c.  Fences outside the street yard may be eight (8) feet in height to accommodate topographical changes, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
d.  A wrought iron or similar transparent fence in the street yard shall be permitted to reach a height of six (6) feet. 
e.  Fences shall be eight (8) feet in height where outdoor rear or side dining or patio areas associated with eating establishments and indoor entertainment uses share a common lot line with a residential use, except for multi-story apartments and upper story residential. 
f.  Decorative street yard fencing of a material other than one specified above may be approved by the zoning administrator, except that chain link fencing is prohibited. 
g.  Opaque fencing of a maximum of six (6) feet in height shall be permitted in the street yard for the purpose of screening service areas containing supplies, equipment and restrooms, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
a.  Where the building setback provides adequate space, landscaping foundation treatment shall be required in accordance with the Category 3 standards in Sec. 8-10. 
b.  Minor modifications to design and development standards may be permitted to protect and accommodate protected trees as identified in chapter 8, article III. 
c.  Screening for parking shall consist of a building, wall, or hedge a minimum three feet in height as described in subsection (d)(1)c.7 above. 
d.  Pervious concrete and pervious pavers for parking and maneuvering areas are permitted. Other permeable surfaces may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Outdoor storage and display. 
a.  General outdoor storage is prohibited. 
b.  Outdoor display and limited outdoor storage shall be allowed in accordance with Sec. 8-65. 
c.  Limited outdoor storage is prohibited in the street yard. 
(7)  Ground-mounted equipment . Screening for air conditioning units and electrical transformers shall be in conformance with Sec. 8-40. All other ground-mounted equipment, including gas or liquid canisters and tanks, shall be screened from public view and adjacent properties by a stone or brick wall. 
(8)  Site furniture. 
a.  Site furniture for nonresidential uses, as defined in Sec. 1-50, shall be required to be of a commercial grade and manufactured for exterior use. 
b.  Site furniture may also include moveable outdoor site features such as outdoor café tables and planters. 
(9)  Special conditions for public open space including parks, trails, creeks, and public plazas. 
a.  No opaque fences shall be allowed on the portion of a lot abutting any public open space. Wrought iron fencing or equivalent may be used. 
b.  There shall be no loading or service areas between the buildings and public open spaces. 
c.  An eight-foot wide linear landscaped area in accordance with Sec. 8-10(g)(4) shall be required on lots abutting public open space that have their parking between the buildings and the public open space. If site constraints inhibit the incorporation of the required landscaped area, alternative landscaping may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(10)  Light fixture height . The height of a freestanding light fixture shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(11)  Noise . Exterior speakers are only permitted for service and gathering areas at restaurants/bars and public plazas. Said speakers shall be oriented in such a manner to minimize the amount of sound audible to adjacent properties and in the right-of-way. 
(e)  Mixed-use downtown medium density design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the MU-2 district, except for certain expansions, as addressed in subsection (g). Additional standards for apartments, single-family residential uses, structured parking, expansions, and conversions are provided below this subsection and replace their counterparts in this subsection where applicable. Alternate design standards may be approved by the zoning administrator to permit a more flexible or creative design that meets the intent of the MU-2 district design standards. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), glass, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows, accents and trim. 
a.  Neither fiber cement siding nor corrugated or ribbed metal shall comprise more than 33 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
b.  Architectural CMU shall have an ashlar pattern. 
c.  The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. 
d.  Other wall materials or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Orientation requirements. 
a.  Buildings shall have their main entrance off a public street or plaza. Entrances shall be easily accessible for pedestrians from the street, a plaza or the sidewalk. 
b.  Buildings on corner lots shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
c.  Where ramps or other accessibility-related structures are installed such that they are visible from the right-of-way, they shall be integrated into the building design by facing the structure with the same exterior materials as the building, using the same stone material that was used in the landscape if applicable, or screening structures behind planters and other landscape features. 
(3)  Exterior color. Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(4)  Building elevation variation. 
a.  The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 35 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line or architectural materials. 
b.  For buildings with a primary facade length of greater than 140 feet, offsets of at least three feet in depth shall be required for every 70 feet of facade length. 
c.  The composition of windows and other major features shall relate to the wall plane between each offset or other feature identified in subsection (e)(4)b, immediately above. 
(5)  Building articulation. 
a.  All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide architectural interest and style. 
b.  The following is a list of design features that may be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of five (5) of the following: 
1.  Decorative cornices. 
2.  Eaves. 
3.  Bow window. 
4.  Bay window. 
5.  Arched window. 
6.  Gable window. 
7.  Transom windows. 
8.  Multiple sashed and/or paned upper story windows. 
9.  Oval or round windows. 
10.  Shutters. 
11.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
12.  Recessed entryways. 
13.  Storefront (for retail uses). 
14.  Arcade/gallery (for retail uses). 
15.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
16.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
17.  Decorative tile. 
18.  Veranda, porch or balcony. 
19.  Projected wall or dormer. 
20.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
21.  Decorative caps and chimneys. 
22.  Stone coursing around windows. 
23.  Metal canopies. 
24.  Fabric awnings that relate to window and door bays. 
25.  Other features as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Special design features. The following is a list of special design features that shall be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building and site design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of at least one of the following: 
a.  Stoops. 
b.  Rooftop decks. 
c.  Patios. 
d.  Decorative street yard fencing. 
e.  Low masonry walls at property lines. 
f.  Dooryard. 
g.  Forecourt. 
(7)  Windows. In order to ensure appropriate proportion, shape, position, location, pattern and size of windows on a building, the following shall be required: 
a.  The entire primary facade shall have a minimum of 30 percent glazing. The ground floor of the primary facade shall have a minimum of 30 percent glazing. Upper floors may have less than 30 percent glazing as long as the entire primary facade has the minimum of 30 percent. All glazing on the primary facade of the ground floor shall have a minimum light transmittance of 70 percent. 
b.  The maximum sill height on the ground floor shall be 30 inches; however, 18 inches is recommended for retail uses. Sill height requirements shall not apply to multifamily. 
c.  At least 25 percent of the wall area on any side or rear elevation facing a public street, creek, park, or plaza shall consist of glazing or as permitted by the building code, whichever is less. 
d.  To assist with energy efficiency and solar gain the requirements in this subsection may be reduced by the zoning administrator to the extent that the required level or location of glazing conflicts with the standards of the building code, a recognized green building program, or the functionality of the structure. 
(8)  Glass. Except for photovoltaic cells, mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings and structures. 
(9)  Roofing materials. 
a.  Roofing materials for pitched roofs shall consist of a minimum 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, copper or other similar materials as approved by the zoning administrator. Portions of the roof shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks, provided that such flat areas are screened by pitched sections of the roof that meet the roofing material requirements. 
b.  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by parapets so as to not be visible from an abutting street, public plaza or public open space. The parapet shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
(10)  Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies attached to buildings shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so as to avoid obscuring details of the building facade. 
b.  Fabric awnings for windows shall be a drop-front style, except at arched window openings, and shall relate to each window or bay. 
c.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so that there is a minimum clearance of eight feet at its lowest point when over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway. 
d.  Awnings and canopies may encroach up to ten feet or 66 percent of the distance from the building face to the curb, whichever is less. 
(f)  Multifamily. All residential uses that consist of multiple dwelling units that are not in combination with a commercial use shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Dwelling forms. Regardless of the number of residential units, live/work units and upper-story residential units shall not be considered a multifamily use; such units shall meet the design standards in subsection (d) above. Changes in use from single-family or commercial to multifamily shall be required to meet all standards below, as applicable. The following multifamily dwelling forms shall be permitted: 
a.  Multi-story apartments. 
1.  Apartments shall be in buildings that are 100 percent residential, and shall be a minimum of two (2) stories. 
2.  The ground floor of all facades that face a public street shall be 100 percent natural stone, brick, or simulated stone. 
b.  Townhouses. Townhouses shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Townhouses shall be in a "row house" form. 
2.  Townhouses shall have raised front steps off the sidewalk to access the main entrance. 
3.  Each unit shall include an off-set in wall planes and individual roof lines separated by recessed entries or shall be distinguished by a change in facade materials. 
4.  All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows. The following is a list of features that may be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive design to provide visual relief to townhouse buildings. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of five (5) of the following: 
i.  Bow windows. 
ii.  Bay windows. 
iii.  Arched windows. 
iv.  Gable windows. 
v.  Oval or round windows. 
vi.  Shutters. 
vii.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
viii.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
ix.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
x.  Decorative tile. 
xi.  Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony. 
xii.  Projected wall or dormer. 
xiii.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
xiv.  Decorative caps on chimneys. 
xv.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
5.  Pedestrian access. Each unit shall have its main pedestrian entrance off of the street or a landscaped courtyard. 
6.  Garage doors shall not face a public street. 
7.  Fencing located within 10 feet of an alley or common lot boundary shall not impede the visibility of drivers entering or exiting the alley. 
c.  Courtyard building. Attached or detached dwelling units which are arranged around a central courtyard or series of courtyards on a single site. 
1.  Pedestrian access. 
i.  At least one courtyard on a site shall provide direct access to the street. 
ii.  Each building shall have their primary access from an internal courtyard. 
2.  At least 15 percent of the square footage of all building footprints on a site shall be developed as common courtyard areas. No more than a total of three courtyards may be developed on one site. When a site has less than four units, the courtyard shall be one contiguous area. Paseos, parking areas, designated on-site walkways and building entry areas shall not count towards the common courtyard area. 
d.  Villa. A villa is a large house containing two (2) to eight (8) dwelling units which are individually accessed from one internal common area. 
1.  Pedestrian access. The internal common area shall be accessible from a main entrance at the street level on the primary facade. 
e.  Multifamily house. A multifamily house is a structure that is designed to appear as a large, custom-built single-family home but may contain up to six (6) dwelling units inside. 
1.  Pedestrian access. Each unit shall have a primary entrance on the front or side of the building. Any secondary entrances shall be located on the side or rear of the building. 
f.  Carriage house/accessory dwelling unit. Attached or detached accessory unit above a garage or at grade. Habitable area shall not exceed 450 square feet per floor. Design and materials should be compatible with the principal structure on the lot. 
(2)  The following standards apply to all multifamily uses: 
a.  Exterior wall finish. The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), glass, stucco, fiber cement siding, or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows, accents, and trim. 
1.  The ground floor of all buildings shall be a minimum of 75 percent natural stone, simulated stone, brick, or architectural CMU with the exception of multi-story apartments as stated in subsection (f)(1)a.2. 
2.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each structure and each material used shall comprise no less than 20 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
3.  If architectural CMU is incorporated into a project, it shall have an ashlar pattern. 
4.  No more than 33 percent of the building facade may be fiber cement siding or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
5.  Carriage house/accessory dwelling units shall be permitted to have the same exterior materials as the principal structure on the lot. 
6.  The use of other materials shall be limited to accent features. 
7.  Other wall finishes or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Parking. All multifamily uses shall provide on-site parking in accordance with subsection (d)(1). 
(g)  Expansions. 
(1)  Expansions to existing single-family structures shall meet the height and setback standards established in subsection (c) or the contextual setback as defined in subsection Sec. 2-96. 
(2)  Expansions, excluding existing single-family, that are less than 35 percent of the existing gross floor area shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Expansions shall reflect the architectural style of the original building, including roof, articulation, windows, doors, and exterior finish. If the existing style is not desired for the expanded portion of the structure, the expansion shall meet the design standards provided in subsection (e), as applicable. 
b.  Newly constructed portions of the building shall meet all density and development standards in subsections (c) and (d), as applicable. 
(3)  The cumulative expansion of 35 percent or more of the gross floor area over any five-year period shall meet the following standards, except for existing single-family: 
a.  Each street-facing facade shall be required to incorporate a minimum of three improvements in accordance with subsection (e). 
b.  Newly constructed portions of the building shall meet all density and development standards in subsections (c) and (d), as applicable. 
(h)  Conversions. 
(1)  Conversions in the MU-2 district from single-family residential to a nonresidential use shall meet the following development standards in subsection (d): 
a.  Parking (subsection (d)(1)); 
b.  Traffic impact and parking generation studies (subsection(d)(2)); 
c.  Access and circulation (subsection (d)(3)); 
d.  Fencing design standards (subsection (d)(4)); 
e.  Landscaping (subsection (d)(5)); 
f.  Outdoor display and storage (subsection (d)(6)); 
g.  Site furniture (subsection (d)(7)); and 
h.  Special conditions for public open space (subsection(d)(8)). 
(2)  The following requirements from the district design standards (subsection (e)) may apply when changes to the exterior of a building are being made to a conversion: 
a.  Exterior wall finish (subsection (e)(1)); 
b.  Orientation requirements (subsections (e)(2)a. and (e)(2)c.); 
c.  Exterior color (subsection (e)(3)); 
d.  Roofing (subsection (e)(10)); 
e.  Awnings and canopies (subsection (e)(11)); and 
f.  Signs (subsection (e)(12)). 
(3)  Expansions in the gross floor area during the conversion process shall meet the standards in subsection (g) above, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0205, § II, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-73. - MU-L (Mixed-Use Limited) district. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of the MU-L district is to allow single-family and limited commercial uses in structures that are single-family residential in style. For the purposes of this district, limited commercial uses include bed and breakfast, office, live/work units, and very limited retail uses including personal services, artisanal production, and boutique shops. Changes from single-family to a limited commercial use shall be considered a conversion. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MU-L district may be found in Sec. 2-77. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MU-L district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-78, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Buildings shall be subject to a contextual front setback in accordance with Sec. 2-96. The contextual setback shall establish the minimum required depth. 
(2)  The setback on all side lot lines for accessory buildings shall be five (5) feet; the front setback shall be measured from the front building facade of the principal structure. 
(3)  A one-story accessory building shall be no taller than 15 feet. If an accessory dwelling unit is located on top of a garage, the height may be up to 25 feet, or five (5) feet taller than the principal building if the principal building is over 25 feet tall. 
(4)  Setbacks shall be permitted to be adjusted to accommodate conflicts with utility easements. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this code, the following regulations apply to the MU-L district: 
(1)  Parking. In accordance with the downtown master plan, the following standards are meant to encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment by minimizing curb cuts and the visual presence of on-site parking. 
a.  All nonresidential uses shall provide on-street or on-site parking equal to one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  An applicant shall be permitted to provide fewer parking spaces than the 1:400 ratio where a site has insufficient driveway capacity and street frontage to accommodate the required parking in those areas. 
c.  Parking shall be accommodated in an existing on-site driveway and/or garage first before the applicant improves other areas. 
d.  On-street parking shall be created before additional on-site parking is created. 
e.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
f.  A minimum of two on-site parking spaces shall be required for single-family uses. 
g.  For live/work units, parking shall be calculated at the rate indicated above for the gross floor area of the entire structure. 
h.  On-site parking, except for parking in an existing on-site driveway or garage, is not required but may be constructed in any amount as desired by the applicant. Where on-site parking is incorporated, it shall be placed in an unobtrusive location that minimizes impacts to pedestrian circulation. 
1.  On-site parking is prohibited in the street yard. 
2.  On-site parking shall be accessed from an alley or secondary frontage where available. 
3.  If a property has an existing driveway, it may be utilized to meet the parking requirement but may not be expanded in the street yard to accommodate additional parking. Slight modifications may be made to the existing driveway to access additional parking located outside the street yard. 
4.  A driveway may be constructed in the front street yard only if it is the sole means for accessing on-site parking. 
5.  A property may have more than one driveway only when the existing driveway accesses a garage and an additional driveway is necessary to access on-site parking. 
6.  A driveway shall be no wider than 18 feet within the required front or side setback. 
i.  On-street parking requirements. 
1.  Diagonal parking shall be utilized on the following streets: North Lewis Street, North or South Stone Street, North or South Black Street, North Nelson Street, and North College Street. 
2.  Parallel parking shall be utilized on the following streets: East Liberty Avenue, East Bagdad Avenue, East Austin Avenue, Park Way, and Timberwood Drive. 
3.  On-street parking is prohibited on East Main Street without prior written approval from the transportation director. 
4.  The materials and design for all on-street parking shall be approved by the transportation director. 
j.  A new garage shall be permitted with the following standards: 
1.  Where an alley exists, garages shall be oriented toward the alley and the alley shall be utilized to access the garage. If an alley does not exist, garages shall be oriented toward a secondary frontage, which shall be utilized to access the garage. If the garage is oriented toward the secondary frontage, the façade that faces the primary frontage shall include articulation such as windows or doors. 
2.  No portion of a garage is permitted in any street yard along the primary frontage. 
3.  A driveway constructed to access a new garage shall be no wider than 18 feet within the setback, and no wider than the garage at any point. 
(2)  Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall not be required for any development in the MU-L district. 
(3)  Lot fencing standards. 
a.  The following design standards apply to fencing in the MU-L district, in addition to the applicable portions of Sec. 8-35: 
1.  Fences shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, natural stone, simulated stone, wrought iron, or wood. Other decorative masonry materials, reinforced concrete, or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
2.  A wrought-iron or equivalent fence in the street yard shall be permitted to reach a height of six (6) feet. 
3.  Fences in all other yards shall not exceed six (6) feet, except that fences may be eight (8) feet in height to accommodate topographical changes, as approved by the zoning administrator. 
b.  All nonresidential uses shall be required to install and maintain a fence constructed of masonry materials such as brick, natural stone, simulated stone, decorative reinforced concrete, or other equivalent material approved by the zoning administrator, a minimum of six feet in height, along every property line which is adjacent to a residential use. The zoning administrator may waive the requirement based upon a finding of any of the following: 
1.  The zoning administrator determines that due to the site plan layout and/or existing conditions, potential impacts will be negligible; 
2.  The zoning administrator receives a letter from the adjacent residential property owner(s) requesting that the fence not be installed; or 
3.  The zoning administrator determines that existing and/or proposed vegetation will serve as an adequate screen. 
(4)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping foundation treatment shall be required in accordance with the Category 3 standards in Sec. 8-10 for all nonresidential uses. 
b.  Minor modifications to design and development standards may be adjusted to protect and accommodate protected trees as identified in chapter 8, article III. 
c.  Visual screening . For conversions from single-family to nonresidential uses, visual screening with landscaping or fencing of trash receptacles, ground-mounted equipment, and other similar features shall be required where visible from any public street. 
(5)  Outdoor display and storage. No equipment, goods, supplies or materials associated with the limited commercial use shall be displayed or stored where visible from an abutting right-of-way or at the property line of an abutting property at a point six feet above the finished grade. 
(6)  Ground-mounted equipment . For nonresidential uses, screening for air conditioning units and electrical transformers shall be in conformance with Sec. 8-40. All other ground-mounted equipment, including gas or liquid canisters and tanks, shall be screened from public view and adjacent properties by a stone or brick wall. 
(7)  Lighting . 
a.  Building illumination . Compact fluorescent, incandescent, or light emitting diode (LED) fixtures appropriate to a residential style of a building shall be used. 
b.  Height of fixture. The height of a freestanding fixture shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
(e)  Mixed-use limited design standards . 
(1)  New construction shall meet the City of Round Rock Historic Design Guidelines for residential properties, except as specifically modified by this Code. 
(2)  Architectural changes to an existing building and expansions shall reflect the original architecture, including roof materials, articulation, windows, doors, and exterior finish, and shall be in compliance with the historic residential character recommendations in the downtown master plan where it does not conflict with the standards herein. An appeal to this design requirement shall be heard by the historic preservation commission. 
(3)  Pitched roofs shall be required for all detached structures and shall have a pitch equal to or greater than 4:12. The pitch may be 3:12 if the span is greater than 60 feet. 
(4)  The exterior finish of all new buildings shall be of natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or wood siding. Single-family uses with structures less than 150 square feet of gross floor area shall be exempt from exterior finish requirements. 
(5)  New construction on a vacant lot shall consist of detached structures not sharing a common wall and shall have only one entrance fronting on the street bearing the address. 
(6)  Where ramps or other accessibility-related structures are installed such that they are visible from the right-of-way, they shall be integrated into the building design by facing the structure with the same exterior materials as the building, using the same stone material that was used in the landscape if applicable, or screening structures behind planters and other landscape features. 
(f)  Operating hours . The hours of operation of any nonresidential use shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for access by the public. Appeals to these operating hours may be heard by the zoning board of adjustment. 
Sec. 2-74. - MU-R (Mixed-Use Redevelopment and Small Lot) district. 
(a)  Purpose . 
(1)  To allow for the development of small lots where the desired development or redevelopment cannot be accommodated with existing commercial district standards. This district also permits mixed-uses, including a residential component that typically would not otherwise be accommodated. The development standards establish projects with a more pedestrian-oriented and urban scale. 
(2)  The standards herein are not intended to be of a particular style or period, but to encourage high-quality construction and development that fits the proportions and functional characteristics of a mixed-use district with an urban and pedestrian-oriented feel. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the MU-R district may be found in Sec. 2-77, with the following supplementary note: 
(1)  In order for a restaurant/bar with an outdoor cooking area to qualify for a special exception, no outdoor cooking areas shall be permitted to share a common lot line with an existing single-family use. 
(c)  Lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MU-R district shall conform to the standards found in Sec. 2-78, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Special purpose lots, such as landscape lots and utility lots, are exempted from these requirements. 
(2)  A contextual setback may be considered when the frontage within a block is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of greater depth than 10 feet. The zoning administrator shall consider roadway type, development patterns, and adopted land use plans for the block on which the project is located in determining a modification to this setback. 
(3)  Side wall requirements for separation from adjacent structures, wall construction, and allowable openings for elements such as windows and doors shall be regulated by the Fire Code. 
(4)  Number of stories includes mezzanines or other occupiable levels. Rooftop decks and patios shall not be included in the number of stories, but structures placed on rooftop decks and patios shall qualify towards the height requirement. The height of the structure abutting an existing single-family residential use is limited to the height of the single-family structure's nearest wall excluding the roof and attic plus one foot in height from every foot of distance from the existing single-family residential use. 
(5)  Fences may be eight (8) feet in height to accommodate topographical changes, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(d)  Supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations apply to the MU-R district: 
(1)  Parking . On-site parking shall be placed in an unobtrusive location that minimizes impacts to pedestrian circulation. 
a.  On-site parking . 
1.  Due to the variable nature of lot sizes and use, a parking generation study shall be provided with each development application for all nonresidential uses. The parking generation study shall include the following criteria: 
i.  A demand analysis of parking need based on industry standards. 
ii.  Characteristics of those using parking, including turnover rate. 
2.  On-site parking shall be required for all residential uses, or residential portions of any building. 
i.  Required residential parking per unit: 
1 Bedroom: 1 space 
2 Bedrooms or more: 2 spaces 
ii.  For residential units without defined bedrooms: 
Under 800 square feet: 1 space 
800 square feet or more: 2 spaces 
iii.  Tandem parking shall be permitted to accommodate the residential parking requirement. 
3.  Alternative solutions may include a shared parking agreement as described in Sec. 8-47 or other solution as approved by the Transportation Director. 
b.  All parking shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements in addition to standards provided in chapter 8, article VI of this Code: 
1.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
2.  Vehicular entrances to all parking areas shall be no wider than the minimum standard allowed by the Design and Construction Standards. 
3.  On-site parking areas are prohibited in any street yard, and all parking shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any street-facing building façade. For the purposes of through lots, the street yard shall be designated as that which fronts on the roadway with the higher classification. 
4.  All existing driveways that are no longer required for parking access shall be removed and replaced with landscaping at the time of site plan review and street improvements installed to match adjacent areas. 
5.  On-site parking areas visible from a public street shall be screened by a building or wall, hedge or other landscaping screen that is at least three (3) feet in height. 
c.  On-street parking . 
1.  The applicant for a building permit may provide on-street parking adjacent to the property, if the existing right-of-way will accommodate it. The materials, design and location of the parking improvements shall be approved by the City. 
d.  Structured parking . All structured parking garages where any of the parking is above grade shall meet the following standards, in addition to the standards in subsection (c) above: 
1.  The first 20 feet in height of the frontage of a garage that faces a public street, except for pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress areas, shall require either a ground-level use or vehicle parking areas to be screened from view from a public street by means of landscaping or manufactured materials. 
2.  Exterior garage building materials shall be limited to natural stone, simulated stone, brick, split-face or stone-face concrete masonry units (CMU), or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
3.  The glazing percentage requirements provided in subsection (e)(7) shall apply to ground-level occupant spaces, if any. 
4.  Pedestrian access. 
i.  Pedestrian ingress and egress to all parking structures shall provide access directly to a street or public frontage except for underground parking levels, where pedestrians may exit the parking area directly into a building. 
ii.  Pedestrians shall have direct access from parking areas to the street on the primary frontage. 
iii.  There shall be direct access to the street from commercial uses. 
5.  Service access shall be from the rear or a secondary frontage where one exists and shall be enclosed or screened from view. 
(2)  Traffic impact analysis . A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), deferral, or waiver shall be required for any development in the MU-R district prior to any site plan approval. 
(3)  Access and circulation . 
a.  Vehicle access and circulation standards provided in Sec. 8-60 apply to all new development. These include requirements for connections to existing and future roads, connection to adjacent development, and design requirements for driveways. 
b.  Drive-throughs shall be prohibited except on lots fronting arterials, as defined by the Transportation Master Plan. The following conditions shall apply to any site where a drive-through is incorporated: 
1.  Only one (1) business on a site shall have a drive-through. 
2.  Drive-throughs shall be part of a building containing two (2) or more occupants or uses. 
3.  The principal use associated with the drive-through shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross floor area of a single-story building. For multi-story buildings, the principal use may occupy the entire first floor. 
4.  Off-street vehicle stacking spaces are prohibited in any front street yard and shall meet the stacking area standards and design provided in Sec. 8-54. 
5.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be no wider than the minimum required for one (1) vehicle and shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
(4)  Lot fencing design standards . 
a.  The following standards apply to all lot fencing in the MU-R district, in addition to the applicable standards found in Sec. 8-35: 
1.  Fences shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or wrought iron. Other decorative masonry materials, reinforced concrete, or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  Fence posts shall be constructed of rust-resistant metal parts, concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars of sound structural integrity. 
3.  Fence posts and fence panels shall be capped. 
4.  All fences shall provide a finished face to abutting single-family or townhouse uses. 
5.  All fences shall provide a finished face to abutting streets. 
b.  All nonresidential uses shall be required to install and maintain a fence constructed of masonry materials such as brick, natural stone, simulated stone, decorative reinforced concrete, or other equivalent material approved by the zoning administrator, a minimum of six feet in height, along every property line which is shared with a SF or TF use and is not in the street yard. The zoning administrator may waive the requirement based upon a finding of any of the following: 
1.  The zoning administrator determines that due to the site plan layout and/or existing site conditions, potential impacts will be negligible; 
2.  The zoning administrator receives a letter from the adjacent residential property owner(s) requesting that the fence not be installed; or 
3.  The zoning administrator determines that existing and/or proposed vegetation will serve as an adequate screen. 
(5)  Landscaping . 
a.  Where the building setback provides adequate space, landscaping foundation treatment shall be required in accordance with the Category 3 standards in Sec. 8-10. 
b.  Minor modifications to design and development standards may be permitted to protect and accommodate protected trees as identified in chapter 8, article III. 
c.  Screening for parking shall be in accordance with subsection (d)(1)b.5. above. 
d.  Pervious concrete and pervious pavers for parking and maneuvering areas are permitted. Other permeable surfaces may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(6)  Outdoor storage and display . 
a.  General outdoor storage is prohibited. 
b.  Outdoor display and limited outdoor storage shall be allowed in accordance with Sec. 8-65. 
c.  Limited outdoor storage is prohibited in the street yard. 
(7)  Site furniture . 
a.  Site furniture for nonresidential uses, as defined in Sec. 1-50, shall be required to be of a commercial grade and manufactured for exterior use. 
b.  Site furniture may also include moveable outdoor site features such as outdoor café tables and planters. 
(8)  Special conditions for public open space including parks, trails, creeks, and public plazas . 
a.  No opaque fences shall be allowed on the portion of a lot abutting any public open space. Wrought iron fencing or equivalent may be used. 
b.  There shall be no loading or service areas between the buildings and public open spaces. 
c.  An eight (8) foot wide linear landscaped area in accordance with Sec. 8-10(g)(4) shall be required on lots abutting public open space that have their parking between the buildings and the public open space. If site constraints inhibit the incorporation of the required landscaped area, alternative landscaping may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(e)  MU-R district design standards . The following design standards apply to all buildings in the MU-R district, except for certain expansions, as addressed in subsection (g). Additional standards for expansions and conversions are provided in subsections (f) and (g) below and replace their counterparts in this subsection where applicable. Alternate design standards may be approved by the zoning administrator to permit a more flexible or creative design that still meets the intent of the MU-R district design standards. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish . The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), glass, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows, accents and trim. 
a.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 33 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
b.  If architectural CMU is incorporated into a project, it shall have an ashlar pattern. 
c.  The use of materials such as wood shingles and wood siding shall be limited to accent features. 
d.  Other wall materials or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Orientation requirements . 
a.  Main entrances shall be visible to pedestrians from the street or a public plaza on the primary frontage. 
b.  Buildings with multiple street frontages shall be designed with primary facades facing each public street. 
c.  Where ramps or other accessibility-related structures are installed, they shall be integrated into the building design by facing the structure with the same exterior materials as the building, using the same stone material that was used in the landscape if applicable, or screening structures behind planters and other landscape features. 
(3)  Exterior color . Day-Glo, luminescent, neon, or similar types of color finishes are prohibited. 
(4)  Building elevation variation . 
a.  The length of walls facing public streets shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 50 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line or architectural materials. 
b.  For buildings with a primary façade length of greater than 100 feet, offsets of at least three (3) feet in depth shall be required for every 50 feet of façade length. 
c.  The composition of windows and other major features shall relate to the wall plane between each offset or other feature identified in subsection (e)(4)b, immediately above. 
(5)  Building articulation . 
a.  All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide architectural interest and style. 
b.  The following is a list of design features that may be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of five (5) of the following: 
1.  Decorative cornices. 
2.  Eaves. 
3.  Bow window. 
4.  Bay window. 
5.  Arched window. 
6.  Gable window. 
7.  Transom windows. 
8.  Multiple sashed and/or paned upper story windows. 
9.  Oval or round windows. 
10.  Shutters. 
11.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
12.  Recessed entryways. 
13.  Storefront (for retail uses). 
14.  Arcade/Gallery (for retail uses). 
15.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
16.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
17.  Decorative tile. 
18.  Veranda, porch or balcony. 
19.  Projected wall or dormer. 
20.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
21.  Decorative caps and chimneys. 
22.  Stone coursing around windows. 
23.  Metal canopies. 
24.  Fabric awnings that relate to window and door bays. 
25.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  Special design features for buildings with a setback greater than zero feet . The following is a list of special design features that shall be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building and site design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of at least one (1) of the following: 
a.  Stoops, 
b.  Rooftop decks, 
c.  Courtyard, 
d.  Forecourt, 
e.  Structural landscape elements or public art that are installed within the setback. 
(7)  Windows . In order to ensure appropriate proportion, shape, position, location, pattern and size of windows on a building, the following shall be required: 
a.  The ground floor of the primary façade shall have a minimum of 40 percent glazing. All glazing on the primary façade of the ground floor shall have a light transmittance of 70 percent. 
b.  Upper floors of the primary façade shall have a minimum of 30 percent glazing. 
c.  At least 25 percent of the wall area on any side or rear elevation facing a park or plaza shall consist of glazing or as permitted by the Building Code, whichever is less. 
d.  To assist with energy efficiency and solar gain the requirements in this subsection may be reduced by the Zoning Administrator to the extent that the required level or location of glazing conflicts with the standards of the Building Code or a recognized green building program. 
(8)  Glass . Except for photovoltaic cells, mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings and structures. 
(9)  Roofing Materials . 
a.  Roofing materials for pitched roofs shall consist of a minimum 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, copper or other similar materials as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Portions of the roof screened by pitched roof sections shall be permitted to be flat to provide for mechanical equipment wells or roof decks provided all pitched sections of the roof meet the roofing material requirements. 
b.  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view so as to not be visible from an abutting street, public plaza or public open space. The screen shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
(10)  Awnings and Canopies . Awnings and canopies attached to buildings shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so as to avoid obscuring details of the building façade. 
b.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so that there is a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet at its lowest point when over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway. 
c.  Awnings and canopies may encroach up to 10 feet or 66 percent of the distance from the building face to the curb, whichever is less. 
(f)  Expansions. 
(1)  Expansions to existing structures shall meet the height and setback standards established in subsection (c) or the contextual setback as defined in Sec. 2-96. 
(2)  Expansions that are less than 35 percent of the existing gross floor area shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Expansions shall reflect the architectural style of the original building, including roof, articulation, windows, doors, and exterior finish. If the existing style is not desired for the expanded portion of the structure, the expansion shall meet the design standards provided in subsection (e), as applicable. 
b.  Newly constructed portions of the building shall meet all development standards in subsection (d), as applicable. 
(3)  The cumulative expansion of 35 percent or more of the gross floor area over any five (5) year period shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Each street-facing façade shall be required to incorporate a minimum of three (3) improvements in accordance with subsection (e). 
b.  Newly constructed portions of the building shall meet all development standards in subsection (d), as applicable. 
(g)  Conversions. 
(1)  Conversions in the MU-R District from single-family residential to a nonresidential use shall meet the following development standards in subsection (d): 
a.  Parking (subsection (d)(1)); 
b.  Traffic impact analysis (subsection(d)(2)); 
c.  Access and circulation (subsection (d)(3)); 
d.  Fencing design standards (subsection (d)(4)); 
e.  Landscaping (subsection (d)(5)); 
f.  Outdoor display and storage (subsection (d)(6)); 
g.  Site furniture (subsection (d)(7)); and 
h.  Special conditions for public open space (subsection(d)(8)). 
The following requirements from the district design standards (subsection (e)) may apply when changes to the exterior of a building are being made to a conversion: 
a.  Exterior wall finish (subsection (e)(1)); 
b.  Orientation requirements (subsections (e)(2)a. and (e)(2)c.); 
c.  Exterior color (subsection (e)(3)); 
d.  Roofing (subsection (e)(9)); 
e.  Awnings and canopies (subsection (e)(10)); and 
(2)  Expansions in the gross floor area during the conversion process shall meet the standards in subsection (e) above, as applicable. 
Sec. 2-75. - MU-G (Mixed-Use Greenfield and Large Lot) district. 
(a)  Purpose . 
(1)  To establish areas of mixed land uses for the comprehensive development of a mixed-use project that includes a large tract of land and one of the following conditions: 
a.  Where commercial zoning districts and a residential component could not otherwise be accommodated; 
b.  Where desired development or redevelopment cannot be accommodated with existing commercial zoning standards; or 
c.  Where the desired development is of an urban scale which is oriented toward the pedestrian. 
(2)  This district is intended to serve as the base zoning district in PUD negotiations for developers to utilize for new, large mixed-use development. 
(3)  Mixed-use zoning for this district refers to the combining of complementary residential and commercial uses in the same building, on the same site, or in the same block. The standards herein are not intended to be of a particular style or period, but to encourage high-quality construction and development that fits the proportions and functional characteristics of a mixed-use district with an urban and pedestrian-oriented feel. 
(4)  This district is intended to serve as an option for property owners to use for new, large-scale mixed-use development instead of creating a PUD, or as the base zoning district in PUD negotiations. 
(b)  Site and land use criteria. The following site and land use criteria shall be provided for all proposed projects: 
(1)  The total acreage of the project, which shall be a minimum of 10 acres. 
(2)  A general plan indicating the layout, land uses, and percentages of each land use. 
(3)  Allocation of open space accessible to the public comprising a minimum of 15% of the total acreage. 
(4)  Each project shall have a designated main street which is configured in a block layout and serves as the core of each development. 
a.  The maximum block size shall be three (3) acres in size and 400 feet in length. 
b.  Buildings on the main street shall have their primary façade facing the main street. 
c.  The design of building facades in the first block off the main street shall reflect the design of the buildings on the main street. 
(5)  A minimum of two (2) land use/zoning categories (residential, commercial, employment) shall be identified. 
a.  If a development is entirely nonresidential it shall have at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  Any type of residential neighborhood or multifamily development abutting at least one (1) side of the proposed project. 
2.  The entirety of the proposed project fronts on a multi-lane divided roadway and is on average not more than one (1) block in depth according to the measurement standards for blocks provided within this section. 
3.  The proposed project contains a building with overnight accommodations that occupies a minimum of four (4) stories. 
b.  When residential uses are incorporated into a project, the first phase of the project shall meet at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
1.  All development abutting a thoroughfare shall have nonresidential uses on at least seventy-five (75%) percent of the ground floor of buildings. 
2.  At least forty (40%) percent of any building(s) shall be allocated to nonresidential uses. 
3.  For buildings in the first phase of a project to include more than sixty (60%) percent residential, all multi-unit residential buildings shall have units accessed from the interior of the building without exterior stairs to access main entrances of units. 
(c)  Thoroughfare criteria. A general plan indicating the internal roadway system throughout a proposed project shall be provided. Special emphasis should be placed on a roadway system that emphasizes a grid pattern that allows for pedestrian linkages and visual enhancements. Street design should encourage commercial and residential buildings with a build-to line without intervening parking between buildings, sidewalks and roads, and provides for community-serving retail, commercial, office and services uses available to those that access the site as pedestrians or in vehicles. 
(1)  The following thoroughfare provisions shall be required of all proposed projects: 
a.  All streets shall be private streets, unless the city agrees to accept dedication of some or all as public streets. Private street standards shall be subject to city approval. 
b.  All streets shall be open for public use and shall not be gated or have restricted access, except for permitted special events. 
c.  A private street lot or public right-of-way may vary in width but must be sufficient to accommodate travel lanes, medians, sidewalks, utilities, street furniture and fixtures, and landscaping of public or common ownership. 
d.  Street design . 
1.  All proposed projects shall have a main street which serves as the core of the project and is designed in accordance with the "Walkable Thoroughfares" standards in the table in subsection (c)(2) below. No parking garages or surface parking lots shall have a driveway on the main street. 
2.  Street design shall allow a variety of routes from point of origin to destination. 
3.  Street design shall allow for parking on one or both sides of the road. 
4.  Street design shall provide continuous landscaping, especially for shade trees. 
5.  Culs-de-sac shall be prohibited. 
e.  Pedestrian orientation . The individual uses, buildings, and clusters of development within a mixed-use project shall provide the following: 
1.  Interconnecting pedestrian areas including but not limited to sidewalks, plazas, and trails. 
2.  Pedestrian connections to the City's parks and trails system where applicable. 
3.  Internalized pedestrian connections between residential and nonresidential land uses. 
4.  Multi-modal transportation access where applicable. 
(2)  The following table shall serve as guidelines for the development of the streetscape and pedestrian realm within the PUD. The source of the table is "Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach" (RP-036A) published in 2010 by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in partnership with the Congress for the New Urbanism. 
Characteristic Walkable Thoroughfares Vehicle-Oriented
ThoroughfaresTarget speed range 15-25 mph 25-35 mph Pedestrian separation from moving traffic Curb parking and streetside furnishing Optional, typically separation achieved with planting strip. Streetside width Minimum 9 feet (residential) and 12 feet (commercial) to accommodate sidewalk, landscaping and street furniture. Minimum 5 feet Block lengths 200-660 feet Up to one-quarter of a mile Protected pedestrian crossing frequency (pedestrian signals or high-visibility markings at unsignalized crossings) 200-600 feet As needed to accommodate pedestrian demands Pedestrian priority at signalized intersection Pedestrian signals and pedestrian countdown heads, adequate crossing times, shorter cycle lengths and median refuges for very long crossings. Vehicle priority; may have longer cycle lengths and require two cycles for slower pedestrians to cross wide streets with medians. Pedestrian crossings High-visibility crosswalks shortened by curb extensions where there is on-street parking. Full street-width Median width 6 feet minimum width at crosswalk, if used as pedestrian refuge, plus 10 feet for left turn lane, if provided. 14 foot total width for left-turn lane if no refuge needed. 14-18 feet for single left-turn lane; 26-30 feet for double left-turn lane. Vehicular access across sidewalks 24 feet or less, except if specific frequent design vehicle requires added width. As needed Curb parking Normal condition except at bus stops and pedestrian crossings. None Curb return radius 10-30 feet; low-speed channelized right turns where other options are unworkable. 30-75 feet; high-volume turns channelized.  
(d)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  All uses shall be permitted, with the exception of the prohibited uses listed in Sec. 2-91 and the following: single-family detached with the exception of zero lot line and village lots; manufactured housing; two-family; funeral home/mortuary, cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium, and memorial park; institutions; auto service facilities; car wash; self-service storage; vehicle sales, rental, or leasing facilities; auto body, painting and repair shops; fuel sales; pawn shops; sexually oriented businesses; taxidermists; retail sales and service consisting of predominantly outdoor storage or consumer loading areas; light industrial services including manufacturing and assembly; wholesale trade; outdoor kennels; livestock veterinary clinics; warehouse and freight movement; large vehicle and equipment repair; heavy equipment sales and leasing; vehicle storage and towing; waste-related services; agricultural operations; fowl or livestock raising; mineral extraction; and commercial parking with the exception of multistory structured parking. 
(2)  The following uses are permitted only with a special exception granted by the ZBA: outdoor entertainment, passenger terminals. 
(e)  Baseline lot and building dimensional standards . Property and buildings in the MU-G district shall utilize the standards found in Sec. 2-78 as the baseline in PUD negotiations, with the following supplementary notes: 
(1)  Special purpose lots, such as landscape lots and utility lots, are exempted from these requirements. 
(2)  For courtyard multifamily, the front setback from the street (ROW) may be more than the maximum as long as the courtyard fills the space from the maximum setback to the façade of any building. 
(3)  Side wall requirements for separation from adjacent structures, wall construction, and allowable openings for elements such as windows and doors shall be regulated by the Fire Code. 
(4)  Number of stories includes mezzanines or other occupiable levels. Rooftop decks and patios shall not be included in the number of stories, but structures placed on rooftop decks and patios shall qualify towards the height requirement. 
(5)  Fences may be eight (8) feet in height to accommodate topographical changes, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(f)  Baseline supplementary development standards . In addition to the applicable standards found in Chapter 8 of this Code, the following regulations shall provide the baseline for PUD negotiations for the MU-G district: 
(1)  Parking . The following standards are meant to encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment by minimizing curb cuts. On-site parking shall be placed in an unobtrusive location that minimizes impacts to pedestrian circulation. 
a.  On-site parking . 
1.  Due to the variable nature of uses and lot sizes, a parking generation study shall be provided with each development application for all nonresidential uses. The parking generation study shall include the following criteria: 
i.  A demand analysis of parking need based on industry standards. 
ii.  Characteristics of those using parking, including turnover rate. 
2.  On-site parking shall be required for all residential uses, or residential portions of any building. 
i.  Required residential parking per unit: 
1 Bedroom: 1 space 
2 Bedrooms or more: 2 spaces 
ii.  For residential units without defined bedrooms: 
Under 800 square feet: 1 space 
800 square feet or more: 2 spaces 
iii.  Tandem parking shall be permitted to accommodate the residential parking requirement. 
3.  Alternative solutions may include a shared parking agreement as described in Sec. 8-47 or other solution as approved by the Transportation Director. 
b.  All parking shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements in addition to standards provided in chapter 8, article VI of this Code: 
1.  Parking and access shall be permitted only on improved surfaces. 
2.  Vehicular access shall be from the secondary frontage where possible. 
3.  Vehicular entrances to all parking areas shall be no wider than the minimum standard allowed by the Design and Construction Standards. 
4.  On-site parking areas are prohibited in any front street yard of any internal thoroughfare, and all parking shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any thoroughfare-facing building façade. No parking shall be permitted in any street yard of a public right-of way. 
5.  On-site parking areas visible from a public right-of-way shall be screened by a building or wall, hedge or other landscaping screen that is at least three (3) feet in height. 
c.  Thoroughfare parking . 
1.  Parking adjacent to the property may be used to fulfill a parking requirement determined in a parking generation study, as determined by the zoning administrator. The materials, design and location of the parking improvements shall be approved by the City. 
d.  Structured parking . All structured parking garages where any of the parking is above grade shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The first 20 feet in height of the frontage of a garage that faces a public street, with the exception of pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress areas, shall require either a ground-level use or vehicle parking areas to be screened from view from a public street by means of landscaping or manufactured materials. 
2.  Exterior garage building materials shall be limited to natural stone, simulated stone, brick, split-face or stone-face concrete masonry units (CMU), or architecturally finished steel or metal. 
3.  The glazing percentage requirements provided in subsection (h)(2) below shall apply to ground-level occupant spaces, if any. 
4.  Pedestrian access . 
i.  Pedestrian ingress and egress to all parking structures shall provide access directly to a street or public frontage except for underground parking levels, where pedestrians may exit the parking area directly into a building. 
ii.  Pedestrians shall have direct access from parking areas to the street on the primary frontage. 
iii.  There shall be direct access to the street from commercial uses. 
5.  Vehicular access shall be from the secondary frontage where possible. 
6.  Service access shall be from an alley where possible. Where an alley does not exist, service access shall be from a secondary frontage where one exists and shall be enclosed or screened from view. 
(2)  Traffic impact analysis . A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) shall be required for any development in the MU-G district. 
(3)  Access and circulation . 
a.  Vehicle access and circulation standards provided in Sec. 8-60 apply to all new development. These include requirements for connections to existing and future roads, connection to adjacent development, and design requirements for driveways. 
b.  Drive-throughs shall be prohibited except on lots fronting arterials, as defined by the Transportation Master Plan. The following conditions shall apply to any site where a drive-through is incorporated: 
1.  Only one (1) business on a site shall have a drive-through. 
2.  Drive-throughs shall be part of a building containing two (2) or more occupants or uses. 
3.  The primary use associated with the drive-through shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of a single-story building. For multi-story buildings, the principal use may occupy the entire first floor. 
4.  Off-street vehicle stacking spaces are prohibited in any front street yard and shall meet the stacking area standards and design provided in Sec. 8-54. 
5.  Vehicular entrances and exits shall be no wider than the minimum required for one (1) vehicle and shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
(4)  Lot fencing design standards . The following standards apply to fencing in the MU-G district, in addition to the applicable standards found in Sec. 8-35. 
a.  Fences shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or wrought iron. Other decorative masonry materials, reinforced concrete, or wrought iron equivalents may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(5)  Landscaping . 
a.  Where the building setback provides adequate space, landscaping foundation treatment shall be required in accordance with the Category 3 standards in Sec. 8-10. 
b.  Minor modifications to design and development standards may be permitted to protect and accommodate protected trees as identified in chapter 8, article III. 
c.  Screening for parking shall be in accordance with subsection (f)(2)b.5. above. 
d.  Pervious concrete and pervious pavers for parking and maneuvering areas are permitted. Other permeable surfaces may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(6)  Outdoor storage and display . 
a.  General outdoor storage is prohibited. 
b.  Outdoor display and limited outdoor storage shall be allowed in accordance with Sec. 8-65. 
c.  Limited outdoor storage is prohibited in the street yard. 
(7)  Site furniture . 
a.  Site furniture for nonresidential uses, as defined in Sec. 1-50, shall be required to be of a commercial grade and manufactured for exterior use. 
b.  Site furniture may also include moveable outdoor site features such as outdoor café tables and planters. 
(8)  Special conditions for open spaces including parks, trails, creeks, and plazas . 
a.  No opaque fences shall be allowed on the portion of a lot abutting any public open space. Wrought iron fencing or equivalent may be used. 
b.  There shall be no loading or service areas between the buildings and open spaces. 
a.  An eight (8) foot wide linear landscaped area in accordance with Sec. 8-10(g)(4) shall be required on lots abutting public open space that have their parking between the buildings and the public open space. If site constraints inhibit the incorporation of the required landscaped area, alternative landscaping may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(g)  Baseline design standards . The following design standards shall be utilized as the baseline for PUD negotiations for all buildings in the MU-G District. 
(1)  Exterior wall finish . The exterior finish of all buildings shall be natural stone, simulated stone, brick, architectural concrete masonry units (CMU), glass, stucco, fiber cement siding (excluding flat, unarticulated panels), or architecturally finished steel or metal, except for doors, windows, accents and trim. 
a.  Fiber cement siding shall not comprise more than 33 percent of the exterior wall finish. 
b.  If architectural CMU is incorporated into a project, it shall have an ashlar pattern. 
c.  The use of materials such as wood shingles and wood siding shall be limited to accent features. 
d.  Other wall materials or recognized architectural styles not explicitly permitted by this section may be approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Orientation requirements . 
a.  Buildings shall have their main entrance off a thoroughfare or plaza. Entrances shall be easily accessible for pedestrians from the street, a plaza or the sidewalk. 
b.  Buildings on corner lots shall be designed with primary facades facing each thoroughfare. 
(3)  Building elevation variation . 
a.  For buildings on the main street, the length of walls facing any street shall be broken into smaller planes. Wall planes shall not extend more than an average of 50 feet without an offset or interruption by a pilaster or structural frames, change in roof line or architectural materials. 
b.  The composition of windows and other major features shall relate to the wall plane between each offset or other feature identified in subsection (g)(3)a, immediately above. 
c.  For buildings on any thoroughfare, any wall facing the street in excess of 100 feet in length shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two (2) feet and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. 
(4)  Roofing materials . 
a.  Roofing materials for pitched roofs shall consist of a minimum 25-year architectural dimensional shingles, tile (clay, cement, natural or simulated stone), non-reflective prefinished metal, copper or other similar materials as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
b.  All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by parapets or other opaque screening materials so as to not be visible from an abutting street, public plaza or public open space. The parapet or screen shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
(5)  Glass . Except for photovoltaic cells, mirrored glass with a reflectivity of 20 percent or more is prohibited on the exterior walls and roofs of buildings and structures. 
(h)  MU-G district design standards for buildings within one (1) block of the main street. 
(1)  Building articulation . 
a.  All buildings shall be designed to include varied relief to provide interest and variety and to avoid monotony. This shall include details that create shade and cast shadows to provide visual relief to the buildings. Horizontal and vertical elements of exterior walls should vary in height, design and projection to provide architectural interest and style. 
b.  The following is a list of design features that may be used as part of an integrated, comprehensive building design to provide architectural interest and style. Such interest and style shall include a minimum of five (5) of the following: 
1.  Decorative cornices. 
2.  Eaves. 
3.  Bow window. 
4.  Bay window. 
5.  Arched window. 
6.  Gable window. 
7.  Transom windows. 
8.  Multiple sashed and/or paned upper story windows. 
9.  Oval or round windows. 
10.  Shutters. 
11.  Arched entry, balcony or breezeway entrance. 
12.  Recessed entryways. 
13.  Storefront (for retail uses). 
14.  Arcade/Gallery (for retail uses). 
15.  Stone or brick accent wall. 
16.  Decorative stone or brick band. 
17.  Decorative tile. 
18.  Veranda, porch or balcony. 
19.  Projected wall or dormer. 
20.  Variation of roof lines on the building. 
21.  Decorative caps and chimneys. 
22.  Stone coursing around windows. 
23.  Metal canopies. 
24.  Fabric awnings that relate to window and door bays. 
25.  Other feature as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Windows . In order to ensure appropriate proportion, shape, position, location, pattern and size of windows on a building, the following shall be required: 
a.  The ground floor of the primary façade shall have a minimum of 40 percent glazing. All glazing on the primary façade of the ground floor shall have a light transmittance of 70 percent. 
b.  Upper floors of the primary façade shall have a minimum of 30 percent glazing. 
c.  At least 25 percent of the wall area on any side or rear elevation facing a park or plaza shall consist of glazing or as permitted by the Building Code, whichever is less. 
d.  To assist with energy efficiency and solar gain the requirements in this subsection may be reduced by the Zoning Administrator to the extent that the required level or location of glazing conflicts with the standards of the Building Code or a recognized green building program. 
(3)  Awnings and canopies . Awnings and canopies attached to buildings shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so as to avoid obscuring details of the building façade. 
b.  Fabric awnings for windows shall be a drop-front style, except at arched window openings, and shall relate to each window or bay. 
c.  Awnings and canopies shall be placed so that there is a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet at its lowest point when over a sidewalk or other pedestrian walkway. 
d.  Awnings and canopies may encroach up to 10 feet or 66 percent of the distance from the building face to the curb, whichever is less. 
Sec. 2-76. - PUD (Planned Unit Development) district. 
(a)  Purpose . Proper private development of infill areas, as well as the comprehensive development of large areas of vacant or substantially vacant land, requires a flexible approach to be available both to the city and to the landowner. The PUD (Planned Unit Development) is intended to encourage mixed-uses, allow a more flexible response to the market, and encourage innovative subdivision or site plan design that may not be explicitly accommodated by the standards contained within this code. Development within each PUD shall be clearly superior to development in a typical zoning district with respect to design, function, and compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
(b)  Application . Procedures for application of the PUD district are located in Sec. 10-22. 
(c)  Each PUD district unique . Each designated PUD district will have unique standards and requirements that are described in the adopting ordinance for that district. 
(d)  Underlying standards and requirements. The standards and requirements of this code shall apply in every PUD district unless specifically superseded by the standards and requirements of the PUD district. 
(e)  Clearly superior . The following are examples of ways in which a PUD may demonstrate superior development over that which would typically occur in a traditional zoning district: 
(1)  Residential PUDs . 
a.  For single-family homes, the exterior wall materials of the front and side facades shall contain a designated minimum percentage of brick or natural stone. 
b.  Single-family neighborhoods shall be made up of a variety of lot sizes, with a large percentage of lots exceeding the minimum Code standard. 
c.  Automatic, programmable underground irrigation shall be installed with each new single-family home or townhouse unit. 
d.  All homes shall incorporate enhanced architectural design features, including but not limited to porches or patios, large windows, gutters and downspouts, decorative trim, and upgraded front doors, garage doors, roofing and fencing. 
e.  Multifamily developments shall provide trees in an amount exceeding the minimum Code requirement. 
f.  Multifamily developments shall construct public improvements such as connections to a city park or trail where possible. 
(2)  Nonresidential PUDs. 
a.  Building facades facing the right-of-way shall be designed with pedestrians in mind by being oriented toward the street and sidewalk and having significant glazing on the ground floor. 
b.  All on-site parking shall be provided at the rear of the lot. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be constructed at a width greater than the Code minimum and shall include pedestrian-friendly features such as benches, street trees, bike racks, shade structures, public art, and decorative paving. 
d.  Trees and shrubs shall be incorporated in an amount exceeding the Code minimum. 
e.  Protected trees that are removed during development shall be replaced at a rate greater than that stated in the code. 
f.  Compatibility buffers, where required, shall contain an amount of trees above the Code minimum and fences shall be constructed of brick or natural stone. 
g.  The development shall incorporate water conservation measures such as rainwater harvesting and utilizing the city's reuse water, where available. 
Sec. 2-77. - Permitted Uses in the Mixed-Use and PUD Districts. 
    Summary use table by mixed-use and PUD zoning district 
Use Zoning District MU-1 MU-2 MU-L MU-R MU-G (1) Supplementary Use Standard P = Permitted  P/S = Permitted with supplementary use standards  SE = Special Exception needed  - = Prohibited Residential Uses Accessory Dwelling Unit/Carriage House - P P/S P 2-91(a) Apartment - P - - Courtyard Building - P - - Multifamily House - P - - Single-family, Attached - P - - Single-family, Detached P/S P/S P - 2-91(hh) Townhouse - P - - Upper-Story Residential P/S P/S - P/S 2-91(kk) Villa - P - - Public and Civic Uses Community/Government Service - - - P/S 2-91(k) Day Care - SE - SE Park, Community - P P P Park, Linear/Linkage P P P P Park, Neighborhood P P P P Passenger Terminal SE SE - SE Place of Worship P P P P Public Safety Facility P P P P Utility, Minor P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) Utility, Intermediate P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(mm) WTF, Stealth P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(qq) Commercial Uses Bed and Breakfast - P P P Cosmetic Services P - - P Event Center P SE - SE Hotel/Motel/Lodging P/S P/S - P 2-91(q) Indoor Entertainment Activities P/S P/S - P/S 2-91(r) Live/Work Units P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(t) Office P/S P P P 2-91(u) Office, Medical - P/S - P/S 2-91(v) Outdoor Entertainment P SE - SE Restaurant/Bar P/S P/S - P/S 2-91(dd) Restaurants with Outdoor Cooking Areas P SE - SE Retail Sales and Services P/S P/S P/S P/S 2-91(ee)  
(1)  All uses are permitted in the MU-G district except for those listed in Sec. 2-4 and Sec. 2-75. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0208, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-78. - Mixed-Use and PUD districts lot and building dimensional standards. 
    Mixed-use and PUD zoning districts lot and building dimensional standards chart 
Description Zoning District MU-1 MU-2 MU-L MU-R MU-G Internal 
Streets Arterial 
Streets Freeways Minimum lot width 20 ft./ 
24 ft. 20 ft. - 20 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. Maximum front setback from street (ROW) 0 ft. - Contextual 10 ft./Contextual 10 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft. Maximum and minimum front setback from street (ROW), for lots located on Brushy Creek or Lake Creek - N/A - - - - - Minimum rear setback 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Minimum side setback 0 ft. 2.5 ft. 5 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. Maximum height, principal building 3 stories/ 
2 stories (historic buildings) 8 stories/ 
6 stories/ 
4 stories/ 
3 stories 2.5 stories 3 stories/50 ft. 5 stories 5 stories 15 stories Maximum height, accessory buildings - - 15 ft./25 ft. - - - - Maximum height, new and existing single-family uses - 2.5 stories - - - - - Minimum side setback, new and existing single-family uses - 5 ft. - - - - - Minimum front setback from street (ROW), new single-family, multifamily, and buildings with nonresidential uses - 0 ft. - - - - - Maximum front setback from street (ROW), new single-family, multifamily, and buildings with nonresidential uses - 10 ft. - - - - - Minimum front setback from street (ROW), expansion of existing single-family uses - 10 ft. - - - - - Maximum front setback from street (ROW), expansion of existing single-family uses - 20 ft. - - - - - Minimum setback from front building façade, single-family garages - 10 ft. - - - - - Minimum rear setback, garages and carports - - 5 ft. - - - - Minimum rear setback with alley - - 5 ft. - - - - Minimum rear setback without alley - - 20 ft. - - - - Minimum rear setback where sharing common lot line with existing single-family uses - - - 10 ft. - - - Minimum setback, accessory buildings - - 5 ft. - - - -  
Secs. 2-79-2-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-85. - In general. 
    The overlay districts serve to protect or highlight geographically or culturally unique characteristics of the city across one or more previously established base zoning districts. An overlay district supplements, and sometimes replaces, specific development standards of the underlying zoning district. Common uses for overlay districts are to preserve the historic character of a given area or to establish a unifying architectural theme. 
Sec. 2-86. - H (Historic Overlay) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve structures, sites or areas that have outstanding historical and cultural significance. 
(b)  Application . Procedures for application of the H (Historic Overlay) district are located in Sec. 10-55. 
(c)  Designation of existing historic sites. Any existing designated historic landmark, site or district in the city at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is designated as an H (Historic Overlay) district. Any special requirements or standards for such existing sites shall continue to apply to the H (Historic Overlay) district. 
(d)  Certificate of appropriateness required for development. A certificate of appropriateness is required prior to commencing any development or exterior alteration in any H (Historic Overlay) district. Procedures for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness are described in Sec. 10-56. 
(e)  Each historic overlay unique. Each designated H (Historic Overlay) district may have unique standards that are described in the adopting ordinance for that district. Standards for underlying districts remain in effect unless supplanted by the district-specific standards. 
(f)  H (Historic Overlay) district standards. All H (Historic Overlay) districts shall be subject to the following district standards or requirements: 
(1)  Any regulations for a specific H (Historic Overlay) district shall apply to all properties or structures wholly contained within that district, and to those portions of any property located within the district. 
(2)  Because the H district is an overlay district, the regulations for the underlying zoning district shall remain in effect, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(3)  In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in the underlying district and the regulations of the H (Historic Overlay) district, the regulations of the overlay district shall apply, even where the applicable regulation may not be the "higher" standard. 
(4)  The findings adopted by the city council for a specific H (Historic Overlay) district shall define the scope of the city's interest in protecting the historic resource and shall provide the guidelines to be used by the historic preservation commission, along with the applicable regulations, in considering whether to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness. 
(g)  Minimum maintenance and duty to maintain. 
(1)  Every person responsible for a structure or lot with H (Historic Overlay) district zoning shall keep the following in good repair such that its historic integrity and significance is not threatened or compromised: 
a.  All the exterior portions of such structures. 
b.  All interior portions of such structures, which, if not maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such structures to deteriorate, decay, become damaged, or otherwise fall into a state of disrepair. 
c.  Any other improvements on a lot with H (Historic Overlay) district zoning. 
d.  The following minimum property, structural and health standards shall be used to assess whether minimum maintenance conditions have been met: 
1.  All exterior materials including, but not limited to, siding, trim, masonry, chimneys and roofing shall be free of decay, securely attached and weather-tight; 
2.  All exterior surfaces of a structure that are vulnerable to decay shall be sealed with paint or other coatings and maintained in a manner to effectively protect these surfaces from deterioration to weather; 
3.  Foundations shall be level so as to not cause structural stress; 
4.  No glazing on structures shall be cracked or broken; 
5.  Exterior doors, door frames, windows and associated trim shall be free from damage, and character-defining features intact; 
6.  Other character-defining features such as but not limited to screens, shutters, lighting, gutters, downspouts, and hardware, shall not be damaged; 
7.  Skirting around the structure, if any, shall be intact and in sound condition; 
8.  Porches, balconies exterior steps, railings and other exterior features shall be maintained in a sound condition so as to maintain character; 
9.  Fences and any structures other than the principal structure shall be free of decay; 
10.  Dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing damage shall be removed. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring any such improvement to be kept in good repair. 
(3)  The historic preservation commission may enforce the provisions of this section at law or at equity. 
(h)  Prevention of demolition by neglect. 
(1)  Demolition by neglect is prohibited. No person shall allow a structure on a lot with H (Historic Overlay) district zoning or its character-defining features, to deteriorate through demolition by neglect. The Historic Preservation Commission and the Chief Building Official shall examine the following to determine demolition by neglect: 
a.  Parts which are improperly or inadequately attached so that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
b.  A deteriorated or inadequate foundation. 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports that are insufficient to carry the loads imposed. 
d.  Walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defect or deterioration, or are insufficient to carry the loads imposed. 
e.  Ceilings, roofs, ceiling or roof supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defect or deterioration, or are insufficient to support the loads imposed. 
f.  Fireplaces and chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defect or deterioration, or are of insufficient size or strength to carry the loads imposed. 
g.  Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose exterior stucco or mortar. 
h.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken or open windows and doors. 
i.  Any fault, defect, or condition in the structure which renders it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
j.  Deterioration of any unique architectural feature which would detract from the original architectural style. 
(2)  Demolition by neglect procedure . 
a.  Any interested party may request that the city investigate whether a property with H (Historic Overlay) district zoning is being demolished by neglect. 
b.  The Zoning Administrator and the Building Official shall prepare a report for the Historic Preservation Commission on the condition of the structure as stated in the criteria in (h)(1) above, and the repairs needed to satisfy those criteria. 
c.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider and take action on the report and determine whether a property is in a state of demolition by neglect. Conditions of the action shall include that the repairs be started within 30 days and be completed within one (1) year from the date of notification of the property owner. 
d.  Ineligibility for historic tax exemption . During the period of time when a property is in a state of demolition by neglect, the property owner may not be considered for a partial tax exemption for historically significant sites. 
e.  Extensions . The property owner may request annual extensions of the completion date from the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall require that the property owner provide a progress report in order to be considered for an extension. 
f.  If the property owner fails to begin repairs by the date in the notification letter, fails to make continuous progress toward completion, or fails to complete repairs by the date set by the Historic Preservation Commission, this zoning violation shall be forwarded to Code Enforcement for enforcement. 
(i)  Taxes. Nothing in this section shall be construed as reason for an increased evaluation of the property for purposes of ad valorem taxation because of historic designation. 
Sec. 2-87. - CT (Chisholm Trail Overlay) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve areas within the overlay that have significance and interest, and to encourage commercial development that supports and complements the historic nature and general theme of the area as Round Rock's founding settlement. The city began as a trade center that grew informally at a stop on a stagecoach line during the post-pioneer, pre-railroad era. Structures originating in this era were constructed by skilled builders from raw natural materials available in the immediate area, with later additions and outbuildings of manufactured materials made available by the railroad. 
(b)  Use restrictions; permitted uses. 
(1)  All permitted uses in the C-1 district, except automobile service facilities, car washes, self-service storage, vehicle repair facilities and body shops, and vehicle sales, rental or leasing facilities. 
(2)  A single residence within a structure also containing any principal permitted use. 
(3)  Drive-throughs shall only be permitted on buildings with frontage on I-35, and entrances and exits for drive-throughs are prohibited to access Chisholm Trail Road. 
(4)  Buildings shall be restricted to 2.5 stories. 
(c)  Density and development standards . All development within the CT (Chisholm Trail Overlay) district shall conform to the lot and building dimensions, development, and supplementary standards of the underlying zoning district, C-1 (General Commercial). 
(d)  Special criteria for site plan approval. 
(1)  All plans for new construction in the CT district are subject to the approval of the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall consider the following design criteria as part of review of building plans: 
a.  The architecture of all buildings and structures shall be compatible with the style of vernacular post-pioneer, pre-railroad buildings and structures typical of the Hill Country and Central Texas region. This provision shall not prohibit the construction of multi-story or multi-level structures, but shall ensure that the design of such structures is compatible with the architecture of the surrounding historic landmark buildings. These buildings are characterized by a simple primary volume with accretions of later additions and/or outbuildings, rather than a single large volume. 
b.  A minimum of 50% of the exterior finish of all buildings shall be limestone, with the remainder to consist of wood and clear-appearing non-reflective window/door glass. Wood siding should be in a narrow lap or board-and-batten pattern. Fiber cement siding is not considered to be wood. 
c.  All structures other than buildings shall be constructed of limestone and wood to the extent practicable. 
d.  Metal may be used where structurally required and shall be integrated into the design of the building or structure or shall be appropriately camouflaged. Metal may also be used in a decorative manner in keeping with the theme of the surrounding historic landmark buildings. Acceptable metal finishes shall be the same as those recommended in the Historic Design Guidelines including dark bronze or wrought iron finishes, except for roofing material. 
e.  Doors and window frames shall be constructed of wood or a material that looks like wood such as fiberglass. All glass for windows and doors shall be non-reflective and clear-appearing, and muntins shall not be sandwiched between layers of glass. The size, proportion and placement of windows and doors on the primary volume shall be similar to surrounding historic landmark buildings. Windows on all elevations shall be paned and evenly spaced. 
f.  Roofs shall be pitched with simple gables and no dormers or hips. Roofing materials may be galvanized metal, wood, tile, or such other material as may be approved by the zoning administrator. Prefinished colored metal roofing is prohibited. Only one category of roofing material shall be used on all roof surfaces of a given structure. 
g.  All buildings or structures located upon a lot having frontage onto Chisholm Trail shall provide a primary pedestrian entrance and building facade on Chisholm Trail. When a lot has more than one street frontage, more than one primary entrance and building facade may be developed. In no case shall any street yard fronting Chisholm Trail give the appearance as a service entrance for a building or structure. 
h.  All parking, stacking spaces for drive-throughs, and other service areas shall be located and designed so as to achieve maximum screening from Chisholm Trail. 
i.  Asphalt is prohibited between the front façade of any building and Chisholm Trail Road. 
Sec. 2-88. - PV (Palm Valley Overlay) district. 
(a)  Purpose . To establish and preserve the unique characteristics of the Palm Valley area, and to implement the design goals of the Palm Valley plan. 
(b)  Special criteria for site plan approval . In addition to complying with the site plan approval criteria listed in Sec. 10-45, any site plan in the PV district shall also comply with the following special approval criteria whenever the criteria are applicable. Failure to provide for these special approval criteria shall result in disapproval of the site plan. Site plan approval is required prior to commencing any development within the PV district. 
(1)  Building fronts shall be easily accessible by pedestrians from the street or sidewalk. 
(2)  Public spaces shall be provided in front of buildings and protected from the street using planting strips or other amenities (e.g., trees, lighting standards) and on-street parking. 
(3)  Parking and vehicular circulation shall be subordinate to pedestrian access to buildings. 
(4)  Developments shall promote walkability within the surrounding area. 
(5)  View corridors and vistas shall be protected. 
(6)  Building massing shall be addressed by breaking large structures into a series of smaller units and places. 
(7)  Building facades shall be broken into small components to bring them into the human scale. 
(8)  Building fronts shall encourage pedestrian activity on the street, by utilizing porches, awnings, arcades, colonnades, entries and windows. 
(9)  All building elevations that front onto a street, any parking areas, or public open space shall have prominent windows. 
(10)  No parking is permitted in the required front setback. 
(11)  Entrances to neighborhoods shall be marked with defining architectural features as described in subsection 2-88(c)(3). 
(12)  Buildings and landscaping shall incorporate unifying design themes representative of Palm Valley and consistent with subsection 2-88(c)(3). 
(13)  Signs shall be consistent in style and representative of Palm Valley architectural themes. 
(c)  Density and development standards . All development within the PV (Palm Valley overlay) district shall conform to the density, development, and special standards of the underlying zoning district and the following special standards. When in conflict, the special development standards shall apply: 
(1)  Build-to lines. 
a.  Build-to lines are established for all development in the Palm Valley overlay district. Build-to requirements replace minimum setback requirements in the overlay area. If no build-to requirements are established, then the applicable setback standards shall remain in force. 
b.  Fifty-five percent of the street frontage of all townhouse or multifamily residential structures shall be between 20 to 25 feet from the street edge. Townhouse or multifamily structures located within 300 feet of single-family detached structures may not be closer than ten feet to the street. 
c.  Sixty percent of the street frontage of all structures in nonresidential districts shall be between 20 to 25 feet from the street edge. Pedestrian accessible plazas and courtyards along commercial streets may count as part of this building frontage if they extend to the edge of the sidewalk. 
d.  Garages shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet, and may not be included in calculation of residential building frontage. 
e.  With the approval of the zoning administrator, the minimum build-to lines established above may be modified to allow for pedestrian passages or protected spaces that create wider sidewalk areas for cafes, patios or other types of outdoor pedestrian activities as well as driveways and access to parking. 
f.  Buildings along curved rights-of-way are required to have one or more points tangent to the build-to line. This eliminates any unintended requirement for curved walls. 
g.  The build-to line may be averaged when there are two or more contiguous lots. 
h.  Build-to lines do not apply to designated arterial roads. 

C-2: Palm Valley Configuration 
(2)  Building materials. 
a.  Exterior wall finish for single-family (detached and attached) residential buildings. Metal of any type is prohibited except horizontal, prefinished aluminum siding. Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Exterior wall finish for townhouse, multifamily and senior residential buildings. Exterior wall finish for townhouse, multifamily and senior residential development shall be in accordance with the exterior wall finish standards listed in the townhouse, multifamily and senior zoning districts. 
c.  Exterior wall finish for nonresidential buildings. 
1.  Any exterior wall facing a public right-of-way, parking area, or public open space, shall be brick, natural stone, simulated stone, stucco, or similar material approved in writing by the zoning administrator, except for doors, windows and trim. Stucco shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the exterior finish (breezeways are not included in this calculation). 
2.  The exterior wall finish of all other sides of the building (not facing a public right-of-way) shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, stucco, architectural concrete masonry unit (CMU), concrete tilt wall, or similar material approved in writing by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Building design standards. Buildings, other than those located in an LI, I, BP or PUD base district, should be designed with characteristics of the Pioneer architectural style. Buildings shall contain one or more of the following design features from the Pioneer architectural style. These characteristics include the following: 
a.  Front porches, back porches, wrap-around porches, add-on porches, and cut-out porches. 
b.  Stone walls of various stone coursing. 
c.  Gable end roofs, some hip roofs, occasional hip-gable roofs. 
d.  Pitched roofs with multiple pitch angles. 
e.  Galvanized metal roofing. 
f.  Dormer windows. 
g.  Pronounced stone chimneys. 
h.  Breezeways between parts of buildings. 
i.  Courtyards. 
j.  Small add-on structures. 
k.  Exterior stairs to upper levels. 
l.  Exposed rafters at eaves. 
m.  Rock fences. 
n.  Arbors. 
(4)  Palm Valley overlay district additional signage standards. Signs shall meet the requirements of chapter 8, article IX of this Code and shall be in harmony with the style and character of the development and shall be an integral design component of the building architecture, building materials, landscaping and overall site development. 
Secs. 2-89, 2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 2-91. - Supplementary use standards. 
(a)  Accessory dwelling unit . 
(1)  Accessory dwelling units in the C-2 and OF-1 districts are subject to the following standards: 
a.  Only one unit is permitted per platted lot. 
b.  Each unit shall be occupied by the owner or manager of the principal use on the same lot. 
c.  Each unit shall be subject to the density and development standards for principal structures of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling units/carriage houses in the MU-L district are subject to the following standards: 
a.  Detached units shall not exceed 450 square feet per floor. 
b.  Units that are above a garage may occupy the same footprint of the garage, excluding balconies, landings, and similar structures, with a maximum area of 625 square feet. 
c.  The design and materials shall be compatible with the principal structure on the lot. 
(b)  Amenity center. 
(1)  Amenity centers located in residential districts district shall have their principal vehicular entrance and exit on a collector street. Amenity centers shall be operated by the property owners' association. 
(2)  Amenity centers are permitted in the BP district provided they serve the employee population. The site shall be larger than two acres and shall have principal vehicular entrance and exit on a street internal to the business park. 
(c)  Apartment. Apartments in the SR district are restricted to senior housing. 
(d)  Assisted living. Assisted living facilities in the SR district are limited to facilities that function as senior housing. 
(e)  Auto body and painting shops and large vehicle and equipment repair facilities. 
(1)  All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(2)  All damaged vehicles shall be enclosed behind a minimum six-foot screening fence. 
(3)  Buildings shall not be less than 100 feet from the boundary of any SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, SR, MF-1, MF-2, or MF-3 district. 
(4)  No facilities shall be permitted to have bay doors facing an SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, SR, MF-1, MF-2, or MF-3 district. 
(f)  Auto sales, rental or leasing facilities. 
(1)  Auto sales, rental or leasing, including trucks and recreational vehicles, shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
a.  Fixed lighting shall be so arranged to prevent direct glare of beams onto any adjacent public or private property or street. 
b.  Repairs shall be performed only within a principal building. 
c.  Screening shall be provided along all lot lines abutting or adjacent to residentially zoned or developed property, to block any view of the use, its operations and stored materials and equipment from all points on such residential property when viewed from a point six feet above ground level. 
d.  Outdoor display of vehicles shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all lot lines abutting residentially zoned or developed property. 
e.  Landscaping shall be in accordance with Sec. 8-10. 
f.  Facilities located in the BP district are restricted to limited vehicle renting with eight available vehicles located on-site at any given time. 
(2)  Auto sales are prohibited in the C-1a district, unless the use is located on a lot with frontage on IH-35 and shall be subject to the standards provided in subsection (e)(1) of this section. 
(g)  Auto service and repair facilities. Facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All services and repairs shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(2)  Outdoor storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
(3)  Buildings shall not be less than 50 feet from the boundary of any SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, SR, MF-1, MF-2, or MF-3 district. 
(4)  No automobile service and repair facility shall be permitted to have bay doors facing an SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, SR, MF-1, MF-2, or MF-3 district. 
(h)  Bed and breakfast. 
(1)  A bed and breakfast shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  A maximum of six guest rooms shall be provided in any one bed and breakfast establishment. 
b.  No food preparation, except beverages, is allowed within individual guest rooms. Meal service shall be provided to overnight guests only. 
c.  Preparation and service of food for guests shall conform to all applicable regulations of the state and the city. 
(2)  A bed and breakfast located in the SF-2 or SF-D district shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
a.  A bed and breakfast located in an SF-2 district shall be in the downtown development area. 
b.  The operator of the bed and breakfast shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling in which the bed and breakfast establishment is housed. 
c.  A maximum of four (4) guest rooms shall be provided in any one bed and breakfast establishment. 
(i)  Car wash. 
(1)  Multi-bay car wash facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All washing facilities shall occur under a roofed area with at least two (2) walls. 
b.  The building surfaces shall be faced with brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or architectural concrete masonry units. 
c.  The building shall be set back not less than 50 feet from the front property line. 
(2)  In addition to the conditions provided in subsection (i)(1) of this section, multi-bay car wash facilities in the C-1a district and multi-bay car wash facilities in any district which share a common lot line with a single-family or two-family use are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The entrance and exit of the bays shall be aligned parallel with the primary road that the property fronts in order to limit the visibility of the interior of the bays. 
b.  The queuing area shall be screened from view from the primary road the property fronts and from adjacent single-family or two-family property lines by either a masonry wall extending from the side of the outside bay or by a landscaped berm. 
c.  The building shall not be less than 100 feet from any single-family or two-family property line. 
d.  Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building but shall not be in the street yard and shall not be closer than 150 feet from any single-family or two-family property line. 
(3)  Fully automatic, single-bay car washes are only permitted as an accessory use to fuel sales in the C-1 and C-1a districts, and with the following conditions: 
a.  The building shall not be less than 100 feet from any residential property line. 
b.  The entrance and exit of the bay shall face as few residential properties as possible. 
(j)  Commercial and general parking. 
(1)  Trucks, truck-tractors, and semi-trailers may not be parked in commercial or general parking lots except for panel trucks, pickup trucks, school buses and those motor vehicles necessary and accessory to the operation of uses permitted in the zoning district. 
(2)  No commercial or general parking lot may be used as a towing service storage yard or as an abandoned vehicle yard. 
(k)  Community/government service. 
(1)  A community/government service use located in the C-2, OF-1, MU-R, or any district adjacent to a residential district shall have its principal vehicular entrance and exit on a collector street or local street within 200 feet of its intersection with a collector or arterial street. 
(2)  A community/government service use located in the C-2, OF-1, or MU-R district shall be limited to 2,500 square feet of gross floor area and shall not serve as a location primarily for in-person customer contact. 
(3)  A community/government service use located in the OS district shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property in a residential district. 
(4)  A community/government service use located in the SR district shall be for the use of seniors. 
(l)  Day care. A day care facility shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions, in addition to the general development standards applicable in the districts: 
(1)  All day care facilities shall meet the minimum state requirements for such facilities. 
(2)  Day care facilities located in C-2 and OF-1 districts that do not have frontage on a designated arterial roadway may not exceed 5,000 square feet. All day care facilities located in C-2 and OF-1 districts shall meet following requirements as required for the size of the facility: 
a.  All day care facilities regardless of size shall provide a 25-foot unencumbered landscape buffer along property lines that adjoin existing or planned single- or two-family homes. However, this increased buffer shall not be required if the outdoor play/instruction area is located adjacent to a principal building elevation that is the farthest away from the single- or two-family lots. 
b.  All day care facilities less than 7,500 square feet shall provide a masonry fence at least six feet in height along property lines that adjoin existing or planned single- or two-family homes with a residential zoning designation. 
c.  All day care facilities that exceed 7,500 square feet shall provide a masonry fence at least eight feet in height along property lines that adjoin existing or planned single- or two-family homes. 
d.  All day care facilities that exceed 7,500 square feet shall submit a traffic impact analysis (TIA) for review and approval by the transportation division. The TIA shall address the projected traffic impacts to the surrounding neighborhood and how these impacts will be mitigated. This TIA is required regardless of whether or not the proposed facility generates at least 100 trips during the peak hour. 
e.  All day care facilities 10,000 square feet and larger shall require special exception approval by the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) and shall meet the aforementioned standards. 
(3)  Day care facilities in the OF-2 district may not be located in a building with no other uses. 
(m)  Dog day care, indoor kennel, grooming, and training facility. Dog day care, grooming, and training facilities in the C-2 district are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Animals shall not be allowed to be dropped off or picked up except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  On sites smaller than two acres, the gross floor area for each facility shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
(3)  On sites larger than two acres, the gross floor area for each facility shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(4)  On sites with 50 percent or greater frontage on an arterial roadway, the gross floor area for each facility shall not exceed 7,500 square feet. 
(n)  Golf courses and country clubs. Any structure established in connection with such uses shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property in a residential district. 
(o)  Group home (six or fewer persons). Group homes shall comply with state licensing requirements. 
(p)  Hospital heliports. 
(1)  Hospital heliports shall comply with FAA hospital heliport design standards (U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Advisory Circular No. 150/5390-2A, as amended). 
(2)  Hospital heliports shall be limited in use to touchdown and lift-off areas only and shall not include maintenance, storage or refueling facilities. 
(3)  Touchdown and lift-off areas may be located at ground level or on the rooftop of a hospital facility. 
(4)  Ground level touchdown and lift-off areas shall be paved and maintained in accordance with Sec. 8-52(d). 
(5)  Touchdown and lift-off areas shall not be located on required parking spaces for the hospital facility. 
(6)  Touchdown and lift-off areas shall be shown on the site development plan submitted for the hospital facility. 
(7)  Touchdown and lift-off areas shall not be located within 1,000 feet of residentially zoned property. 
(q)  Hotel/motel/lodging. Hotels/motels/lodging in the MU-1 and MU-2 districts shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Exterior entrances to guest rooms shall not face a public street; 
(2)  One hundred percent of the primary face on the ground floor of the primary structure shall consist only of lobby, reception areas, dining areas, drinking areas, and/or other facilities associated with the hotel/motel/lodging use. 
(r)  Indoor entertainment activities. 
(1)  In the C-1 or C-1a districts, a freestanding indoor entertainment activities facility, including the building footprint, outdoor eating, drinking and entertainment areas/patios, drive-through lanes and associated facilities, trash dumpsters and receptacles, and loading/unloading facilities, are prohibited within 150 feet of a residential property line. 
(2)  In the C-1 and C-1a districts, an indoor entertainment activities facility within a multi-tenant building are prohibited within 50 feet of a residential property line. Outdoor eating, drinking and entertainment areas/patios and drive-through lanes and associated facilities are prohibited within 150 feet of a residential property line. 
(3)  In MU-1, MU-2, and MU-R districts, indoor entertainment activities shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Video arcades with more than five (5) machines and firing ranges are prohibited. 
b.  Outdoor rear or side patio areas shall be screened by a natural stone, simulated stone, or brick fence that is eight feet in height in MU-2 and at least six (6) feet in height in MU-1 and MU-R. 
The zoning administrator may waive the above requirement based upon a finding of any of the following: 
1.  The zoning administrator determines that due to the site plan layout and/or existing conditions, potential impacts will be negligible; 
2.  The zoning administrator receives a letter from the adjacent residential property owner(s) requesting that the fence not be installed; or 
3.  The zoning administrator determines that existing and/or proposed vegetation will serve as an adequate screen. 
(s)  Light industrial services, manufacturing, and assembly . 
(1)  All activities shall occur within a fully enclosed building; and 
(2)  Outdoor loading docks, service areas, and fleet parking are prohibited. 
(t)  Live/work units. 
(1)  Live/work units permitted in the MU-1, MU-2, and MU-R districts shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  The occupant of the unit shall be the person who operates the business or trade that occupies the unit. 
b.  The unit may have nonresident employees and a commercial exterior. 
c.  The unit shall have the elements of a dwelling unit, including a kitchen and a bathroom but may not have more than one kitchen. 
d.  Home occupation requirements as provided for in Sec. 2-93(b) shall apply to a nonresidential use in a townhouse or upper-story residence. 
e.  The work component of a live/work unit shall be limited to the nonresidential uses permitted for that district in which the unit is located. 
(2)  Live/work units permitted in the MU-L district shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  The work component of a live/work unit in the MU-L district shall be limited to office or to the limited retail sales and services provided in Sec. 2-91(ee)(7). 
(u)  Office. 
(1)  Office uses in the C-2 district are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  On sites smaller than two acres, no single office use shall exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  On sites larger than two acres, no single office use shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  On sites with 50 percent or greater frontage on an arterial roadway, no single office use shall exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Office uses in the MU-1 district are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Except as provided below, in the two blocks of Main Street between Mays and Sheppard, office uses are prohibited on the ground floor of all buildings. Regardless of the foregoing, office use shall be permitted on the ground floor of buildings that contain office uses on the ground floor as of July 11, 2013, which such buildings are located at the following addresses, to wit: 100 E. Main, 102 E. Main, 104 E. Main, 105 E. Main, 108 E. Main, 109 E. Main, 110 E. Main, 115 E. Main, 116 E. Main, 206 E. Main, and 212 E. Main. 
(v)  Office, medical. 
(1)  Ambulance access ramps and other special design features for the accommodation of ambulances are prohibited. 
(2)  Except for sleep clinics, medical offices in the MU-2, C-2, OF-1, and MU-R districts shall be limited to regular service hours not beginning before 7:00 a.m. and not extending past 9:00 p.m. Sleep clinics are prohibited in the MU-2 district. 
(w)  Outdoor entertainment . Amplified live music performed in association with a restaurant/bar is permitted by right in the C-1 and C-1a districts. All other outdoor entertainment in the C-1 and C-1a districts requires special exception approval from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(x)  Park, community. Any structure established in connection with such uses shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property in a residential district. 
(y)  Park, linear and linkages. In residential districts, any trailhead (with parking) shall be located on a collector or higher street. Trail access points, intended to serve only pedestrians from the subdivision or neighborhood, may be located on local streets. 
(z)  Passenger terminal. Passenger terminals in the C-1 and C-1a districts may not include airports. 
(aa)  Places of worship. 
(1)  With accessory uses totaling less than 2,500 square feet: Places of worship shall meet development standards and supplementary use standards for any accessory uses. They are required to have direct access to a collector or higher street. 
(2)  With accessory uses totaling greater than 2,500 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet : Places of worship shall meet development standards and supplementary use standards for any accessory uses. They are required to either front on or have direct access to a collector or higher street. 
(3)  With unrestricted square footage of accessory uses : Places of worship shall meet development standards and supplementary use standards for any accessory uses. They are required to either front on or have direct access to an arterial street. 
(bb)  Research and development. No facilities for overnight stays by human test subjects shall be provided, nor shall such overnight stays be permitted. 
(cc)  Residential to office conversion. In cases where an existing single-family or two-family residential structure is converted to an office use in a C-1, C-1a, C-2 or OF-1 zoning district, the following special standards shall apply. Where standards are not mentioned in this section, applicable district standards shall apply: 
(1)  Any architectural changes to an existing building associated with a change in use for a residential to office conversion shall reflect the original architecture, including roof, roof pitch, articulation, windows, doors, treatment and exterior finish. 
(2)  Residential to office conversions shall apply only to existing structures that were formerly used as single-family or two-family residences. The existing principal building on a site establishes the allowable setbacks for a residential to office conversion. Any expansions shall be subject to the zoning district standards. Existing residential structures that were expanded after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and prior to an office conversion, shall not be allowed to utilize these standards for a period of five years after rezoning. 
(3)  A residential to office conversion may also operate as a live/work unit, as defined in Sec. 1-50, provided the work component is limited to an office use. 
(4)  The hours of operation of any residential to office conversion use shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for access by the public. No emergency medical services shall be permitted. 
(5)  Landscaping requirements provided in Sec. 8-10, except for landscape buffer requirements, apply to all residential to office conversions. 
(6)  Parking. 
a.  Residential to office conversions shall have an off-street parking requirement of one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  If a residential to office conversion operates as a live/work unit, parking shall be calculated using the relevant office requirements for the total square footage of the structure. No additional parking spaces shall be required for the residential component. 
(7)  Outdoor storage and display is prohibited. 
(8)  Fencing requirement. All residential to office conversions shall be required to install and maintain a fence constructed of masonry materials such as brick, natural stone, simulated stone, decorative reinforced concrete, or other equivalent material approved by the zoning administrator, a minimum of six (6) feet in height along every property line which abuts residential uses. The zoning administrator may waive the requirement based upon a finding of all of the following: 
a.  The zoning administrator determines that due to the site plan layout and/or existing conditions, potential impacts will be negligible; 
b.  The zoning administrator receives a letter from the abutting residential property owner requesting that the fence not be installed; and 
c.  The zoning administrator determines that existing and/or proposed vegetation will serve as an adequate screen. 
(9)  Lighting. 
a.  All external lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as to deflect light away from residential areas and shall not result in any spillover to adjacent properties. 
b.  Site lighting. 
1.  Freestanding fixtures shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall not be required to be concealed within an opaque housing. For parking lot lighting fixtures, if a site has greater than ten parking spaces, freestanding fixtures may be up to 16 feet in height; however, the light source for fixtures taller than eight (8) feet shall be completely concealed (recessed) within an opaque housing. 
2.  Building fixtures shall not be required to be concealed within an opaque housing if located at a height of no more than eight (8) feet above grade. 
c.  The design of building fixtures shall be consistent with the character of the area and the style of the building. 
(dd)  Restaurants/bars. 
(1)  Freestanding restaurants/bars. In the C-1, C-1a, and MU-R districts, freestanding restaurants/bars shall locate any outdoor eating, drinking, or entertainment areas, patios, drive-through lanes, speaker boxes, and associated facilities a minimum of 150 feet from any residential property line. This requirement may be waived in situations where the zoning administrator determines that topography, natural features, site design, or other existing site conditions render such a setback unnecessary or impractical. 
(2)  Restaurants/bars in a multi-tenant building. In the C-1, C-1a, and MU-R districts, all outdoor eating, drinking, or entertaining areas, patios, drive-through lanes, speaker boxes, and associated facilities with a restaurant/bar in a multi-tenant building shall be located more than 150 feet from any residential property line. This requirement may be waived in situations where the zoning administrator determines that topography, natural features, site design, or other existing site conditions render such a setback unnecessary or impractical. 
(3)  Requirements for C-2. Restaurants/bars in the C-2 district are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  On sites smaller than two acres, no single restaurant/bar shall exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  On sites larger than two acres, no single restaurant/bar shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  On sites with 50 percent or greater frontage on an arterial roadway, no single restaurant/bar shall exceed 7,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  No drive-through service is allowed. 
(4)  Requirements for BP and OF-2. Restaurants/bars permitted in the BP and OF-2 districts are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The gross floor area of any single establishment shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
b.  The establishment shall clearly be a secondary, support use for the regular operation of the business park or office building. 
c.  The establishment may not be located in a building with no other uses. 
d.  All outdoor eating, drinking, or entertaining areas, patios, drive-through lanes, speaker boxes, and associated facilities with a restaurant/bar shall be located more than 150 feet from any residential property line. This requirement may be waived in situations where the zoning administrator determines that topography, natural features, site design, or other existing site conditions render such a setback unnecessary or impractical. 
(5)  Requirements for MU-1 . Bars in the MU-1 district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined: 
1.  Bar shall be defined as an establishment which: 
i.  Sells alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption; 
ii.  Does not have a commercial kitchen; and 
iii.  Does not meet the definition of "restaurant/bar" as defined in Sec. 1.50. 
2.  Block shall be defined as a group of properties bound on all sides adjacent public streets. 
b.  No more than twelve bars may operate in the MU-1 zoning district. 
c.  No more than four bars may operate within any single block. 
d.  No greater than two bars may operate on the same side of any single block. 
e.  Establishments whose primary façade, including building and patio areas, exceeds 100 feet in length shall be counted as two bars. 
f.  The owner of an establishment counting as two bars according to subsection e. above shall not be issued a building permit that will expand the premises. 
g.  When the limit in subsections b., c., or d. above is reached, any further prospective bars shall be placed on a waiting list maintained by city staff. 
1.  The owner of property occupied by a bar which ceases operations shall be entitled to resume bar use for up to six months after the closing of the previous bar. If no building permit application is filed with the city or application for an alcoholic beverage license filed with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) seeking to open a new bar on the property before the end of the six-month period, city staff will notify the longest-tenured waiting list applicant of his/her right to proceed. 
2.  The waiting list applicant will have 90 days to file an application for a building permit with the city, or, if no building permit is required, an application for an alcoholic beverage license with TABC. If neither action has occurred at the end of the 90-day period, staff will notify the next waiting list applicant. 
(6)  Requirements for MU-2. Restaurants/bars in the MU-2 district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Outdoor rear or side dining areas shall be required to install and maintain a natural stone, simulated stone, or brick fence that is eight (8) feet in height along any shared property line with a residential use, with the exception of multi-story apartments and upper story residential. 
The zoning administrator may waive the above requirement based upon a finding of any of the following: 
1.  The zoning administrator determines that due to the site plan layout and/or existing conditions, potential impacts will be negligible; 
2.  The zoning administrator receives a letter from the adjacent residential property owner(s) requesting that the fence not be installed; or 
3.  The zoning administrator determines that existing and/or proposed vegetation will serve as an adequate screen. 
b.  All restaurants/bars that serve alcohol must hold a food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 28.18. 
(ee)  Retail sales and services. 
(1)  Special standard for banks and pharmacies in any district . Stacking spaces, speaker boxes, service windows, and other facilities associated with a drive-through lane shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any residential property line. This requirement may be waived in situations where the zoning administrator determines that topography, natural features, site design, or other existing site conditions render such a setback unnecessary or impractical. 
(2)  C-1a district. Retail sales and service uses in the C-1a district are subject to the following standards: 
a.  Amusement parks or carnivals; boat sales (except on IH-35); camper sales (except on IH-35); campgrounds; flea markets; heavy equipment sales, rental and leasing; kennels; landscaping services; manufactured home sales; pawn shops; portable building sales; recreational vehicle parks; self-service storage; sexually oriented businesses; shooting ranges; tattoo parlors; truck service or repair; and truck stops are prohibited in the C-1a district. 
b.  Resale stores in the C-1a district are prohibited on lots with frontage on IH-35. 
(3)  C-2 district. Cosmetic services and retail sales and service uses in the C-2 district are subject to the following requirements: 
a.  On sites smaller than two acres, no single use shall exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. No drive-through facilities are permitted. 
b.  On sites larger than two acres, no single use shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. No drive-through facilities are permitted. 
c.  On sites with 50 percent or greater frontage on an arterial roadway, no single use shall exceed 7,500 square feet of gross floor area. Drive-through facilities are permitted for banks if there is an intervening building that effectively screens the drive-through area, including stacking spaces, from adjacent residences. 
d.  Auto sales, rental, and leasing facilities; boat sales; camper sales; check-cashing services; flea markets; gold sales; gun sales; heavy equipment sales, rental and leasing; manufactured home sales; pawn shops; portable building sales; recreational vehicle parks; self-service storage; sexually oriented businesses; shooting/archery ranges; tattoo/piercing shops; title loan or payday loan services; truck service or repair; and truck stops are prohibited. 
e.  Fuel sales is permitted with the following conditions: 
1.  For establishments that share a common lot line with a single-family or two-family use, the number of fuel pump islands shall not exceed four (4) without special exception approval from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. There is no limit to the number of fuel pumps for establishments that do not share a common lot line with a single-family or two-family use; 
2.  The canopy shall have a pitched roof with a minimum 3:12 pitch; 
3.  Lighted bands around the exterior of the canopy are prohibited; 
4.  Columns supporting the canopy over the fuel pumps shall be clad in brick or natural stone that is complementary to the masonry used on the exterior of the convenience store; 
5.  No automated teller machines (ATMs) may be located outside the convenience store; and 
6.  The hours of operation for the convenience store may not exceed 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(4)  OF-2 district . 
a.  Cosmetic services and retail sales and services are permitted only when incorporated into the ground floor of a multi-story structure. 
b.  Animal boarding; art and craft studios with welding or heavy machinery; auto parts sales; auto sales, rental, and leasing facilities; boat sales; camper sales; donation centers; flea markets; fortune tellers/psychic readers; heavy equipment sales; machinery repair and services; manufactured home sales; mortuaries; pawn shops; portable building sales; self-service storage; sexually oriented businesses; shooting/archery ranges; tattoo/piercing shops; taxidermists; and title loan or payday loan services are prohibited. 
(5)  BP district. Retail sales and service uses in the business park (BP) district are restricted to commercial gyms only. They are permitted provided that they generally serve the employee population of the business park. 
(6)  MU-1, MU-2, and MU-R districts. Retail sales and services in the MU-1, MU-2, and MU-R districts are subject to the following standards: 
a.  Animal boarding; attached wireless transmission facilities; art and craft studios with welding or heavy machinery; auto parts sales; auto repair and body shops; auto sales, rental, and leasing facilities; boat sales; camper sales; campgrounds; car washes; donation centers; flea markets; gasoline and fuel sales; heavy equipment sales; machinery repair and services; manufactured home sales; mini-warehouses; monopoles; mortuaries; pawn shops; portable building sales; recycling centers; self-enclosed monopoles; self-service storage; sexually oriented businesses; shooting/archery ranges; taxidermists; wholesale nurseries; and wrecking yards are prohibited. 
b.  Tattoo and/or piercing shops shall be prohibited within a 500-foot radius of an existing tattoo and piercing shop, as measured from property line to property line. 
c.  Gun and/or firearm shops shall be prohibited within a 500-foot radius of an existing gun and/or firearm shop, as measured from property line to property line. 
d.  Veterinary clinics and animal grooming shops are prohibited in MU-1, but permitted in MU-2 and MU-R. 
(7)  MU-L district. It is the intent of the MU-L district to encourage the establishment of specialized personal services, boutique shops selling specialty items, and artisanal workshops. Therefore, retail sales and service uses are subject to the following standards: 
a.  The following uses are prohibited: animal boarding; art and craft studios with welding and heavy machinery; attached wireless transmission facilities; auto parts sales; auto repair and body shops; auto sales, rental, and leasing facilities; banks including savings and loans, credit unions, and check-cashing facilities; campgrounds; car washes; donation centers; dry cleaning; flea markets; food sales with a commercial kitchen of greater than 500 square feet; fortune tellers/psychic readers; gasoline and fuel sales; gun or firearm shops; hair salons; heavy equipment sales; laundromats; machinery repair and services; manufactured home sales; mini-warehouses; monopoles; mortuaries; nail salons; pawn shops; portable building sales; recycling centers; self-enclosed monopoles; self-service storage; sexually oriented businesses (as defined in the Code); shooting/archery ranges; tanning salons; tattoo and piercing shops; taxidermists; wholesale nurseries; and wrecking yards. 
b.  All permitted uses shall have no more than 2,000 total square feet of sales floor, service areas accessible to the public, food preparation areas, and manufacturing areas. 
(ff)  Schools, public and private. 
(1)  Elementary schools, public. Elementary schools shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet, shall front on a collector street, and shall not front on an arterial street. Portable classrooms are prohibited in the front street yard. 
(2)  Middle schools, public. Middle schools shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet and shall front on either a major collector or minor arterial street. Portable classrooms are prohibited in the front street yard. 
(3)  High schools, public. High schools shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet and shall front on either a minor or major arterial. Portable classrooms are prohibited in the front street yard. 
(4)  Colleges, universities, business/trade, and other post-secondary educational facilities. Colleges, universities, business/trade, and other post-secondary educational facilities shall front on either a minor or major arterial street. 
(5)  Primary/secondary, private. 
a.  Portable classrooms are prohibited in the front street yard. 
b.  Schools shall front on collector or arterial streets. 
(gg)  Self-service storage. Self-service storage facilities shall be allowed subject to the following standards: 
(1)  In the C-1 district only multi-story facilities with internal access to storage units are allowed, and exterior roll-up doors providing access to individual units are prohibited. 
(2)  The use of the individual storage units shall be limited to storage purposes only. 
(3)  No direct glare from any illumination on the site shall be visible from lots in any adjacent residential zoning district. 
(4)  Electrical service to any individual storage unit shall be limited to a single circuit providing a maximum force of 20 amperes, with no more than one duplex outlet providing single-phase electrical service of no more than 110 volts. 
(5)  A caretaker's residence is permitted only in the LI and I districts as an accessory use for self-storage facilities. 
(6)  Each self-storage facility in the LI and I districts that abuts a designated arterial roadway shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Each landscaped street yard shall contain a depth of at least 25 feet. 
b.  Parking spaces shall not be located in the street yard. 
c.  One hundred percent of each street yard shall be landscaped. 
d.  Each wall or fence that abuts a street yard shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or other similar masonry product; but not including cinder block unless covered with stucco or similar material. 
e.  The entire tract shall be enclosed by a building wall or a six-foot perimeter fence. Any portion of said building wall or fence that is visible from the designated arterial roadway shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or similar masonry product. 
f.  Storage or parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, and other similar unenclosed storage is prohibited in any street yard and shall be enclosed by a building wall or an eight foot perimeter fence constructed in accordance with subsection (gg)(7)e. of this section. 
(hh)  Single-family attached and single-family detached dwelling units. 
(1)  C-1 and C-1a districts. Single-family attached (two dwelling units) and single-family detached dwelling units in the C-1 and C-1a districts are permitted only in the downtown development area. 
(2)  MU-2 district. Single-family dwelling units are subject to the following standards: 
a.  A single-family use that is converted to a nonresidential use shall not return to a single-family use. 
b.  Single-family uses shall not be required to provide on-site parking in a garage. 
c.  Nonresidential uses shall not be required to provide a compatibility buffer adjacent to single-family uses. 
d.  After the 1st day of August, 2013, if a single-family structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent by natural or manmade disaster, not including damage caused intentionally or negligently by the owner, the single-family structure may be rebuilt according to the following density and development standards and time deadlines: 
1.  No minimum lot area required; 
2.  Front, side, and rear setbacks shall conform to either SF-2 or MU-2 standards; 
3.  The exterior finish of all new buildings shall be of natural stone, simulated stone, brick, stucco, and/or fiber cement siding; 
4.  If the building official has not issued a certificate of occupancy within five years following the date of destruction of the single-family structure, all future use of the property must conform to all MU-2 standards. 
(3)  TF district . Single-family detached dwelling units in the TF district shall comply with the lot and building dimensional standards for the SF-2 zoning district, which can be found in Sec. 2-26. 
(4)  MU-1 district. 
a.  Single-family detached dwelling units shall be permitted only on properties located at the following addresses in the city: 305 East Liberty; 309 East Liberty, 311 East Liberty, 306 East Liberty, and 102 East Liberty. 
b.  Single-family dwelling units are subject to the following standards: 
1.  A single-family use that is converted to a nonresidential use shall not return to a single-family use. 
2.  Single-family uses shall not be required to provide on-site parking in a garage. 
3.  Nonresidential uses shall not be required to provide a compatibility buffer adjacent to single-family uses. 
4.  The MU-2 (Mixed-Use Downtown Medium Density) district design standards contained in Subsection 2-72(e) shall apply. 
(ii)  Small-scale alcohol production. Small-scale alcohol production in the BP district shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All temporary outdoor storage areas shall be screened from any public right-of-way or abutting property by an opaque wall a minimum of six (6) feet in height. The wall shall be constructed of materials complementary to the principal structure. 
(jj)  Townhouses. Townhouses in the SR district are restricted to senior housing. 
(kk)  Upper story residential. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (kk)(2) of this section, upper story residential uses are permitted subject to the following standards: 
a.  In the C-1 and C-1a districts, upper story residential is permitted only in the downtown development area and the CT overlay. 
b.  In the C-2 district, upper story residential uses are permitted only on sites larger than two acres. 
c.  In the C-1, C-1a and C-2 districts, the residential use shall be clearly secondary to the principal commercial use. The gross floor area of the entire building shall include not more than 50 percent residential uses. 
d.  In the C-1, C-1a and C-2 districts, separate designated parking spaces for use by the residential units are required. Shared parking calculations are prohibited. 
(2)  Upper story residential uses in the MU-1, MU-2, and MU-R districts shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  For upper story residences, on-site resident parking shall be separated from customer or employee parking, reserved for residents' use only, and shall be clearly marked for such purposes. 
b.  The ground floor of the building shall be occupied by nonresidential uses. 
c.  The residential use shall have a separate entrance from the nonresidential uses. 
d.  On the primary facade, direct access from the ground level to balconies or landings of upper story residential uses is prohibited. 
(ll)  Urgent care facilities . 
(1)  Urgent care facilities in the C-1 and C-1a districts that offer emergency medical services may not be located within 300 feet of an existing or zoned residential use. 
(2)  Urgent care facilities in the OF-1 district shall not be specifically designed to accommodate ambulances. 
(mm)  Utilities. 
(1)  Minor utilities. Minor utilities shall be treated as ground-mounted mechanical equipment and shall comply with the district-specific standards and any required landscaping standards in Sec. 8-10. 
(2)  Intermediate and major utilities. Except as provided in subsection (mm)(3) below, intermediate and major utilities are required to provide an eight (8) foot masonry fence (or alternate material approved in writing by the zoning administrator) with landscaping in compliance with Sec. 8-10. The facility shall be secured. 
(3)  MU-2 district. Major utilities in the MU-2 district shall be fully enclosed within a building. 
(nn)  Veterinary clinic, livestock. 
(1)  Corrals and stables may be provided solely incidental to animal hospital use and for convalescing livestock. 
(2)  Cremation services shall be prohibited. 
(oo)  Veterinary clinic, small animals. 
(1)  Any veterinary clinic, small animals in the C-2 and OF-1 districts shall be limited to regular service hours beginning at 7:00 a.m. and ending at 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Kennel facilities shall be limited to indoors and incidental to animals being treated at the facility. 
(3)  Ancillary sales of pet care products, including but not limited to, prescription food, medications, and grooming accessories shall be limited to no more than ten percent of the gross floor area of the facility. 
(4)  Cremation services shall be prohibited. 
(pp)  Waste-related service. Waste-related services are permitted in the LI district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The facility shall be visually screened from any adjacent roadways, residential districts and any other nonindustrial uses by an eight-foot perimeter fence. Any portion of the fence that is visible from the adjacent roadways shall be constructed of brick, natural stone, simulated stone, or architectural concrete masonry units. 
(2)  All recycling bins shall be enclosed behind a minimum eight (8) foot screening fence. 
(3)  All solid, liquid or sanitary waste collected shall be stored within an enclosed building. 
(4)  All manufacturing or production of goods or energy from solid, liquid or sanitary waste or recycled materials shall be conducted in an enclosed building. 
(5)  Accessory buildings shall be set back more than 100 feet from single-family and two-family lots. 
(qq)  Wireless transmission facility (WTF). Wireless transmission facilities shall comply with the standards provided in Sec. 2-97. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0208, § II, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 2-92. - Temporary uses, structures, and permits. 
(a)  Purpose. Temporary buildings and structures, as set forth below, are declared to have characteristics which require certain controls to ensure compatibility with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. 
(b)  Temporary buildings. No temporary building or structure shall be erected in any required setback area. 
(1)  Temporary buildings providing classrooms for schools, religious institutions and other similar facilities may be permitted only where such buildings are part of an approved site plan for future development of the site. 
(2)  Temporary buildings, where permitted, are subject to site plan approval. The zoning administrator may require buffering or screening as set forth in Secs. 8-10 and 8-40. 
(3)  Temporary buildings shall not be placed in any street yard of the principal building, except for those providing classrooms for schools and places of worship, which may be placed in a side or rear street yard. 
(4)  Temporary buildings shall not interfere with on-site circulation. 
(c)  Use of model home as temporary sales office. The following regulations shall apply to the use of model homes as temporary sales offices: 
(1)  The use of a model home as a temporary sales office may be located within residential districts as part of an ongoing residential development, if the office is directly and exclusively related to initial sales of dwelling units within the respective residential subdivision or development. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall ensure that each use of a model home as a temporary sales office is issued only a temporary certificate of occupancy. The temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire in one year, except as described below or unless it is renewed by the respective real estate agency upon which the burden shall lie to demonstrate that the conditions of approval still exist. 
(3)  If a model home is used as a temporary sales office, the sales office shall be removed when certificates of occupancy have been issued to 90 percent of the associated residential units. 
(4)  If any garage space has been used as office space, it shall be converted back to a garage for automobile parking prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for use as a home. 
(5)  Temporary sales offices shall only be located in model homes. 
(d)  Contractors' offices and equipment sheds. Contractors' offices and equipment sheds containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations are permitted in any district when accessory to an ongoing construction project. Such use shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the associated construction project. 
(e)  Use of temporary buildings or temporary outdoor storage during expansion, remodeling or reconstruction. The following regulations shall apply to the use of temporary buildings or temporary outdoor storage during expansions, remodeling or reconstruction: 
(1)  The temporary buildings or the temporary outdoor storage can only be used to accommodate staff, equipment or inventory displaced by the expansion, remodel or reconstruction. 
(2)  The location of the temporary building or temporary outdoor storage must be shown on a site plan; and reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. The location requirements are as follows: 
a.  The placement of temporary outdoor storage shall not conflict with any vehicle circulation. 
b.  The placement of temporary outdoor storage shall not conflict with any public utilities, easements or rights-of-way. 
c.  If an alternative location exists, the temporary outdoor storage shall not be placed within the street yard. 
d.  The location of the temporary building or temporary outdoor storage shall meet the accessory building requirements for that zoning district. 
(3)  Upon review and approval by the zoning administrator, a temporary use permit shall be applied for all temporary buildings and temporary outdoor storage used during the expansion, remodeling or reconstruction of an existing business. 
(4)  Separate building permits shall be obtained for the temporary building or temporary outdoor storage; and the expansion, remodel or reconstruction of the existing business. 
(5)  The temporary building or temporary outdoor storage shall be removed no later than 45 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the building permit related to the expansion, remodel or reconstruction of the existing business. 
(6)  The business undergoing the expansion, remodel or reconstruction must be an existing business and not a new business, changing businesses or changing uses. 
(7)  An existing site plan for the existing business must already be on file with the city. 
(8)  Temporary outdoor storage uses shall also comply with the requirements provided in Sec. 8-35. 
(f)  Temporary portable storage units. Temporary, portable storage units are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Location. Temporary portable storage units are prohibited in any right-of-way or easement, and must be located on an improved surface such as a paved driveway or parking lot. 
(2)  Duration. Temporary portable storage units shall not remain on any residential lot for more than seven consecutive days. 
(3)  Shipping containers and conexes . Industrial shipping containers, sometimes known as conexes, are prohibited in any residential or mixed-use zoning district except during construction, expansion, or remodeling as noted in subsection (e) above. 
(g)  Temporary use permits. 
(1)  Applicability. Before temporary uses are permitted on private or public property, applicants shall obtain a temporary use permit from the zoning administrator that outlines conditions of operations to protect the public, health, safety and welfare. Temporary uses are prohibited in public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Temporary uses types. Temporary uses shall be deemed to include short-term or seasonal uses that are not otherwise allowed by the zoning district regulations of this Code. The following uses and activities shall be considered temporary uses: 
a.  Fundraising activities by not-for-profits. Fundraising or noncommercial events for nonprofit religious, educational or community service organizations where the public is invited to participate in the activities and which last longer than 72 hours, but not longer than 45 days. This description shall not preclude the use of existing religious institutions or other not-for-profit facilities for events conducted entirely within a building. 
b.  Other temporary uses. Other temporary uses found by the zoning administrator to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Review and action by zoning administrator. 
a.  Application should be made at least 15 days in advance of the requested start date for a temporary use. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall determine whether to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the permit within ten days after the date of application and shall determine the length of time that the permit is valid. Permits requested for a temporary building or temporary outdoor storage during expansions, remodeling or reconstruction as provided for in this section shall be valid for a period of up to one year and an extension may be requested from the zoning administrator for a period not to exceed one additional year prior to the expiration of the original temporary use permit issued. All other permits shall be valid for a period between one and 45 days. 
c.  Where an application has been disapproved by the zoning administrator, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for the disapproval. 
(4)  Temporary use approval criteria. Temporary uses shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Land use compatibility. The temporary use shall be compatible with the purpose and intent of this Code and the zoning district in which it will be located. The temporary use shall not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site. The temporary use shall not endanger or be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of the temporary use, given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and its relationship to parking and access points. 
b.  Compliance with other regulations. A building permit or temporary certificate of occupancy may be required before any structure used in conjunction with the temporary use is constructed or modified. All structures and the site as a whole shall meet all applicable building code, zoning district, and fire code standards and shall be promptly removed upon the cessation of the use or event. Upon cessation of the event or use, the site shall be returned to its previous condition (including the removal of all trash, debris, signage, attention attracting devices or other evidence of the special event or use). 
c.  Hours of operation and duration. The duration and hours of operation of the temporary use shall be consistent with the intent of the event or use and compatible with the surrounding land uses. The duration and hours of operation shall be established by the zoning administrator at the time of approval of the temporary use permit. 
d.  Traffic circulation. The temporary use shall not cause undue traffic congestion or accident potential, as determined by the city traffic engineer, given anticipated attendance and the existing design of adjacent streets, intersections and traffic controls. 
e.  Off-street parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the temporary use, and it shall not create a parking shortage for any of the other existing uses on the site. 
f.  Public conveniences and litter control. On-site restroom facilities are required. Adequate on-site solid waste containers may also be required. The applicant shall provide a written guarantee that all litter generated by the event or use shall be removed at no expense to the city. 
g.  Appearance and nuisances. The temporary use shall be compatible in intensity, appearance and operation with surrounding land uses in the area, and it shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive noise, dust, smoke, glare, spillover lighting, or other forms of environmental or visual pollution. 
h.  Signs and attention-attracting devices. The zoning administrator shall review all signage in conjunction with the issuance of the permit. The zoning administrator may approve signs and the temporary use of attention attracting devices that conform to the requirements of chapter 8, article VIII, of this Code. 
i.  Other conditions. The zoning administrator may establish any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential adverse impacts on nearby uses, including but not limited to, time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation, requirements for screening/buffering, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following the temporary use. 
(5)  Expiration and lapse of approval. If the use described in the temporary use permit has not begun within 60 days from the date of issuance, the temporary use permit shall expire and be of no further effect. 
Sec. 2-93. - Accessory uses and home occupations. 
(a)  Generally. Any accessory use customarily associated with a principal use that may be permitted by right consistent with applicable provisions of this chapter may be permitted. The establishment of such accessory uses shall be consistent with the following standards in addition to any district specific requirements: 
(1)  The accessory use shall be subordinate to and serve a principal use or principal structure. 
(2)  The accessory use shall be subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use served. 
(3)  The accessory use shall contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use served. 
(4)  The accessory use shall be located within the same zoning district as the principal use. 
(5)  Accessory uses located in residential districts shall not be used for commercial purposes other than legitimate home occupations. 
(b)  Home occupation. 
(1)  Home occupation limitations . 
a.  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or attached garage which is the bona fide residence of the practitioners. 
b.  No person other than a person or persons who reside in the dwelling unit may participate in a home occupation on the premises. 
c.  Neither the interior, nor the exterior of the dwelling shall be structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction codes to accommodate the home occupation. No additional buildings or structures shall be added on the property to accommodate the home occupation. This provision shall not prohibit the construction of an accessory building as permitted by a residential zoning district. 
d.  The home occupation shall not interfere with the use of the garage as a required parking space under this code. 
e.  No equipment, goods, supplies or materials associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored where visible from an abutting right-of-way or at the property line of an abutting property at a point six (6) feet above the finished grade. 
f.  The sale of merchandise directly to a customer on the premises shall be prohibited; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the following: 
1.  Up to one garage sale every six (6) months. 
2.  A service that involves the sale of a custom item made by the home occupant. 
g.  The home occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference or waste runoff outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling unit. Commercial repair of automobiles or engines and appliance repair are prohibited, and storage of these items shall not be allowed on the premises. 
h.  The street address of the home occupation shall not be advertised through pamphlets, signs, billboards, television, radio, the internet, the phone book, newspapers or on vehicles. 
i.  A home occupation shall not generate more than 24 single directional vehicle trips each day of customer-related vehicular traffic. 
j.  Not more than two customers shall be permitted to conduct business associated with the home occupation at one time, except for day care, which allows six children to be cared for at one time. 
k.  Organized events for the purpose of displaying or modeling articles for sale shall not be conducted at a home more than six times per year. 
l.  Signs shall meet the requirements of Chapter 8, article IX, of this code. 
(2)  Remedies and enforcement power . Remedies and enforcement powers shall be as described in Sec. 1, article II of this code. 
(c)  Mobile food establishments. 
(1)  General . A mobile food establishment is a temporary food service operation that supports certain types of businesses in certain locations in the City. 
(2)  Temporary in nature . Mobile food establishments are meant to be open and on-site only on a temporary basis. As such, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  New connections to city water or wastewater infrastructure are prohibited; 
b.  New electric meters are prohibited; and 
c.  For mobile food establishments serving a municipal parks and recreation facility, the Parks and Recreation Department shall determine the permissible duration for which each establishment may operate. 
(3)  Site location criteria . 
a.  Mobile food establishments shall not locate on public streets or in public parking lots, but may locate in an unimproved alley of a property zoned MU-1. 
b.  Mobile food establishments shall not be located within 50 feet of a single-family dwelling unit. This measurement shall be taken from the property line of the dwelling unit to the closest point of the mobile food establishment location. 
c.  Mobile food establishments shall not locate in access drives, fire lanes, or improved alleys. 
d.  Mobile food establishments shall not locate on sidewalks in or along the right-of-way without prior approval from the city. Approval may be granted if a minimum width of five (5) feet of sidewalk remains free of any obstructions. 
e.  Mobile food establishments may not occupy any parking spaces needed for the minimum required parking for the primary use. 
f.  Mobile food establishments shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from fire hydrants and five (5) feet from any utility box, ADA accessibility ramp, or building entrance. 
(4)  Other requirements . 
a.  The mobile food establishment shall be in compliance with Williamson County and Cities Health District regulations and applicable City fire department regulations. 
b.  All signage and identification for the mobile food establishment shall be on or attached to the vehicle. Menu items may be displayed on sandwich boards which are not attached to the vehicle. 
c.  All food vending transactions shall occur from the vehicle. 
d.  No trash or grease shall be left at the site after the departure of the mobile food establishment, except in existing on-site containers specifically designed for such waste. 
e.  Vehicles, generators, and other equipment shall be maintained so as to be in operable condition at all times. 
f.  Durable exterior-grade finishes and decorations shall be utilized for all exterior materials on the vehicle and shall be maintained in accordance with minimum property, structural and health standards. 
(5)  Long-term accessory use . Upon the issuance of an annual permit as described in subsection (6) below, mobile food establishments are permitted as an accessory use supporting the following primary uses: 
a.  Eating and drinking establishments located on lots zoned MU-1 or a PUD which abuts a MU-1 or MU-2 zoned parcel; 
b.  A multi-tenant center where the mobile food establishment is located within an internally oriented pedestrian promenade which is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
c.  Small-scale alcohol production facilities; 
d.  Event centers; 
e.  Municipal parks and recreation facilities; and 
f.  Public and private education facilities, corporate office campuses, and business/industrial parks, at which the mobile food establishment provides service to the students of employees of the hosting organization. 
(6)  Annual permit required . 
a.  Except as provided below, an annual permit from the city for each calendar year beginning January 1 shall be required for the operation of a mobile food establishment. The property owner or tenant who is hosting the mobile food establishment shall be responsible for obtaining the permit; 
b.  A site map showing the proposed location of the mobile food establishment(s) shall be provided; 
c.  All applications for mobile food establishment permits shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances; 
d.  The mobile food establishment shall not operate during the hours that the primary use is closed; 
e.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a mobile food establishment which is visible from public rights-of-way to park the vehicle overnight at the location of their associated primary use on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday night, except for Sunday and Thursday nights that coincide with a federal holiday the following day; and 
f.  Sites smaller than one (1) acre are prohibited from having more than two (2) mobile food establishments on-site at any time. 
(7)  Short-term accessory use . Upon issuance of a three-day permit as described in subsection (8) below, mobile food establishments are permitted as an accessory use supporting the following uses: 
a.  Property located within a Commercial Zoning District, which contains an operational business; 
b.  Property located within an Employment and Industrial Zoning District which contains an operational business; 
c.  Small-scale alcohol production facilities; 
d.  Event centers; 
e.  Community/government service facilities/places of worship; 
f.  Municipal parks and recreation facilities; and 
g.  Public and private education facilities, corporate office campuses, and business/industrial parks, at which the mobile food establishment provides services to the students or employees of the hosting organization. 
(8)  Three-day permit required . 
a.  Each event shall be for a maximum of three (3) consecutive days. 
b.  A maximum of four (4) permits within each calendar year shall be used for each property. 
c.  The property owner or tenant who is hosting the event shall be responsible for obtaining the permit. If a tenant applies for the permit, the signature of the property owner or property management company must be on the application. 
d.  All applications for mobile food establishment permits shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in appendix A the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0083, § I, 2-14-2019) 
Sec. 2-94. - Limited and specific use standards. 
(a)  Generally . 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages . Regulations pertaining to alcoholic beverages may be found in chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses . Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses may be found in chapter 6, article III of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Shooting and archery ranges . Regulations pertaining to shooting and archery ranges may be found in chapter 6, article IV of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 2-95. - Renewable energy standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the installation and construction of solar energy systems in the City of Round Rock, subject to reasonable restrictions, which will mitigate possible nuisances and preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the siting of solar energy systems used to generate electricity or perform work which may be connected to the electric distribution grid, serve as an independent source of energy, or serve in a hybrid system. The requirements are not intended to apply to landscape lighting, security lighting, and other self-contained lighting fixtures that are not connected to other electrical components. 
(c)  Zoning. Solar energy systems may be permitted as an accessory structure in all zoning districts. 
(d)  Removal of defective or abandoned solar energy systems . Any solar energy systems found to be unsafe by the building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or removed within 10 days following written notice. If any solar energy system is not operational for a period of 12 consecutive months or more, the city shall give written notice to the landowner to take corrective action within 45 days after receipt of notice. In such a response, the landowner shall set forth reasons for the operational difficulty and provide a reasonable timetable for corrective action. If the city deems the timetable for corrective action to be unreasonable, the city must notify the landowner and the landowner shall remove the structure at the landowner's own expense within 30 days of receipt of notice from the city. The city shall have the authority to pursue legal action if necessary. 
(e)  Application requirements . 
(1)  Building permit applications for solar energy systems shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Standard drawings, and a site plan showing the location of the proposed system and the locations of all existing buildings, structures and property lines to scale along with distances; 
b.  A line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the adopted electrical code; and 
c.  The specifications and performance standards of the system, as provided by the manufacturer. 
(2)  An engineering analysis of any structure over 20 feet in total height showing compliance with the International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. 
(3)  When a solar energy system will be connected to the electric distribution grid, an interconnect agreement with the electrical utility provider must be in place prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(f)  Additional requirements for solar energy systems. 
(1)  Height. 
a.  Roof-mounted systems: 
i.  Must conform to the slope of the roof and the top edge must be parallel to the roofline; 
ii.  Shall not project above the ridge of a gabled or gambrel roof; 
iii.  Shall not project more than five feet above the deck or parapet of a flat roof; 
iv.  Must screen all mounting hardware from public view; screening shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
b.  Ground-mounted systems shall not be higher than eight (8) feet. If located in a fenced yard or patio, height of the system shall not exceed the height of the fence. 
c.  Appurtenant components must be located within an enclosed structure or screened by the planting of one large shrub every four (4) linear feet around the boundary of the equipment. 
Sec. 2-96. - Height and placement requirements. 
(a)  Lot area . Lot area refers to the land contained within the boundaries of the lot. 
(b)  Lot width. Lot width is measured between side lot lines along a line that is parallel to the front lot line or its chord and located the minimum front setback distance from the front lot line. 
(c)  Setbacks. Setbacks refer to the open area between the furthermost projection of a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located, except as modified by the standards of this section. 
(1)  Features allowed within setbacks. The following features may be located within a required setback: 
a.  Trees, shrubbery or other landscape features may be located within setbacks. 
b.  Fences and walls, if they are in compliance with any specific requirements of the zoning district. 
c.  Driveways and parking pads may be located in front and street side setbacks. 
d.  Sidewalks may be located in setbacks. 
e.  Utility lines, wires and associated structures, such as power poles may be located in setbacks. 
f.  Satellite dish antennas are treated as accessory buildings, and may not be placed in required setbacks for accessory buildings. 
(2)  Corner lot vision clearance. On all corner lots, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner to impede vision between a height of three feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the curb lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along the curb lines 40 feet from the point of the intersection. See Sec. 8-10 for additional requirements. 
(3)  Contextual setbacks. Where 51 percent or more of the frontage within a block is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of less depth than required by this chapter, the remainder of that block may be developed by observing the established front yard line, if approval thereof is granted by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  Special setbacks. Where setback lines have been established on any street by the appropriate approval authority of a subdivision plat, such setback lines shall prevail over the front setbacks of the underlying zoning district if greater than those required by the underlying zoning district. 
(5)  Structures built over property lines. Where structures are built over one or more property lines and the lots are owned by the same person, the setback requirements applicable to the property lines crossed do not apply. 
(d)  Building coverage. Building coverage refers to the area of a lot covered by buildings (principal and accessory) or roofed areas, as measured along the outside wall at ground level, and including all projections. 
(e)  Height. 
(1)  Building height. Building height refers to the vertical distance from the highest point on a structure to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect the ground. 
(2)  Fences or walls. In the case of fences or walls, height shall be measured from ground level at any point along the fence and wall. 
(3)  Height limits. 
a.  The maximum height permitted for a flagpole is ten feet above the maximum building height for the zoning district in which the flagpole is located. 
b.  The maximum height permitted for belfries, cupolas, spires, domes or similar architectural features is twice the maximum building height for the zoning district in which the structure is located. In addition, the height of belfries, cupolas, spires, domes or similar architectural features may not exceed the distance from the base of the structure to the nearest property line. 
(4)  Exceptions to height limits. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height limitations of this code shall not apply to electrical power transmission lines or water tanks. 
Sec. 2-97. - Wireless transmission facilities (WTFs). 
(a)  General standards . All wireless transmission facilities (WTFs) shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Location prioritization. The city shall prioritize proposed locations for new WTFs in the following order: 
a.  Attached to an existing WTF. 
b.  Attached to a utility infrastructure, as defined in chapter 44, article X of the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  Attached as a stealth WTF to an existing building or structure in a nonresidential zoning district. 
d.  Attached to an existing building or structure in a nonresidential zoning district. 
e.  Located as a freestanding stealth WTF in a permitted nonresidential zoning district. 
f.  Located as a self-enclosed monopole in a permitted nonresidential zoning district. 
g.  Located as a monopole in a permitted nonresidential zoning district. 
h.  Attached as a stealth WTF to an existing nonresidential building or structure in a residential zoning district. 
i.  Attached to an existing nonresidential building or structure in a residential zoning district. 
j.  Located as a freestanding stealth WTF on a lot of a nonresidential use within a residential zoning district. 
k.  Located as a self-enclosed monopole on a lot of a nonresidential use within a residential zoning district. 
(2)  Historic regulations. Any application to locate a WTF in an historic district or on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register shall be subject to review and approval by the historic preservation commission in accordance with Sec. 10-56. 
(3)  Combination with other uses. Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, a WTF is permitted on a lot with an existing use. 
(4)  Combination with nonconforming buildings, uses and land. A WTF is permitted on a nonconforming building, on a lot with an existing nonconforming use, or in combination with a nonconforming use of land, provided that the WTF shall cease to operate if and when the provisions in Sec. 2-98 require that the nonconforming building, structure, use or use of land be removed, if the nonconforming use is not able to be brought into compliance with the required provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Prohibited combination. A WTF is prohibited on billboard signs. 
(6)  Signage. Advertising is prohibited anywhere on a WTF, except for the minimum signage as required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations or necessary for the operation of a WTF. 
(7)  Identification sign. An identification sign for each service provider responsible for the operation and maintenance of a WTF at the site, not larger than two square feet, shall be posted at a location from which it can be easily read from outside the perimeter of the WTF, and shall provide the name, address, and emergency telephone number of the responsible service provider. 
(8)  Noise. Equipment located at the base of a WTF shall not generate noise in excess of 75 db at the property line. 
(9)  Automation. Except as provided in subsection (10) of this section and during construction or an emergency, a WTF shall be fully automated and unattended on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance. 
(10)  Maintenance and repair. All WTFs and associated equipment shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. Routine testing and maintenance shall be limited to weekdays between 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Emergency repairs shall be allowed at all times. 
(11)  Removal. Any WTF that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned, and shall be removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city of such abandonment. Each property owner and person in control of the site is responsible for removal, jointly and severally. If such facility is not removed within said 60 days, the city may remove such facility at their expense. If there are two or more users of a single WTF, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations on the facility housing the users. 
(12)  Improvement and replacement. An existing WTF may be improved or replaced with a new WTF provided the improvements or replacement comply with the provisions of this article. 
(13)  Violations. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, the city may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article and other available relief. 
(b)  Monopoles and self-enclosed monopoles . 
(1)  Permitted locations . 
a.  Monopoles may only be located in LI and I zoning districts, subject to the conditions set forth in this article. 
b.  Self-enclosed monopoles may be located in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, C-1, BP, LI, I, PF-3 and OS zoning districts, subject to the following conditions and the conditions set forth in this article: 
1.  Self-enclosed monopoles in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, C-1, BP, PF-3 and OS districts shall be located at a minimum of 200 feet from a residential property line and 100 feet from the centerline of a public right-of-way. 
2.  Self-enclosed monopoles shall only be permitted in C-1, BP and PF-3 zoning districts on lots that are ten acres or more; or on a lot adjacent to other lots that are zoned C-1, BP and PF-3, which when combined provide the cumulative sum of ten acres or more. 
3.  Only one self-enclosed monopole is permitted for every ten acres of contiguous development in C-1, BP and PF-3 districts. Multiple self-enclosed monopoles may be clustered together. 
4.  Self-enclosed monopoles in BP, PF-3 and C-1 districts are permitted only in the service area at the rear or side of a building. 
5.  Self-enclosed monopoles in BP, PF-3 and C-1 districts may not be located in a street yard or in a side or rear yard that abuts a residential use. 
6.  Self-enclosed monopoles shall only be permitted in OS zoning districts on lots that are ten acres or more; or on a lot adjacent to other lots zoned OS, which when combined provide the cumulative sum of ten acres or more. 
7.  Self-enclosed monopoles in OS districts must be approved by the director of the parks and recreation department. 
8.  Self-enclosed monopoles shall only be permitted in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, and SF-D districts on lots used for the following nonresidential purposes: places of worship, schools or fire stations. 
9.  Self-enclosed monopoles shall only be permitted in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, and SF-D districts as a special exception in accordance with Sec. 10-53. 
(2)  Setbacks . The standard setbacks for each zoning district shall apply to monopoles and any associated equipment, with additional setbacks or separation being required in the sections below. 
(3)  Maximum height . 
a.  LI and I zoning districts . The maximum height of a monopole in LI and I zoning districts shall be no more than 150 feet (including antenna). 
b.  SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, C-1, BP, PF-3 and OS zoning districts . The maximum height of a self-enclosed monopole in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, C-1, BP, PF-3 and OS zoning districts shall be no more than 80 feet (including antenna). 
c.  The maximum height of associated equipment located at the base of a monopole or self-enclosed monopole shall be no more than ten feet. 
(4)  Color . Monopoles and self-enclosed monopoles shall be painted a non-contrasting gray, beige or similar neutral color minimizing its visibility, unless otherwise required by the FCC or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(5)  Lighting. No monopole or self-enclosed monopole shall be artificially lighted except as required by the FCC and FAA. Security lighting around the equipment shelter is permitted provided it is not visible from neighboring properties. Lighting for maintenance purposes is permitted, provided the lights are not used at any other time. 
(6)  Screening. The equipment shelter at the base of a monopole or self-enclosed monopole shall be screened from public view by an unpainted split-face decorative masonry wall with a minimum height of one foot greater than the height of the equipment shelter. 
(7)  Hazardous waste. No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any monopole or self-enclosed monopole. If any hazardous materials are to be used on-site, there shall be provisions for full containment of such materials. An enclosed containment area shall be provided with a sealed floor, designed to contain at least 100 percent of the volume of the hazardous materials stored or used on the site. 
(8)  Collocation requirements. New monopoles and self-enclosed monopoles shall be designed to accommodate at a minimum three WTFs, including the antennae and any associated ground-mounted equipment, unless the applicant demonstrates that such a design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons. Service providers shall allow the collocation of attached WTFs by competing service providers. 
(9)  Application requirements for site plan review and building permit. The following steps must be taken for the application of a new monopole or self-enclosed monopole to be considered for review: 
a.  Applications and all associated plans and documentation shall be submitted to the planning and development services department. 
b.  The applicant shall provide an inventory of all existing WTFs used by the applicant within the city limits or its ETJ, including but not limited to the location, height and design of each existing WTF. 
c.  The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that the WTF must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area and shall address the location prioritization criteria listed in subsection (a)(1) above. 
d.  The applicant shall provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers which supply service within a quarter mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential collocation opportunities at all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter, as well as responses, shall be included in the application as a means of demonstrating the need for a new monopole or self-enclosed monopole. 
e.  If the WTF is to be located on a lot with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement or entered into a lease for the proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
f.  The applicant shall provide a site plan for the proposed WTF in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 10-45, as applicable. 
g.  The applicant shall provide detailed construction plans showing the design and installation of the WTF. These plans shall be sealed by a professional engineer and/or licensed architect, as applicable, and shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
h.  After the WTF has been constructed, the project engineer shall provide a letter certifying that the WTF was constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
(c)  Attached WTF . 
(1)  Permitted locations . 
a.  An attached WTF may be placed on a monopole, building or structure in the SR, MF-2, MF-3, C-1, C-2, OF-1, OF-2, BP, LI, I, MI, PF-1, PF-2, PF-3, MU-R, MU-G and OS zoning districts, subject to the conditions of this article. 
b.  An attached WTF may be attached to the following nonresidential buildings and structures that are permitted or accessory uses in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, MH, MF-1 and SR residential zoning districts: Schools, places of worship, municipal or governmental buildings or facilities or buildings or structures owned by a utility, subject to the conditions of this article. 
(2)  Mounting and setbacks . The support structure or equipment for an attached WTF shall be mounted flush with the vertical exterior of the building or structure to which it is attached or shall project no more than 24 inches from the surface of the building or structure to which it is attached, and shall not violate the building setback requirements of the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. 
(3)  Maximum height . 
a.  An attached WTF shall not extend more than ten feet above the building or structure to which it is attached and shall not violate the maximum height restriction of the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. The foregoing restriction shall not apply to WTFs attached to state, county and municipal structures. 
b.  An existing WTF may be extended in order to accommodate an attached WTF. Under no circumstances shall the height of the WTF exceed 150 feet (including antenna) in LI and I zoning districts and 80 feet (including antenna) in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, C-1, BP, PF-3 and OS zoning districts. 
(4)  Visibility . 
a.  Equipment associated with roof-mounted WTFs shall be screened from public view. Screening shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. If roof decks with mechanical equipment are visible from any level of adjacent buildings, the mechanical equipment must be painted to match the finished roof material. 
b.  Attached WTFs that are side-mounted shall blend with the existing building's architecture and shall be painted or shielded with material that is consistent with the design features and materials of the building. 
c.  All cabinets, boxes and WTF associated equipment that is not roof-mounted or side-mounted shall be located underground, unless it is so designed and located that it is not visible from a street. 
(5)  Application requirements for site plan review and building permit. The following steps must be taken for the application of a new attached WTF to be considered for review: 
a.  Applications and all associated plans and documentation shall be submitted to the planning and development services department. 
b.  The applicant shall provide an inventory of all existing WTFs used by the applicant within the city limits or its ETJ, including but not limited to the location, height and design of each existing WTF. 
c.  The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that the attached WTF must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area and shall address the location prioritization criteria listed in subsection (a)(1) above. If the applicant is applying for a permit in a residential district, the applicant must present substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zoning district. 
d.  If the applicant is proposing to attach the WTF to any building or structure other than an existing WTF, the applicant shall provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who supply service within a quarter mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential collocation opportunities at all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter, as well as responses, shall be included in the application as a means of explaining why the proposed attached WTF cannot be located on an existing WTF. 
e.  The applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the building or structure to which the WTF will be attached has granted permission for the proposed facility to be attached and maintained. 
f.  If the attached WTF includes associated equipment that is ground-mounted, the applicant shall provide a site plan for the proposed WTF in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 10-45, as applicable. 
g.  If the applicant is proposing to install a roof-mounted WTF, the planning and development services department shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the roof will support the proposed WTF and associated roof-mounted equipment. 
h.  The applicant shall provide detailed construction plans showing the design and installation of the WTF. These plans shall be sealed by a professional engineer and/or licensed architect, as applicable, and shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
i.  After the WTF has been constructed, the project engineer or architect shall provide a letter certifying that the WTF was constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
(d)  Stealth WTF . 
(1)  Permitted locations . 
a.  A stealth WTF may be located in the SR, MF-2, MF-3, C-1, C-2, OF-1, OF-2, BP, LI, I, MI, PF-1, PF-2, PF-3, OS, MU-1, MU-2, MU-R, and MU-G zoning districts, subject to the conditions of this article. 
b.  A stealth WTF may be attached to a nonresidential building or structure that is a permitted or accessory use in SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF, TH, MH, MF-1, SR, and MU-L zoning districts, including but not limited to, a homeowners' association amenity center, a school, a church, a municipal or governmental building or facility, an agricultural building or a building or structure owned by a utility, subject to the conditions of this article. 
(2)  Setbacks. The standard setbacks for each zoning district shall apply to all stealth WTFs. To protect citizens in their homes, freestanding stealth WTFs shall be placed a minimum distance equal to the height of the freestanding stealth WTF away from any residential structure. No guy wires may be used. 
(3)  Maximum height. The maximum height of a stealth WTF shall be determined by the height limitations stated in Chapter 2 for the type of structure the WTF resembles. 
(4)  Visibility. The antenna and associated equipment of a stealth WTF shall be screened, disguised, concealed or otherwise camouflaged as part of a structure such that the antenna and associated equipment of the WTF are indistinguishable from the structure that it is attached to or within. If the zoning administrator determines that the associated equipment cannot be feasibly or adequately camouflaged due to the unique circumstances of the proposed location, it shall be placed underground; or it may be screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by an unpainted decorative masonry wall with a minimum height of one foot greater than the height of the equipment shelter. In zoning districts other than LI, I, and PF-3, the required masonry wall shall be screened by planting one five-gallon or larger size shrub for every three linear feet around the boundary of the wall. Shrubs shall be a minimum height of 2.5 feet at installation. 
(5)  Application requirements for site plan review and building permit. The following steps must be taken for the application of a new freestanding or attached stealth WTF to be considered for review: 
a.  Applications and all associated plans and documentation shall be submitted to the planning and community development department. 
b.  The applicant shall provide an inventory of all existing WTFs used by the applicant within the city limits or its ETJ, including but not limited to the location, height and design of each existing WTF. 
c.  The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that the stealth WTF must be located where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area and shall address the location prioritization criteria listed in subsection (a)(1) above. If the applicant is applying for a permit in a residential district, the applicant must present substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a more appropriate nonresidential zoning district. 
d.  The applicant shall provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who supply service within a quarter mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential collocation opportunities at all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter, as well as responses, shall be included in the application as a means of explaining why the proposed stealth WTF cannot be located on an existing WTF and as a means of demonstrating the need for a new stealth WTF. 
e.  If a stealth WTF is to be located on a lot with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement or entered into a lease for the proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility. 
f.  The applicant shall provide an artist's rendering of the proposed stealth WTF, along with images of comparable structures, both of similar stealth WTFs and of the actual structures that the WTF will be mimicking. 
g.  The applicant shall provide detailed construction plans showing the design and installation of the WTF. These plans shall be sealed by a professional engineer and/or licensed architect, as applicable, and shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
h.  Applications for attached stealth WTFs with ground-mounted associated equipment and applications for freestanding stealth WTFs shall also include a site plan for the proposed WTF in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 10-45, as applicable. 
i.  After the stealth WTF has been constructed, the project engineer or architect shall provide a letter certifying that the stealth WTF was constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
(6)  Criteria for approval. The zoning administrator shall determine whether a proposed stealth WTF is sufficiently camouflaged based on the type, size, scale and appropriateness of the structure that the stealth WTF will resemble in relation to the architectural and land use context in which the stealth WTF is located. 
Sec. 2-98. - Nonconformities. 
(a)  General regulation . Except as specified in this section, any use, building or structure existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or classification amendment applicable to its use, may be continued even though such use, building or structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any use, building or structure established in violation of this chapter or ordinance previously in effect in the city. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots of record . In any district in which single-family dwellings are a permitted use, a single-family detached dwelling that complies with the restrictions below may be erected on a nonconforming lot that is not less than 30 feet in width, consisting entirely of one tract of land of not less than 3,000 square feet, and that meets each of the following conditions: 
(1)  Has less than the prescribed minimum lot area, width and depth, or any of them. 
(2)  Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been a lot of record owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size, depth and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning or other ordinance. 
(3)  Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinances. 
(c)  Nonconforming buildings, uses, and land . Prior to the issuance of any building or development permit, all nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be removed or brought into compliance with all provisions of the code except as follows: 
(1)  Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
a.  Normal repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming building or structure; provided that no structure alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance or those necessary for installing or enclosing required sanitary facilities, such as toilets and bathrooms. 
b.  Unless otherwise provided, a nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions and enlargements meet the requirements of the district in which such building or structure is located. 
c.  A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is to be located. 
d.  If a nonconforming building or structure has been damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent of its fair market value (as determined by the most recent appraised value of the appraisal district in which the building or structure is located), such building or structure and its use, if repaired or replaced, shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located, and it shall be treated as a new building. 
e.  Where the building official determines that a nonconforming building or structure has been damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent of its fair market value (as determined by the most recent appraised value of the appraisal district in which the building or structure is located) and denies a building permit for reconstruction on the basis of a nonconforming use, an applicant for a permit shall have the right of appeal to city council within 15 days after receipt of notification of such action. The applicant shall be advised by the city secretary of the time and place of the hearing at which the appeal will be considered and that the applicant shall have the right to attend and be heard as to reasons for filing the appeal. In determining the time and place of the hearing the city secretary shall cause a public notification to be published in the official newspaper describing the requested development, a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing; and cause certified letters to be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the boundary of the parcel of land for which the building permit is being applied for. In determining whether to allow the issuance of a building permit, the city council shall determine that each of the following standards has been met: 
1.  It will not be contrary to the public interest. 
2.  It will be in harmony with adjacent land uses. 
3.  It will not adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
f.  A vacant, nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before the date of enactment of this section may be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a period of 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The use of a nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed before the date of enactment of this section which becomes vacant after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, may be re-occupied by the use for which the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a period of 90 days after the building or structure becomes vacant. All such buildings, after 90 days of vacancy, shall be converted to a conforming use. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses. The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be continued as hereinafter provided: 
a.  The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed to a use which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is situated. 
b.  A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be extended or expanded into any other portion of such conforming building or structure, nor changed except to a conforming use. If such nonconforming use or portion thereof is voluntarily discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure or portion thereof shall conform to the regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(3)  Nonconforming use of land. The nonconforming use of land existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may continue as hereinafter provided: 
a.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded, extended, or changed to some other use not in compliance with the regulations of the district in which the land is situated. 
b.  If a nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof, is voluntarily discontinued for a period of 90 days, any future use of such land or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such land or portion thereof is located. 
(4)  Abandonment. The nonconforming use of building, structure, or land which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when: 
a.  The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent, for example by termination of utility services; 
b.  The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within 90 days; 
c.  A nonconforming building, structure, or land, or portion thereof, which is, or hereafter, becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a period of 90 days; or 
d.  A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use. 
(5)  Change in district boundaries. Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed as to transfer an area from one district to another district, or when the boundaries of districts are changed as the result of annexation of new territory, or changed in the regulations or restriction of this section, the foregoing provisions relating to nonconforming uses shall also apply to any uses existing therein which may become nonconforming. 
Sec. 2-99. - Air conditioning units. 
(a)  Purpose and intent . The purpose of this section is to set forth requirements regarding the installation of air conditioning units in residential properties. 
(b)  Applicability . This section shall apply to all residential properties within the city limits and in areas where this section is in effect by contractual agreement. 
(c)  Requirements . Air conditioning units are prohibited from being installed in a wall that is facing a public street. 
Chapter 4 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Title. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the general plan for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city. 
Sec. 4-2. - Statutory authority. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted under the authority of the state Constitution and laws, particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, "Municipal Regulation of Subdivision and Property Development"; other applicable chapters of this Code; and any other authority provided by law, or as such statutes may be amended. 
(b)  Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the city. 
Sec. 4-3. - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(a)  The owner of any tract of land within the corporate limits of the city or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as prescribed by state law, as amended, who intends to develop an addition to the city or who divides any tract in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract of land, to lay out suburban building or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use for or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts, must have a plat of the subdivision or addition prepared, approved and recorded in accordance with the requirements of this Code. A division of a tract of land under this Code includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. A division of a tract of land under this Code does not include a division of land into parts greater than five acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
Sec. 4-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A plat is required for any tract of land divided into two or more parts, as provided for in Sec. 4-3 above, except as provided in the Texas Local Government Code or for the following: 
(1)  The division of land into parts greater than five acres each, each part having access to a public street, where no public improvement is dedicated; 
(2)  The acquisition of land by the city, county or state for public facilities; or 
(3)  The acquisition of land by a public utility for the purpose of providing or housing needed infrastructure in order to provide utility service to an immediate area. 
Sec. 4-5. - Purpose. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter are adopted to protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the city as provided below: 
(1)  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the general plan; 
(2)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for plats and replats of land in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; 
(3)  To ensure that developers provide for the required public improvements attributable to development; 
(4)  To prevent the pollution of air and water; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguards the underground water reserves; and to encourage the use and management of natural resources throughout the city; 
(5)  To provide for parkland and open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land; 
(6)  To ensure that land is subdivided to provide for uses of land for which market demand exists and which are in the public interest; 
(7)  To prevent the creation of divisions of land or development of substandard public improvements in violation of this chapter; and 
(8)  To minimize the long-term costs to the city for repair and maintenance of public improvements. 
Sec. 4-6. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission of the city, pursuant to Sec. 12.04 of the City Charter, is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and disapprove applications for the plats of land as provided in this Code. 
Sec. 4-7. - Standards for approval. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall approve a plat if it conforms to the general plan and to the requirements of this Code while taking into account access to and extension of the city water system, reuse water system (if applicable), wastewater system, and stormwater drainage facilities. In rendering its decision, the planning and zoning commission shall also consider the location of current and future streets, alleys, parks, easements, and other required public facilities within the city and its ETJ. 
Sec. 4-8. - Interpretation and validity. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. These regulations shall be interpreted and construed broadly to promote the purposes within Sec. 4-5 above. 
(1)  Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except as provided in this chapter. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control. 
(2)  Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where possible, private provisions not inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations. 
Sec. 4-9. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Building permits. Except as provided below, no building permits, certificates of occupancy, or other permits of any kind shall be issued by the city for the construction or development of any parcel of land until a plat has been recorded in accordance with this chapter and the requirements of Chapter 8, article X, Buildings and Building Regulations, have been satisfied. 
(1)  A plat is not required for the construction of a wireless transmission facility on a parcel of land. 
(2)  A plat is not required for the construction of a building or structure on property zoned AG; provided that no on-site or off-site public improvements are needed to serve the parcel of land. 
(3)  A plat is not required for any modification to an existing structure if said modification is within the existing footprint of said structure. 
(4)  A plat is not required for expansion to existing structures or site modifications, unless said expansion or site modification triggers a traffic impact analysis, requires extension of city utilities or roadways, or requires floodplain delineation as set forth by this Code. 
(5)  A plat is not required for new installation, repair, replacement, or removal of a sign. 
(6)  A plat is not required for the issuance of a subdivision improvement permit. 
(7)  A plat is not required for the issuance of a grading permit. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. Whenever a plat is required by this Code, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building on a lot within a plat until such time that the required public improvements serving all lots within the recorded plat have been completely installed, inspected, and accepted by the city as required in article VIII of this chapter. 
Sec. 4-10. - Connection of utilities. 
(a)  Generally. A tract of land may not be served or connected with city utilities unless a plat has been approved and recorded for said tract of land, nor shall the city have any obligation to extend utility service to any parcel created in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to a tract of land that was first served or connected with the city's utilities prior to January 1, 1970. 
Sec. 4-11. - Non-recorded subdivisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council finds that strict compliance to the regulations of this Code for certain non-recorded subdivisions may result in undue hardship. The city council shall designate such non-recorded subdivisions by resolution duly adopted. So that the purposes of this Code may be fulfilled, the city council may modify the requirements of this Code's regulations for those non-recorded subdivisions so designated. 
(b)  Criteria for recognition of non-recorded subdivisions. 
(1)  Required findings. The city council shall recognize a non-recorded subdivision and authorize the modification of the requirements of this Code when an unnecessary hardship would result from the strict enforcement of this Code. In granting a modification from the requirements of this Code, the city council shall prescribe only conditions it deems not prejudicial to the public interest. Modifications from the requirements of this Code shall only be granted if the city council finds all of the following: 
a.  Extraordinary conditions. That there are extraordinary or special conditions affecting the tract of land involved such that strict application of the provisions of this Code would cause undue hardship. 
b.  Application of a substantial property right. That the modification from the requirements of this Code is necessary for the preservation and application of a substantial property right of the developer. 
c.  Substantial detriment. That granting modification from the requirements of this Code will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, injurious to other property in the area or to the city in administering this Code. 
d.  Other property. That these conditions do not generally apply to other tracts of land in the vicinity. 
e.  Developer's actions. That the conditions are not the result of the developer's own actions. 
f.  General plan. That granting modifications from the requirements of this Code will not substantially conflict with the general plan and the purposes of this Code. 
(2)  Profitability not considered. The fact that the tract of land would be of more value should modification from the requirements of this Code be granted may not be considered as grounds for recognizing the tract of land as a non-recorded subdivision. 
Sec. 4-12. - Certification regarding compliance with plat requirements. 
(a)  On the written request of a developer, a utility provider, or a governing body, and in compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115, the PDS director shall make the following determinations regarding the tract of land identified in the request: 
(1)  Whether a plat is required under this Code for the tract of land; and 
(2)  If a plat is required, whether it has been prepared and whether it has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission or PDS director, as applicable. 
(b)  If the PDS director determines that a plat is not required, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. If the PDS director determines that a plat is required and that the plat has been prepared and has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission, or PDS director where administrative approval is authorized, the PDS director shall issue to the requesting party a written certification of that determination. 
(c)  The PDS director shall make a determination within 20 days after the date the written request is received and shall issue a written certification of that determination within ten days after the date the determination is made. 
Sec. 4-13. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Generally . 
(1)  The PDS director shall have the primary responsibility to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city attorney, and any other appropriate authority, any violations or lack of compliance with these regulations. Any department, agency, employee or enforcement officer of the city having information regarding an alleged violation of this chapter shall report that information to the PDS director. 
(2)  No owner or owner's agent of any parcel of land located in a proposed final plat shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel before a final plat is duly recorded with the county clerk, as provided by Sec. 10-35, recordation procedure. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with or violate any section or subsection of this chapter. A fine or criminal penalty prescribed by this chapter does not apply to a violation in the ETJ. The PDS director shall report violations to the city manager and county judge to determine what action is deemed proper. 
(c)  Civil enforcement. The PDS director shall report violations to the city manager to determine what action is deemed proper, and the city attorney is hereby authorized, without further authorization from city council, to file suit in district court, in addition to any criminal penalties to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by the city in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in this section. 
Sec. 4-14. - Subdivision fees. 
(a)  Subdivision fees under this chapter shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Inspection fees for public improvements and/or private streets shall be equal to 11/2 percent of the actual total construction costs of installing and constructing the public improvements and/or private streets being inspected. The amount of the inspection fees for public improvements and/or private streets shall be sealed by the developer's engineer and approved by the PDS director. 
Secs. 4-15-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-26. - General design principles. 
(a)  Subdivisions in Round Rock shall be designed with consideration for the wellbeing of the citizens and natural environment of the city. The following general subdivision design principles shall be followed for new subdivisions: 
(1)  Tree preservation and the use of significant trees as a design feature shall be a priority. 
(2)  Monarch trees shall serve as focal points with streets and lots designed to take advantage of their presence. 
(3)  Sharp elevation changes, bluffs, and similar topographical features shall be accentuated. 
(4)  Creeks and streams shall be preserved in their natural state. 
(5)  Historic sites shall be made accessible to the public. 
(6)  The following additional design standards apply to new subdivisions containing more than 100 residential lots: 
a.  Open spaces with active and passive recreation opportunities shall be easily accessible to all lots. 
b.  Connections to existing parks and trails adjacent to the subdivision shall be accommodated and maintained. 
c.  Pathways, greenbelts, and similar spaces shall be used to break up long blocks and allow pedestrian connectivity throughout the subdivision. 
d.  A variety of lot sizes shall be incorporated. 
e.  New lots located adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods shall be comparable in size to the adjacent lots. 
Sec. 4-27. - Design and construction standards. 
    The Design and Construction Standards are adopted by ordinance by the city council. All public improvements required by this article shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards to meet or exceed such standards. A subdivision or addition, or any portion thereof, which is within a floodplain as identified in the flood insurance rate maps published by the National Flood Insurance Program, shall meet any Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requirements for stormwater drainage facilities. To the extent that there is any conflict between any of the minimum standards provided in the Design and Construction Standards or the FEMA requirements, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. Whenever any standards in the Design and Construction Standards conflict with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
Sec. 4-28. - Easements. 
(a)  General provisions. The developer shall dedicate easements that allow approved lots within the addition or subdivision to have access to all public utilities. Where necessary to adequately serve the addition or subdivision with public utilities, easements shall be dedicated for all public utilities including water lines, reuse water lines, wastewater lines, and stormwater drainage facilities and associated appurtenances. Such easements shall be provided as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission. Easements shall be dedicated according to the requirements delineated in the development packets. 
(b)  Location and widths. Easements shall be appropriately located and of sufficient width to accommodate the required utilities. All easements for city utilities shall conform to the Design and Construction Standards. The width of the public utility easement required by the development packet for platting procedures in the downtown area may be altered by the zoning administrator to meet building setbacks. 
Sec. 4-29. - Subdivision identification signs. 
    Subdivision identification signs shall conform to the provisions of chapter 8, article IX, Signs. The colors and materials selected for subdivision identification signs shall be complementary to the architectural design of the structures to be constructed within the subdivision. 
Sec. 4-30. - Subdivision walls. 
(a)  Walls required. Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear and/or side yards of residential lots are adjacent to a major collector or higher classification street, the developer shall construct, at his sole expense, walls between said rear and/or side yards and said street, in accordance with the standards set forth below. Where said lots are corner lots, the wall requirements of this section shall take precedence over corner lot fencing specifications regulated by Sec. 8-35. 
(b)  Standards. It is intended that all walls erected pursuant to this section be constructed in such a manner to last 30 years with minimal maintenance required during said period. All walls required by this section shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Where applicable, materials and installation of walls shall comply with the most recent edition of "Selected ASTM Standards for Fence Materials and Products," a copy of which shall be maintained by the PDS director. Structural plans and specifications for walls shall be approved by the PDS director. Such plans and specifications are to be submitted at the same time as other construction plans required by this chapter. In approving said plans and specifications, the PDS director shall consider the site's soil characteristics, wind loadings and other environmental considerations. 
(2)  Walls shall be constructed of the following materials: brick, natural stone, simulated stone, split-faced or architectural concrete masonry unit (CMU), decorative reinforced concrete, or other equivalent materials approved by the PDS director. 
(3)  Walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. The materials, color and design of walls shall be uniform within an approved preliminary plat, unless otherwise approved by the planning department. A finished side of all walls shall face the thoroughfare. 
(4)  All walls shall be placed at least five (5) feet from any existing or proposed city water line, reuse water line or wastewater line. 
(5)  All walls required herein shall be placed along the property line between the right-of-way and the adjoining private property and outside any easements. 
(c)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  A plat note describing the location of proposed wall and associated landscaping including irrigation shall be included on the preliminary plat and final plat. 
(2)  Detail plans for walls and associated landscaping including irrigation shall be submitted with the construction plans for public improvements. 
(3)  Walls shall conform to the requirements of this Code governing sight distance for traffic safety. 
(4)  Prior to the city's acceptance of the public improvements the developer must complete all walls required herein. 
(5)  It is not the intent of this section to regulate the design and/or construction of entrances to subdivisions. 
(6)  The city, at its option, may maintain the wall. As a result, a five-foot (5') access easement shall be provided along the back and sides of the property abutting the wall for maintenance purposes. 
Sec. 4-31. - Bike ways. 
    The developer shall dedicate and construct all bike ways identified in the general plan that are located within the boundaries of the subdivision or addition. The bike lanes shall be designed and identified with markings and materials in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
Sec. 4-32. - Postal delivery service. 
(a)  Requirement. A developer shall provide neighborhood delivery and collection box units for postal service to lots within a residential subdivision. The neighborhood delivery and collection box units shall meet the minimum lot requirements and design standards for such facility as determined by the United States Postal Service ("postal service"). 
(b)  Neighborhood delivery and collection box units. The developer shall provide for neighborhood delivery and collection box unit locations within dedicated rights-of-way, easements or on special purpose lots shown on the preliminary and final plats. The preliminary and final plat shall show the neighborhood delivery and collection box unit locations as approved by the postal service. Approved neighborhood delivery and collection box unit locations shall also be shown on construction plans. 
(c)  Location of neighborhood delivery and collection box units on streets. Neighborhood delivery and collection box units shall be placed in a location that is convenient, accessible, safe and efficient to all lots in the subdivision. The developer shall abide by the standards established by the postal service. In addition, the following criteria shall be used to determine the site location of neighborhood delivery and collection box units: 
(1)  In the street right-of-way of a local street, the site shall be generally located adjacent to a common rear lot line of two lots; 
(2)  In the street right-of-way of a collector street, the site shall be designed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards; 
(3)  The site shall not be located in the street right-of-way of an arterial street; and 
(4)  In situations where special conditions exist and the location requirements provided above cannot be met, the planning and zoning commission may approve an alternate location for the neighborhood delivery and collection box unit. 
(d)  Parking requirements for neighborhood delivery and collection box units. 
(1)  A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for each eight (8) individual postal boxes for the first 32 postal boxes excluding package boxes. One additional space shall be provided for each 16 individual postal boxes thereafter excluding package boxes. 
(2)  Parking spaces for neighborhood delivery and collection box units may be located in the public right-of-way on public streets or within the special purpose lot for private streets. Parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. All aforementioned parking spaces shall not reduce the required roadway width. 
(e)  Design and lighting requirements for neighborhood delivery and collection box units. Design and lighting requirements for neighborhood delivery and collection box units shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
Sec. 4-33. - Protected trees related to platting. 
    All protected trees on the site shall be protected in accordance with the tree protection plan provided for in Sec. 8-22. 
Sec. 4-34. - Rural standards. 
(a)  Criteria. A subdivision may be approved with rural standards if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All lots are a minimum of two (2) acres; 
(2)  All lots have a minimum 50-foot building setback; 
(3)  All lots are single-family either by a zoning classification or by deed restrictions; and 
(4)  No new collector or arterial streets are required. 
(b)  Standards. The following rural standards are permitted if Sec. 4-35(a) is met: 
(1)  Streets may have either standard or ribbon curbs; 
(2)  Open channels may be utilized and shall be constructed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards; 
(3)  Sidewalks are required on one side of the street for all residential subdivisions comprised of four lots or greater; for three or fewer lots no sidewalks are required; 
(4)  Flag lots are permitted if the conditions set out in Sec. 4-46(c) are met; and 
(5)  Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
Sec. 4-35. - Alternative standards agreement. 
(a)  Criteria. The unique nature of the land being platted may require, under proper circumstances, the departure from the adopted design criteria and Design and Construction Standards. The city council may enter into an alternative standards agreement with a developer that departs from this chapter if the following is met: 
(1)  The proposed alternatives, in aggregate, fully address the intent and purpose of the standards of this chapter; and 
(2)  The alternative standards agreement conforms with the general purposes, goals and objectives of the general plan. 
(b)  Recording the alternative standards agreement. The alternative standards agreement shall be recorded prior to the submittal of the preliminary plat application. The recording costs shall be paid by the developer. The plat shall include a note referencing the alternative standards agreement. 
Secs. 4-36-4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-46. - Lots. 
(a)  Special purpose lots. Special purpose lots established for private streets, parkland dedication, landscaping, postal boxes, floodplain, drainage conveyance, storage, or sedimentation and filtration, lift stations, or water storage, electrical substations, switching stations and other similar facilities needed for transmission and supply of public utilities, may be approved as exceptions to the lot requirements provided in chapter 2 of this Code. In addition, except for private streets, a special purpose lot does not require street frontage but must be provided vehicular access approved by the PDS director. A special purpose lot established for a private street must connect to either a public street or another private street that connects to a public street. A special purpose lot that is to serve as a common area, open space, or recreational field for a new subdivision in the SF-2 (Single-Family - Standard Lot) or SF-3 (Single-Family - Mixed Lot) zoning districts shall be irrigated by reuse water where available. 
(b)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited for all single-family, two-family and single-lot townhouse lots unless no other lot configuration is practical as determined by the PDS director. 
(c)  Flag lots. Flag lots shall be permitted at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of subdivision platting. In order for a flag lot to be considered for approval, it must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  The lot is intended for nonresidential use, except as provided for in Sec. 4-34(b)(4); 
(2)  The lot has a minimum width of 50 feet at the street; 
(3)  The length of the projection to the street does not exceed 500 feet or the depth of the abutting lot, whichever is less; and 
(4)  There is a minimum distance of 400 feet from the nearest flag lot as measured along the street frontage. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may deny an application for a flag lot if the location creates site specific traffic safety concerns or conflicts with access to abutting lots or driveway separation standards. 
(d)  Lot size. Except for special purpose lots and lots in the ETJ, the size of the lots shall conform to the requirements of chapter 2. 
(e)  Lot width. Lot widths shall be determined according to the requirements of chapter 2. 
(f)  Lot numbering. All lots shall be numbered consecutively within each block unless an alternative lot numbering arrangement is approved by the PDS director. 
(g)  Lot street frontage. 
(1)  The lot street frontage for a single-family residential lot shall be no less than 25 feet. 
(2)  The lot street frontage for a nonresidential or residential lot other than a single-family lot shall be no less than 50 feet. 
Sec. 4-47. - Blocks. 
(a)  Block configuration. The configuration of blocks shall promote convenient and safe traffic and pedestrian circulation throughout the subdivision, create aesthetically pleasing neighborhoods, foster a desirable living environment, and provide fire and police access to ensure public safety. 
(b)  Restriction. Blocks of single-family, two-family or single-lot townhouse lots shall not contain more than two tiers of lots. 
(c)  Block length. Residential blocks within new residential subdivisions shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The block length shall not exceed 1,000 feet without approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The city encourages block lengths to be limited to 600 feet, but the length may be varied according to circulation, topography, and provisions of the General Plan. 
(2)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission approves a block length that exceeds 1,000 feet, a pedestrian access easement, greenbelt, or similar interrupting feature shall be provided within 100 feet of the mid-point of the block. 
Sec. 4-48. - Driveways. 
(a)  For single-family, two-family and single-lot townhouse residences, as defined in Sec. 1-50, residential driveways are permitted on local streets and local collector streets only. Residential driveways for double frontage lots and corner lots must be located on the lesser classification street. Driveways serving single-family, two-family or single-lot townhouse residences are prohibited on major collectors or arterial streets unless the transportation director determines no other access is possible. 
(b)  Common-lot townhouse, as defined in Sec. 1-50, multifamily, and nonresidential driveways are permitted on all streets; however, the driveways must have a minimum of 200 feet spacing between driveways on arterial streets and from the street centerline at an intersection. 
(c)  The driveway restrictions above do not prohibit driveway access to alleys. Alley driveway access may be permitted upon approval of a TIA by the transportation director. 
(d)  Driveway construction shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
Secs. 4-49-4-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GATED COMMUNITIES 

Sec. 4-56. - Gated communities. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent of these gated communities regulations to: 
(1)  Allow gated community developments to occur within the city on a limited and restrictive basis; and 
(2)  Provide for gated communities and private streets as alternative types of development to allow the city to expand its development types. 
(b)  Guidelines for gated community. The following guidelines are to be satisfied as part of the review and approval process for all gated communities and private streets: 
(1)  All gated communities shall be located in areas zoned as planned unit development district (PUD) in accordance with Secs. 10-22 and 2-76. 
(2)  Each application for a gated community PUD shall be subject to the approval of the commission and the city council, on a case by case basis, based upon the criteria described in this section. However, an applicant who meets the stated criteria will not be entitled to the gated community PUD as a matter of right, but shall obtain approval of the gated community PUD at the discretion of the commission and city council. 
(3)  A gated community shall be designated solely for residential uses. 
(4)  A gated community shall not impede a current or future development of a collector street or arterial; or other minor or major thoroughfare. 
(5)  A gated community shall not disrupt an existing or proposed public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail or park. 
(6)  A gated community shall not contain more than 120 dwelling units. 
(c)  General requirements. All gated community PUDs shall include the following minimum requirements in the PUD ordinance and/or development plan included therein: 
(1)  The gated community private street system must comply with design standards in this Code. All ordinances, rules, regulations, design standards and construction standards which govern public streets shall apply to gated community private streets, including, but not limited to, street and roadway width, paving, drainage, sidewalks, submission of plans, and street lighting requirements. 
(2)  The private street system within a gated community shall provide perpetual access for all lots within the development, for police and other emergency vehicles, public and private utility maintenance and service personnel, solid waste collection services, the U.S. Postal Service, and government employees in pursuit of their official duties. 
(3)  Any type of gate or controlled access means or mechanism is subject to the approval of the city's fire marshal, and any corrective action shall be the responsibility of the property owners association. The location of any such gate or controlled access means or mechanism and any associated appurtenances shall be subject to the approval of the transportation director, and shall not impede necessary sight lines for traffic, nor create vehicular stacking that adversely affects an adjacent street. A turnaround area subject to the approval of the transportation director shall be provided on the exterior side of any such gate or controlled access means or mechanism to allow traffic to reverse direction. The city shall bear no responsibility or liability in connection with the removal or destruction of any gate or other controlled access mechanism while engaged in an emergency action. 
(d)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Each gated community plat shall contain the following wording on the face of the plat: 
"The streets have not been dedicated to the public, for public access nor have they been accepted by the City of Round Rock as public improvements, and the streets and roadways shall be maintained by the property owners association within the subdivision, except that the streets and roadways shall always be open to emergency vehicles, public and private utility maintenance and service personnel, solid waste collection services, the U.S. Postal Service, and governmental employees in pursuit of their official duties". 
"The undersigned, his successors, and assigns hereby agrees to release and hold harmless the City, any governmental entity and public utility for damages to the private streets occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by the City, governmental entity or public utility, for damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of said private street; for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, governmental entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision by the City, governmental entity or public entity. The owners of all lots contained in this plat shall release and hold harmless the City, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. The releases contained in this paragraph apply regardless of whether such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the City, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents". 
"The undersigned, his successors, and assigns hereby agrees that the City is not obligated to provide certain City services on the private streets contained within the development, including, without limitation, routine police patrols, street lighting, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports". 
(2)  A PUD for a gated community must be approved by the city prior to the approval of the final plat. The city shall consider the PUD application after review and recommendation by the city staff. Subject to city council approval, the requirements of this Code may be modified in the ordinance adopting the PUD. 
(3)  Easements. Gated community plats shall provide the following easements: 
a.  Public utility easements containing the private streets and public utilities; 
b.  Additional public utility, drainage and storm sewer easements required by the city, public utilities, or other public agencies; 
c.  Preexisting easements unaffected by the platting process; and 
d.  Such private service easements, including but not limited to, utilities, fire lanes, street lighting, government vehicle access, mail collection and delivery access, and utility meter reading access, as may be necessary or deemed mutually convenient by the applicant and the city. 
(4)  Access. To ensure adequate access to each gated community, there shall be at least two points of ingress and egress, except for a gated community containing no more than 30 dwelling units. The second entry may be designated for emergency access only. 
(5)  Private access amenity plan. For each gated community, a private access amenity plan shall be submitted to the PDS director for review and approval in consultation with other city departments. A private access amenity plan shall be submitted with any gated community PUD application. At a minimum, the private access amenity plan shall include a scale drawing showing the plan and profile of all walls, gates, entry areas, landscaping, architectural features, and signs, etc. This will provide opportunity to review proposed controlled access mechanisms, access points, landscaping, screening walls, or similar buffering barriers, and other related private street components. 
(6)  The city staff may request rendered perspectives and elevations of proposed structures that are components of the private streets, including description of proposed building materials, roof pitches, signage, and showing relationships to adjacent structures and such other items as the city staff might reasonably request. 
(7)  The city staff may require additional data to amplify and clarify the private access amenity plan; such information may include, without limitation, fencing, access controllers, entrance areas, barriers, perimeter walls, and exterior landscaping. 
(8)  The city staff may require additional data to illustrate items outside the gated community, such as entrance area, barriers, perimeter walls, exterior landscaping, and other elements as required by city staff. 
(9)  No credit will be allowed for the development of private parks, not open to the public. The developer of the gated community shall pay a parkland fee in lieu of parkland conveyance in accordance with Sec. 4-68. 
(10)  Private streets and alleys must be constructed within one or more separate lots. Such lots must conform to the city's standards for public streets and alley right-of-way. An easement covering the street lots shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the lots for utilities and the maintenance of same. This right shall extend to all utility providers, including telecable companies, operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to, fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs governmental service or function, or emergency access. 
(11)  With respect to the maintenance and repair of public utilities located within the boundaries of the special purpose lots for private streets, the city's obligation to restore the surface of the special purpose lot shall be limited to the repair or restoration of any grassed area, broom-finished concrete driveway or sidewalk, concrete roadway curb, or asphaltic concrete roadway surface that is removed or disturbed in the course of installing, operating, repairing, or accessing any utilities, lines, or associated appurtenances owned by the city or public utilities. The city and public utilities shall not be obligated to repair or restore any other item so removed or disturbed, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, non-grass groundcover, grass other than common St. Augustine or Bermuda, walls, posts, fences, lighting other than street lighting required under Sec. 6-16, decorative paving, or structures. The city and public utilities shall have final authority in determining the limits of any such repair or restoration, the satisfactoriness of such repair or restoration, and that such repair or restoration is in keeping with the standards of other such repairs or restoration provided elsewhere in the city. 
(12)  All private traffic signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, and city ordinances and regulations. 
(13)  Until conveyance of the private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities to the property owners association, the developer will maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy written by a company licensed to do business in the state, with a combined single limit of not less than $500,000.00, which coverage may be provided in the form of a rider and/or endorsement to a previously existing insurance policy. Such insurance coverage shall specifically name the city as an additional insured. This insurance coverage shall cover all perils arising from the use of the private streets. A copy of each instrument affecting coverage shall be delivered to the city on or before recordation of the plat. Until the private streets are conveyed to the property owners association, the developer shall not cause such insurance to be canceled nor permit such insurance to lapse. All insurance certificates shall include a clause to the effect that the policy shall not be canceled, reduced, restricted or otherwise limited until 30 days after the city has received written notice as evidenced by a return receipt of registered or certified mail. 
(e)  Property owners associations. 
(1)  Each gated community PUD shall have an approved property owners association. The developer will cause to be recorded community covenants that include provisions for: 
a.  Mandatory membership in a property owners association by all property owners within the gated community; 
b.  Mandatory assessments secured by a lien, which assessments will include maintenance of private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities; 
c.  Requirements that the property owners association be responsible for the maintenance of private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities; and 
d.  Such other provisions required by this subsection. 
The covenants required herein shall be approved by the director of planning and city attorney, and filed for record contemporaneously with the filing of the final plat in the county records department. In lieu of filing the covenants with the final plat, the developer may record with the final plat a street restrictive covenant, approved by the director of planning and city attorney, obligating the developer to maintain and repair the private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities and common areas and facilities (and such other provisions required by the city) until a property owners association has been created and community covenants recorded which otherwise comply with this section; provided, however, that in any event the property owners association must be created and the community covenants must be recorded prior to the developer's conveyance of any lot to a third party. No assessments need be levied by the property owners association until the property owners association has been created and community covenants recorded and the private streets, appurtenances related private storm sewers, and drainage facilities and common areas and facilities have been conveyed by the developer to the property association; provided that such private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities, or common areas and facilities must be conveyed to the property association no later than 12 months after completion. 
(2)  The community covenants shall provide for a street maintenance reserve fund for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of private streets, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities, access control structures and equipment. This reserve fund shall be maintained in a separate account and may not be co-mingled with any other property owners association funds. A portion of the assessments levied by the property owners association will be placed in the street maintenance fund. The portion of the assessments collected from lot owners and placed in the street maintenance fund will be based on the current maintenance and replacement schedule prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or an individual holding an RS ("reserve specialist") designation from the Community Associations Institute. In conjunction with approval of the final plat, the basis and formula for calculating the amount of assessments to be deposited in the street maintenance fund, shall be subject to review and approval by the director of transportation and the PDS director. The property owners association shall provide to the city: (i) annually an affidavit setting forth the fund balance and any expenditures therefrom; and (ii) at least once every three years, an updated maintenance and replacement schedule prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or a reserve specialist. No more than once annually, the basis and formula for calculating the amount of assessments to be deposited in the street maintenance fund may be amended, subject to the review and approval of the director of transportation and the city PDS director. 
(3)  The community covenants will permit, but shall not obligate, the city to repair and maintain private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities if the developer or the property owners association, as applicable fails to maintain such facilities in good condition and repair after the city has provided such party written notice and the 30 days to remedy such failure. Notice will not be required in the case of an emergency. The term "emergency" means a condition threatening the health or safety of any person, or significant damage to any publicly owned property or utilities, as determined by the city in its sole and absolute discretion. The community covenants shall further provide that the city may use the outstanding balance in the street maintenance reserve fund if the city is required to repair or maintain the private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities. 
(4)  Membership requirements. Every lot owner within the gated community shall be a member of the property owners association. 
(5)  The community covenants shall provide that the streets within the gated community are private, owned and maintained by the property owners association and that the city has no obligation to maintain or reconstruct the private streets, nonpublic storm sewers and drainage facilities. The covenants shall include the following provision: 
"The property owners association shall be responsible for contacting the City of Round Rock Transportation Department every two years, or as needed, from time of initial completion to schedule an inspection, to include city staff and the property owners association's representative for reviewing the private streets". 
(6)  The community covenants shall include language, approved by the city attorney, whereby the association agrees to release and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs or causes of action of any nature whatsoever, whether real or asserted, brought for or on account of any injuries or damages to persons or property including death, resulting from or in any way connected with the construction, maintenance or operation of the private streets. 
(7)  Upon conveyance of the private streets, appurtenances, or related private storm sewers and drainage facilities to the property owners association, the property owners association will maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy, written by a company licensed to do business in the state with a combined single limit of not less than $500,000.00, which coverage may be provided in the form of a rider and/or endorsement to a previously existing insurance policy. Such insurance coverage shall specifically name the city as an additional insured. This insurance coverage shall cover all perils arising from the use of the private streets. A copy of each instrument effecting coverage shall be delivered to the city on an annual basis. The property owners association shall not cause such insurance to be canceled or permit such insurance to lapse. All insurance certificates shall include a clause to the effect that the policy shall not be canceled, reduced, restricted or otherwise limited until 30 days after the city has received written notice as evidenced by a return receipt of registered or certified mail. 
(f)  Voluntary conversion of private streets to public streets. The city may, but is not obligated to, accept private streets for public access and maintenance. The procedure must conform to all of the following provisions: 
(1)  The property owners association must submit a petition signed by 100 percent of its members. 
(2)  All of the streets must be in a condition that is acceptable to the city, in its sole judgment. 
(3)  All access controllers and other structures not consistent with a public street development must be removed at the expense of the property owners association and to the satisfaction of the city. 
(4)  If any maintenance of the streets and roadways is required, the city may use the outstanding balance in the reserve fund for such maintenance. Any remaining balance in the fund shall be returned to the lot owners at the time the private street and/or roadway is converted to a public street on a fair and equitable basis to be determined by the city council. If the outstanding balance is insufficient to perform the required maintenance, the property owners association shall provide additional funds as required. 
(5)  Each lot owner shall execute an instrument of dedication for filing of record, the form of which shall be approved by the city attorney's office. 
(g)  Design standards; structures. The design and construction of the infrastructure within a gated community shall conform to the same rules, regulations, standards and specifications established for standard subdivisions with public streets. 
(1)  Perimeter fences at entry access points, entry monuments, and access controllers, may be erected within public utility, drainage and storm sewer easement(s), provided they do not impede the operation, installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of public utilities, drainage facilities, and storm sewers within the easement(s), as determined solely by the city PDS director. 
(2)  Where access controllers are a part of a larger, multi-purpose structure, only that portion of the structure which functions as access controllers may encroach the building line adjacent to the private street. 
(h)  Street lights on private streets. Street lighting shall be provided on private streets in accordance with Sec. 6-16. It shall be the responsibility of the property owners association to pay for the cost of operating the street lights on private streets. 
(i)  Additional requirements or standards. The foregoing requirements and standards for gated community PUDs are considered to be the minimum requirements. However, nothing contained herein shall be considered as a limitation on the city council's discretion to modify these or other requirements or standards to make them more or less restrictive, as required by the unique circumstances of each PUD application. 
Secs. 4-57-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKLAND REQUIREMENT 

Sec. 4-61. - Parkland policy and purpose. 
(a)  This article is enacted in accordance with the home rule powers of the city, granted under the state Constitution, and the state statutes. It is hereby declared by the city council that open space and recreational areas in the form of parks are necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public. It is hereby further declared by the city council that a parkland fee in lieu of parkland dedication for residential and nonresidential development is necessary to further the pursuit of obtaining open space and recreational areas. 
(b)  The primary purpose of the parkland requirements is to ensure that the need for parkland that arises from new development is at least partially satisfied by the developer of the new development, so that those who generate the need contribute their proportionate share. Accordingly, when new development occurs, a reasonable contribution is to be made for open space for those who live or work in the new development so that they may engage in active and passive recreational activities within or near the new development. In some instances, the need for parks resulting from new development may be addressed most effectively through the development and acquisition of community or regional parks serving several neighborhoods. 
(c)  It shall be required that a developer of any residential subdivision or addition set aside and convey to the public sufficient and suitable lands within the subdivision or addition for the purpose of parkland or contribute cash in lieu of land conveyance or combination thereof as determined by the planning and zoning commission upon the recommendation of the parks director. 
(d)  The requirements for the conveyance of parkland established by this article are based in part on the goals, recommendations, needs and standards set forth in the general plan adopted by the city council. The general plan describes the needs prioritization and implementation plan, standards for parks and recreation units, planning and land acquisitions methods, as well as goals and objectives. 
Sec. 4-62. - Parkland requirement. 
(a)  Residential. The developer of a residential subdivision or addition shall provide for the parkland needs of the community by conveyance of suitable land in accordance with Sec. 4-63. For purposes of this article, a residential subdivision shall include single-family, two-family, townhouse, multifamily, and senior development. To meet the parkland requirements, the city may allow a developer of a residential subdivision or addition to convey off-site land, contribute cash in lieu of parkland pursuant to Sec. 4-68, or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Nonresidential parkland fee. In order to provide for the open space needs of the community, the developer of a nonresidential subdivision will be assessed a parkland fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time payable in accordance with Sec. 4-68(c). The parkland fee may be reduced or waived by the parks director should the developer choose to dedicate parkland at the time of platting. 
(c)  Mixed-use parkland fee . The parkland fee shall be determined at the time of subdivision platting for developments in the following mixed-use zoning districts: MU-1, MU-2, MU-L, MU-R, and MU-G. The fee shall be determined based on the split of proposed uses of the subdivision. Residential uses in a mixed-use district shall be assessed the fee equivalent to those found in Sec. 4-63 based on the housing unit type. Nonresidential uses in a mixed-use district shall be assessed the fee equivalent to nonresidential uses noted in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  City purchase of parkland. In order for the city to achieve the goals of the general plan, the city may need to purchase land that exceeds standard dedication requirements from the developer for parkland. The city may enter into an agreement with the developer to purchase the property from the developer. If the city and developer cannot agree on the terms of said agreement, the city may choose to prohibit any construction on the proposed parkland for a period not to exceed 120 days from the date of approval of the preliminary plat, during which time the city shall use reasonable and diligent efforts to acquire the necessary funds or financing to purchase the parkland. The foregoing provision shall not be construed as a limitation of the city's authority to acquire land by eminent domain. 
Sec. 4-63. - Parkland calculation for residential development. 
(a)  The developer of a residential subdivision or addition is required to convey the amount of land equivalent to the following percentages of the total acreage of the subdivision excluding any lots zoned for nonresidential use: 
Single-Family (SFR) One percent Single-family (SF-1) Six percent Single-Family (SF-2, SF-3, and SF-D) Eight percent Manufactured Housing (MH) Eight percent Two-Family (TF) Fourteen percent Townhouse (TH) Sixteen percent Senior (SR) Ten percent Multifamily - Low Density (MF-1) Sixteen percent Multifamily - Medium Density (MF-2) Twenty percent Multifamily - Urban (MF-3) Twenty percent  
(b)  The developer of a residential subdivision or addition will be allowed up to 50 percent credit toward fulfilling the requirements of subsection (a) of this section for land designated as privately owned and maintained park and recreational facilities that are for use by the residents of the subdivision or addition. 
Sec. 4-64. - Review by parks director. 
    As part of the plat review process, the parks director shall make recommendations based upon requirements of this article to the planning department at the appropriate time within the plat review process. Recommendations received shall be noted on the written report for the plat prepared by the PDS director. 
Sec. 4-65. - Standards for parkland dedication. 
(a)  General standards. Parkland conveyed to the city as provided in this article shall meet each of the standards set forth below: 
(1)  The general plan shall be used as a guide for location of park sites; 
(2)  The parkland shall have frontage on a public street equal to or greater than the square root of the total square footage of park area to be conveyed (e.g., a 435,600-square-foot park area, which is the equivalent of a ten-acre park, would require 660 linear feet of frontage); 
(3)  Unless otherwise approved by the parks director, parkland which is a part of the citywide trails master plan shall be designed and located within a subdivision or addition to allow for an extension or connection of a public park or public recreational facility within an abutting subdivision; 
(4)  A minimum of 50 percent of the dedicated parkland within a subdivision or addition shall be outside of the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain and shall have a size, configuration and topography to be developable for active park purposes, unless identified in the general plan as a regional trail or a community/regional park; 
(5)  Parkland shall not be encumbered with existing or proposed public utility easements or drainage channels that would unduly restrict the development of the site for recreational purposes except as provided in subsection (b) of this section; and 
(6)  Property identified with environmental hazards that limit its use as a public park as indicated by a phase I or phase II environmental assessment, as provided for through the subdivision platting process, shall not qualify as lands eligible for parkland dedication. 
(b)  Dual park and stormwater drainage facility. The parkland may be designed and constructed to allow for dual recreational and stormwater drainage purposes. Approval must be obtained from both the parks director and PDS director for the location and design of the dual park and stormwater drainage facility. Areas designated for dual use purposes shall not exceed 50 percent of the parkland dedication requirement per Sec. 4-63, unless otherwise approved by the parks director and the PDS director. 
(c)  Improvements required. Parkland conveyed to the city shall be improved as required by this article. The developer shall indicate the proposed parkland improvements within the construction plans as required in article VIII of this chapter. Construction of the required parkland improvements shall be in accordance with the accepted construction plans, and shall be completed by the developer within the time period specified for construction of public improvements in this chapter. An improved park shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  Paved frontage, curbs and gutters for all required street frontages abutting the outside perimeter of the parkland; 
(2)  A sidewalk or trail installed in the park, and/or a sidewalk installed along the street frontage of the park with the location approved according to the construction plans; 
(3)  Water, reuse water (if applicable), wastewater, electrical services and all other utilities provided to the remainder of the subdivision or addition shall be provided to the park as part of standard subdivision improvements; and 
(4)  The grading of site and installation of grass with irrigation. Irrigation may cease when the grass becomes fully established. 
Sec. 4-66. - On-site conveyance of parkland. 
(a)  Parkland shown on preliminary and final plats. Parkland to be conveyed shall be designated as a lot on both the preliminary and final plats as " Parkland shall be conveyed to the City of Round Rock by separate document prior to the recordation of the Final Plat" with the acreage of the parkland also shown. In addition, a note referencing the conveyance of the parkland shall be placed on the final plat. 
(b)  Title insurance policy required. Prior to recording the final plat, the developer shall deliver to the planning department a title insurance policy with the city as the holder and covering the parkland being conveyed. 
(c)  Deed required. Prior to recording the final plat, the developer shall deliver to the planning department the deed, in a form approved by the city attorney, conveying parkland shown on the final plat as approved by the planning and zoning commission. The parkland deeded to the city shall not be subject to reservations of record, encumbrances or easements that will interfere with the use of the land for park purposes. The deed delivered to the planning department shall be recorded in conjunction with the recordation of the final plat. 
Sec. 4-67. - Off-site conveyance of parkland. 
(a)  Approvals required. Upon affirmative recommendations from the parks director and approval from the planning and zoning commission, the city may accept parkland that is not part of an addition or subdivision in order to meet the parkland requirement. 
(b)  Deed required. A deed shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 4-66(c). 
Sec. 4-68. - Parkland fee in lieu of parkland conveyance. 
(a)  When applicable. The city may, at its option, require a parkland fee for all or part of the required parkland conveyance under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When less than three acres is required to be conveyed; 
(2)  Where the proposed parkland does not meet the standards set forth in Sec. 4-65; 
(3)  When a replat or amending plat is submitted subsequent to a rezoning to a higher density classification; or 
(4)  When the development is a gated community. 
(b)  Parkland fee for residential additions and subdivisions. Where applicable, the developer shall pay a parkland fee as adopted by city council. 
(c)  Form tendered. The parkland fee shall be tendered in the form of a cashier's check or other form of payment acceptable by the city, payable to the City of Round Rock Parks Improvement and Acquisition Fund. The cashier's check or other form of payment acceptable by the city shall be submitted to the PDS director and shall accompany the request for plat recordation. 
(d)  Refunds. No refund of a parkland fee received in lieu of parkland conveyance required by this article shall be made except as provided in Sec. 4-69. 
Sec. 4-69. - Parks improvement and acquisition fund. 
(a)  Parkland fee. Parkland fees shall be deposited into the parks improvement and acquisition fund. The city shall account for all parkland fees with reference to the individual additions or subdivisions involved, and all sums received shall be spent or committed by the city within ten years from the recordation of the plat. For purposes of this article, parkland fees shall be considered committed when: 
(1)  Under an earnest money agreement for the purchase of parkland; 
(2)  For a park improvement project; 
(3)  In a grant application; or 
(4)  Encumbered fees are not expended because of delays by reason of strikes, court action or any similar impediment which renders it impossible or illegal to spend the money. 
(b)  Use of parkland fees. 
(1)  Parkland fees may be used for acquisition and/or development of public parkland or other recreational facilities. Where fees are received in lieu of parkland conveyance in additions or subdivisions, the parkland fees collected shall be expended on a neighborhood park within the park zone in which the addition or subdivision is located or the park zones surrounding it, for a total maximum area consisting of nine park zones. In the event that there is not a suitable neighborhood park location within the aforesaid park zones, then the parkland fees collected shall be expended on the closest community park. 
(2)  If parkland fees are not spent or committed within the required ten-year time period commencing from the final acceptance of subdivision improvements, the record owner shall be entitled to a refund. 
(c)  Accountability. The city shall maintain a record of parkland fees and expenditures, including: 
(1)  The developer's name and address; 
(2)  The date monies were received; 
(3)  The total amount of parkland fees received; 
(4)  The addition or subdivision generating the fees; 
(5)  The addition, subdivision or park zone where monies are to be spent; 
(6)  The expiration date for monies to be committed; 
(7)  The balance after expenditures; 
(8)  A statement of expenditures; and 
(9)  The parkland description where monies are spent. 
Secs. 4-70-4-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 4-76. - Water system. 
(a)  Provide water lines. The developer shall provide all water lines necessary to properly serve each lot of the subdivision or addition and ensure that existing and/or new water facilities can supply the required demand, including fire protection. The developer shall install all necessary on-site and off-site mains and shall extend service to all lots terminating with a meter stop and meter box. For the orderly extension of water lines as established in the water and wastewater master plan, the developer shall install water mains to the boundaries of his development for future connection by the development of the abutting land. Extension of service lines to multifamily and nonresidential lots may be postponed until development of the lot if a main is installed in the abutting right-of-way located on the same side of the street as the lot. The developer's engineer shall include a statement with the water system plans that the system meets the requirements of this section and complies with the rules and regulations established by the TCEQ. 
(b)  Design and construction. All water systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards and conform to the TCEQ design criteria in the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. 
(c)  Hydrant flow tests. 
(1)  The fire department shall provide hydrant flow tests to developers as requested. 
(2)  Developers shall pay the fire department a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each hydrant flow test requested. 
Sec. 4-77. - Wastewater system. 
(a)  Sewer service to each lot inside city limits; connection with wastewater system required. 
(1)  Connection to the city's wastewater system shall be required except where the director of utilities determines that such connection would require unreasonable expenditure of funds when compared with alternate methods of sewage disposal. Where alternative sewage disposal is permitted, the plans for such system must meet the requirements of the TCEQ and be approved by the county health department, prior to approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The developer shall install all wastewater mains and lines necessary to serve each lot. The developer shall install necessary on-site and off-site wastewater mains and shall extend service to all lots, terminating each service with a cap. For the orderly extension of wastewater lines as established in the water and wastewater master plan, the developer shall install wastewater mains to the boundaries of his final plat for future connection by the development of the abutting land. For multifamily and nonresidential plats, services to the lots shall connect at manholes. 
(b)  Sewer service to property in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction; connection to approved wastewater system required. Connection to either the city's wastewater system or a TCEQ approved wastewater system shall be required. If the city's wastewater system is not utilized, the alternative sewage disposal system must meet the requirements of the TCEQ and be approved by the county health department prior to approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Developer to submit certificate. The developer's engineer shall include a statement with the wastewater system plans that the wastewater system meets the requirements of this section and complies with the rules and regulations established by the TCEQ. 
(d)  Design and construction criteria. All wastewater systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards and conform to the TCEQ design criteria in the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. Privately maintained wastewater facilities located between the publicly maintained portion of the wastewater system and up to the point five (5) feet away from the building foundation shall follow all requirements of the Utilities Design and Construction Standards and shall not violate the International Plumbing Code, with local amendments. 
Sec. 4-78. - Oversize mains. 
(a)  Size of mains. All water and wastewater mains shall be installed in accordance with the water and wastewater master plan maintained by the utility director. All water and wastewater mains shall be sized to provide necessary service to the tract to be developed. The cost of water mains up to eight inches, or of a size required to serve a tract being developed, whichever is larger, shall be paid in full by the developer. 
(b)  Oversize mains. Where it is determined that on-site water and/or wastewater mains need to be of a larger size than is required to serve the tract to be developed, the city may require the developer to install such oversize mains. For water mains less than 16 inches the developer shall be reimbursed the incremental cost difference for oversizing from the oversize account described in subsection (c) of this section. For oversize water mains 16 inches or greater, the developer shall be reimbursed for the incremental cost difference required for oversizing from the oversize account approved for capital improvement projects, or through reimbursement contracts. For wastewater mains less than 15 inches, the developer shall be reimbursed the incremental cost difference for oversizing from the oversize account described in subsection (c) of this section. For oversize wastewater mains 15 inches or greater, the developer shall be reimbursed for the incremental cost difference required for oversizing from the oversize account approved for capital improvement projects, or through reimbursement contracts. 
(c)  Oversize account. A special oversize account is hereby established for reimbursing developers for the cost of oversizing water and wastewater mains. The account shall be funded by water and wastewater oversize fees which are based on the number of service units to be added to the respective water and wastewater systems. The number of service units will be determined in accordance with Sec. 4-82(e). 
(d)  Oversized fees assessed . The water and wastewater oversize fees will be assessed to all developers regardless of whether they are required to install an oversized line. For single-family, two-family, and single-lot townhouse plats the water and wastewater oversize fees shall be paid when the developer requests recordation of the plat. For all other uses including but not limited to common lot townhouse, multifamily and nonresidential plats, or when a plat is not required, the water and wastewater oversize fees shall be paid when an application for a building permit is submitted. Interest income earned from this account shall be added to the account. 
(e)  Reimbursement. After acceptance of the public improvements by the PDS director, a developer shall present in writing to the PDS director, a request for oversize reimbursement. A request for reimbursement shall be made within five years from the date of recordation, building permit application submittal or effective date of the reimbursement contract, whichever is applicable. After review by the PDS director for completeness of the request, the request for reimbursements shall be presented to the city council for approval. The reimbursement for the cost of oversizing will be paid from available funds within 30 days after the city council approves the reimbursement amount. Developers shall be reimbursed in chronological order of the written request for reimbursement. In the event that sufficient funds are not available, interest will accrue at a rate established by the city council. If a developer is delinquent in the payment of fees and taxes to the city, the city council may deduct from the reimbursement the amount owed to the city. 
(f)  Oversize credit. In the event that there are sufficient funds in the oversize account to meet approved reimbursement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section and to meet contractual obligations, a developer may be entitled to a credit against the water and wastewater oversize fees; provided, however, no credit will be granted to any developer who is delinquent in the payment to the city of any fees or taxes. Subject to the foregoing, a developer may reduce the amount of the water and wastewater oversize fees by an amount equal to the reimbursement, if any, to be issued upon the acceptance of the public improvements. 
(g)  Fees, reimbursement rate and interest rate. Water and wastewater oversize fees shall be established by the city council. Fees shall be paid at recordation as provided for in Sec. 10-35. Periodically, the city council shall review and approve the water oversize fee, wastewater oversize fee, a fixed rate of reimbursement per inch of diameter per linear foot of oversize mains installed, and the rate of interest to be paid. 
Sec. 4-79. - Water and sewer system requirements to eliminate infiltration and contamination from flooding. 
    The authorized building official of the city shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. See also chapter 8, article X, division 12 flood damage prevention, and Sec. 4-88, subdivision and addition plats. 
Sec. 4-80. - Furnishing of water, reuse water, and sewer services outside city limits. 
(a)  Conditions under which city services will be provided . The city shall furnish water, sewer and/or reuse water services to residential and commercial users located outside the city limits only upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Adequate capacity exists . There is adequate capacity of city services available for the purpose of servicing residential and commercial users outside the city without impairing services within the city. Whether such adequate capacity exists shall be determined solely by the city council, and the determination of the city council shall be final. 
(2)  Owners outside city limits to bear costs of lines and furnish easements . The construction costs of water, sewer and/or reuse water lines and appurtenances which serve residential and commercial users outside the city limits shall be paid for by the owner, developer, or political entity requesting the service. Such owner, developer, or political entity shall also furnish suitable construction and permanent easements and rights-of-way for utility lines. 
(3)  Construction to conform to city standards . All design and construction shall be in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(4)  New subdivisions to comply with subdivision regulations . New subdivisions recorded after the date of passage of this section desiring city water, sewer and/or water reuse services shall comply with the subdivision regulations of the City of Round Rock, Texas, in effect at the time such new subdivision is approved. Existing subdivisions whose plats were recorded with the County Clerk of Williamson County, Texas, at the time of the passage of the original Ord. No. 269 (January 8, 1976) can be furnished with water and sewer services without the necessity of having sanitary sewer collection and treatment facilities. 
(5)  City to have right of review . The city shall have the right to review and approve all plats and plans and inspect and approve all water, sewer and/or reuse water construction within subdivisions where water, sewer, and/or reuse water service is to be provided. 
(6)  Water and sewer facility requirements . Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, all residential and commercial users shall have sanitary sewer collection and treatment facilities. Water will not be provided to residential and commercial users who utilize septic tanks save and except water can be provided to subdivisions whose plats were recorded with the County Clerk of Williamson County, Texas, at the time original Ord. No. 269 was adopted (January 8, 1976). 
(7)  Water, sewer, and/or reuse water lines to meet ultimate requirements of city . Where water, sewer, and/or reuse water lines and appurtenances are extended outside the city limits, the lines shall be sized to serve the ultimate requirements of the city. 
(8)  Extended lines to be designed and inspected by city's engineer . All water, sewer, and/or reuse water lines and appurtenances extending from existing city facilities to any tract of land outside the city limits requesting water, sewer, and/or reuse water service shall be designed and inspected by the city's engineer. The owner, developer, or political entity requesting the service shall pay for these services in keeping with the current contract between the city and the engineer employed by the city. 
(9)  City may reimburse owner for oversized lines . Where the size of the water, sewer, and/or reuse water lines required to meet the ultimate requirements for the city is larger than eight inches and the total capacity is not required to serve the tract of land to be developed, the city may enter into a contract with the owner, developer, or entity constructing the lines for reimbursement for the excess capacity as other users request and are granted service. The developer or entity requesting service from an existing line shall pay a tap fee on a pro rata basis, as hereinafter set forth. The reimbursement to the owner, developer, or entity who paid for the line construction shall be made only from those tap fees paid to the city by users of the facility paid for by the said owner, developer, or entity. 
(10)  Pro rata basis for tap fee . The pro rata basis for the tap fee shall be computed based upon the required demand for use and the fire protection as specified by the engineering criteria approved by the city's engineer. The basis for cost shall be the actual total cost of the facility plus five percent (5%) interest. The total cost shall include, but shall not be limited to, construction costs, engineering costs, and inspection costs. 
(11)  Wholesale bulk rate sales of water . Facilities constructed and paid for by another public entity or facilities which will later be acquired by a public entity may be owned, operated, and maintained by that entity. Such facilities shall purchase water from the city at a negotiated wholesale bulk rate. The city shall own, operate, and maintain all other facilities. 
(b)  Rates . The rates paid by residential and commercial users located outside the city limits for the use of the water, sewer, and/or reuse water facilities of the city shall be in accordance with sections 44-32, 44-33, and 44-34 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 4-81. - Water and reuse water meters required, inspection fees. 
(a)  Meters required. All premises using the city potable water and/or reuse water supply must be equipped with adequate water meter(s) furnished by the city, but paid for by the customer. 
(b)  Installation and maintenance. 
(1)  Meters shall be installed in a location that will be easy to access. 
(2)  The meter box shall be maintained by the customer to ensure that no obstacle will hinder or prevent adequate access to the meter for reading and servicing. Adequate access is a condition precedent to the receipt of utility services from the city and a requirement for continued service. The term "adequate access," for purposes of this section, shall be defined as the ability of an authorized city representative to get to a meter without visual aids, without the presence of the customer or without threat of bodily injury and must not be hindered by shrubs, trees, locked gates or any other obstruction. No authorized city representative shall be denied access to a meter. 
(c)  Reading meters. The city shall read or cause to be read every water and reuse water meter used in the city at such times as are necessary that the bill may be sent out at the proper time. No person shall cause interference with reading a meter by building, installing or planting any obstacle that would prevent access to a meter temporarily or permanently. If an obstacle prevents the meter from being read, an additional trip fee as set forth in Sec. 44-30(b) shall be charged to the water and reuse water bill as a reread fee. Should an authorized city representative be unable to have adequate access more than three times, the city shall notify customer, in writing, of such obstruction and give customer ten days to provide adequate access. The city may, at its option, relocate the meter and charge customer for the actual costs of relocating the meter. Failure to comply within the ten-day period shall be grounds for termination of service and customer shall be charged the a water inspection and meter setting fee set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Testing meters. Any customer requesting the municipal water and reuse water meter to be tested shall pay, as a fee, the actual cost of testing the meter by a third party licensed meter tester. The city will retain the fee if the meter is within three percent of being accurate. If the meter is not within three percent of being accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the fee returned to the customer or credited on the customer's account. 
(e)  Right of entry. Any employee of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, meter reading and testing. 
(f)  Water and reuse water service, inspection and meter setting fees. 
(1)  Water and reuse water inspection and meter setting fee. Each applicant for a plumbing permit, whether for new construction or otherwise, shall at the time the permit is issued, pay a water inspection and meter setting fee of $100.00. 
(2)  Fees for water service outside city limits. Applicants for water and reuse water service outside the city limits shall pay the same fees as set forth above. Applicants who are otherwise required by contract to obtain building permits shall pay the fees when a permit is issued. Other applicants shall pay the fees when water service is requested. 
(g)  Sewer inspection fees. 
(1)  Service connection. Each applicant for a plumbing permit, whether for new construction or otherwise, shall, at the time the permit is issued, pay a sewer inspection fee of $100.00 for each sewer service connection to the main line. 
(2)  Sewer service outside city limits. Applicants for sewer service outside the city limits shall pay the same sewer inspection fee as set forth above. Applicants who are otherwise required by contract to obtain building permits shall pay the fees when a permit is issued. Other applicants shall pay the fee when water or wastewater service is requested. 
Sec. 4-82. - Water and wastewater impact fees. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. Impact fees established by this section are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's comprehensive plan, the capital improvement plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, resolutions and ordinances by which the city seeks to provide adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(2)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable uniformly to new development that occurs within the water and wastewater service area. For new development that occurs within the boundaries of the city's wholesale customers or other political subdivisions, the applicability and terms for the assessment and collection of the impact fee shall be defined by agreement. 
(3)  Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, the Constitution and laws of the state, and the city Charter. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt an impact fee pursuant to any other source of local authority nor to limit the utilization of any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein. 
(4)  Development approval. No application for new development shall be approved by the city without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this section, and no water and wastewater tap shall be connected unless the impact fees assessed by this section have been paid. 
(b)  Land use assumptions. 
(1)  The updated land use assumptions contained within the April 2012 Update of the Water and Wastewater Impact Fees of the City of Round Rock, dated April 2012, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and shall be kept of record in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  Said land use assumptions for the city shall be updated at least every five years utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(3)  Amendment to the land use assumptions shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for the service area over at least a ten-year period. 
(c)  Water and wastewater impact fee service area. 
(1)  The water and wastewater impact fee service area, the boundaries of which are depicted on the map contained within the April 2012 Update of the Water and Wastewater Impact Fees of the City of Round Rock, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and shall be kept of record in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  The boundaries of the water and wastewater impact fee service area may be amended from time to time in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(d)  Impact fee capital improvements plan for water and wastewater facilities. 
(1)  The impact fee capital improvements plan for water and wastewater facilities contained within the 2012 Update of the Water and Wastewater Impact Fees of the City of Round Rock, dated April 2012, is adopted and incorporated in this section by reference and shall be kept on record in the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  The impact fee capital improvements plan for water and wastewater facilities may be amended from time to time pursuant to the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(e)  Determination of service units. 
(1)  Table for non-multifamily uses. The number of service units for non-multifamily uses for both water and wastewater service is determined by the size and type of the water meter purchased for the property in accordance with the following table. The number of service units associated with the use of compound meters is determined by the size of the largest meter installed: 
Meter Size (inches) Service Units 5/8 × 3/4 1.0 3/4 1.5 1 2.5 1.5 5.0 2 8.0 3 16.0 4 25.0 6 50.0 8 80.0 10 115.0  
(2)  Table for multifamily uses. The number of service units for multifamily uses for both water and wastewater service is determined in accordance with the following table: 
Type of Multifamily Use Service Unit 
Equivalents Apartments 0.5 per unit Multifamily house 0.5 per unit Townhouse 0.7 per unit Single-family attached house with two dwelling units 0.7 per unit Hotel/motel/lodging and assisted living 0.25 per unit All other multi-unit residential buildings 0.7 per unit  
(3)  Calculation. Service units shall be calculated based upon the size of the water meter for non-multifamily uses, or the type of multifamily use, as set out above. 
(4)  No water meter. Upon application for a building permit for lots for which no water meter has been purchased, wastewater service units shall be determined by a professional engineer licensed in the state, subject to the approval of the director. 
(5)  Nonstandard meter. No adjustment in service units shall be made for water use or fire demand that falls between standard meter sizes or combinations. 
(6)  Revision of service units designation. The city may revise the service units designation in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(f)  Impact fees per service unit. 
(1)  Maximum allowable fee. The maximum impact fee per service unit shall be computed by dividing the cost of water and wastewater capital improvements and facilities expansions necessitated by and attributable to new development identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan for each category of capital improvements by the total number of projected service units in the impact fee service area based upon the land use assumptions, and then may be adjusted to reflect a credit, as appropriate, for other non-fee methods of capital payments referenced in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.014(7). Maximum impact fees per service unit shall be established for each category of capital improvements and are on record in the office of the city secretary, and incorporated in this section by reference. 
(2)  Beginning on March 1, 2016, the city shall assess and collect per service unit to be served by the city's water system a water impact fee of $4,025.00. 
(3)  Beginning on March 1, 2016, the city shall assess and collect per service unit to be served by the city's wastewater system a wastewater impact fee of $2,099.00. 
(g)  Assessment of impact fees 
(1)  The city shall assess the impact fees per service unit in effect at the time of plat recordation of a subdivision plat or other plat under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch, 212, subch. A, or the city's subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Except as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.019, the city shall collect the fees as follows: 
a.  At the time the political subdivision issues a building permit; or 
b.  For land platted outside the corporate boundaries of the city, the city shall collect the impact fees at the time an application for an individual meter connection to the city's water or wastewater system is filed. 
(3)  For land on which new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, the city may assess the impact fees at any time during the development and building process and may collect the fees at either the time of recordation of the subdivision plat or connection to the city's water or wastewater system or at the time the city issues either the building permit or the certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Following assessment of the impact fee hereunder, the amount of the impact fee per service unit may not be increased above the assessed fee unless the owner obtains final approval for replatting in which case a new assessment shall occur at the assessed water and wastewater impact fee per service unit in effect at the time of such replatting. 
(5)  An application for an amended plat made pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016 or the city's subdivision rules is not subject to a reassessment of the impact fee. 
(h)  Calculation of impact fees. 
(1)  The water and wastewater impact fees shall be based on the number of service units required for non-multifamily uses or the size of the water meter determined by the director to be necessary to serve multifamily uses and the number of service units associated with that size of water meter. If the city allows a development to connect to the wastewater system without connecting to the water system, the director shall determine the number of service units that would be required if the development did connect to the water system. The number of service units associated with the various sizes of water meters or multifamily types are set forth herein in subsection (e) above. 
(2)  A property owner may submit, or the director may require the submission of a study, prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in the state, clearly indicating the number of water and/or wastewater service units which will be consumed or generated by the new development. The director will review the information for completeness and conformity with generally accepted engineering practices and may, when satisfied with the completeness and conformity of the study, modify the total number of service units required for the new development. 
(3)  Total service units and any fraction thereof shall be multiplied by the impact fee per service unit for water or wastewater service as set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(4)  All applicable offsets, credits or discounts per service unit allowable under this section for water or wastewater service shall be subtracted from the product derived under subsection (h)(3) of this section. 
(5)  The amount of impact fees due for new development shall not exceed the amount computed by multiplying the assessed fee for water or wastewater service by the total number of service units generated by the development. 
(6)  Whenever the property owner increases the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined based on the assessed fee and applicable offsets, credits and discounts then in effect and such additional fee shall be collected at the time the additional meters are purchased. 
(7)  For the purpose of determining water impact fees attributable to the addition of a separate irrigation meter, the water impact fee shall be based on the size of the irrigation meter shown in the table in Sec. 44-32 of the Code of Ordinances. No wastewater impact fee shall be charged for an irrigation meter. 
(8)  In determining the number of service units for wastewater impact fees, no service units will be attributed to irrigation meters. 
(9)  Payment of an impact fee in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section shall entitle the payor to receive a credit for same to be used in the event the tap for the property for which the fee is paid expires and must be repurchased; provided, however, that the impact fee is not refundable upon expiration of the tap. 
(10)  If the tap or building permit for the property on which an impact fee is paid has expired and a new application is thereafter filed for the identical property and the same number of service units, the impact fee previously paid satisfies the requirements of this section. 
(11)  The impact fee shall attach to the property for which the impact fee was paid and shall not be transferable to other properties or service units. 
(12)  No request to connect to the water and wastewater system shall be granted and no building permit shall be issued if the applicant cannot verify payment of the appropriate impact fee and other applicable fees or if existing facilities do not have actual capacity to provide service to the new connection. 
(i)  Credits. If the city requires, as a condition of development approval, or otherwise enters into an agreement with a developer, to have the developer construct, fund or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a capital improvement or facility expansion included in the adopted water or wastewater capital improvements plan, the city shall provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. If the amount of such credits would be insufficient to reimburse the developer for the cost of required improvements, the city shall provide for reimbursement to the developer up to the balance of the cost of the required improvements from water or wastewater impact fees collected from other new development within the same service area. In determining the amount of such credits, the developer shall submit evidence of the actual, fair-market cost of the required improvement. Such credits shall only be applicable against the impact fees for the type of facility (water or wastewater) for which the capital improvement is made. 
(j)  Exceptions and exemptions. 
(1)  Limitation on modification. Except as provided in this section or by contract in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, any reduction, change or modification in the amount or time of payment of the impact fee must be approved by a duly enacted ordinance of the city council. 
(2)  Fire protection capacity. No fee shall be collected for the purchase of a tap that is utilized to provide only fire protection capacity. 
(3)  Nothing hereinabove stated shall be construed to alter the terms of a contract with a wholesale customer of the city regarding the payment of impact fees and shall not be construed to authorize the payment of impact fees in installments in areas encompassed by such a contract for wholesale service. 
(4)  Exchange. A tap may be exchanged before any water or wastewater service has been received for another tap without collection of the impact fees established in this section if the exchange will result in an equivalent or lesser number of service units to be utilized on the property for which the tap was originally purchased. The number of service units to be exchanged shall be determined in accordance with subsection (e) of this section and shall not be based on the number of units at the time of initial purchase. 
(5)  Waiver. By majority vote of the city council, a resolution or ordinance may be adopted waiving or reducing the impact fees for a certain class of development, or for a specific development if there is a finding that the proposed waiver or reduction would result in substantial economic benefit to the city. All water and wastewater impact fees for public school buildings were waived pursuant to Ord. No. G-95-03-23-9A, adopted 3-23-1995. 
(k)  Accounting for fees and interest. 
(1)  All water and wastewater impact fees collected by the city shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements for which the fees were collected. 
(2)  Interest earned by each account shall be credited to the account on which it is earned and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for impact fees as authorized herein below. 
(3)  The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in this section. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this section; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(4)  The city shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all moneys received, the number of service units for which the moneys are received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the impact fee capital improvements plan as system-related capital projects. The city shall also maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are appropriately made in accordance with this section. 
(l)  Use of proceeds of impact fee account. 
(1)  Water and wastewater impact fees shall only be used to pay the costs of constructing water and wastewater capital improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the following: 
a.  Construction contract price; 
b.  Subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.012(b), interest charges, including projected interest charges, or other finance costs; 
c.  Surveying and engineering fees; 
d.  Land acquisition costs, including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert witness fees; and 
e.  Fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the city. 
(2)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this section shall not be used to pay for any of the items set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.013. 
(m)  Refunds. All or any portion of a water or wastewater impact fee payment that has been collected by the city and has not been spent as authorized by this section within ten years from the date such impact fee was collected shall be refunded pursuant to the provisions set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.025. 
(n)  Updates to plan and revisions of fees. The city shall review the land use assumptions and impact fee capital improvements plan for water and wastewater facilities at least every five years, with the five-year period to commence from the date of adoption of the impact fee capital improvements plan referenced in this section. The city council shall accordingly make a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions, impact fee capital improvements plan or impact fees are needed and shall, in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, or any successor statute, either update the fees or make a determination that no update is necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0201, § I, 5-9-2019) 
Sec. 4-83. - Petition for the creation of a municipal utility district (MUD). 
    Fee required . Each request or petition to the city for its written consent for the creation of a municipal utility district shall be accompanied by a fee of $5,000.00 which shall be paid to the city to defray the expense of reviewing and responding to said request or petition. 
Sec. 4-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE 

Sec. 4-85. - General policies. 
(a)  Stormwater drainage improvements shall be provided for the subdivision or addition. Stormwater impacts resulting from new development must not adversely affect any properties, including those abutting, downstream, and in upstream areas. Stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed by an engineer licensed to practice in Texas and in compliance and in accordance with this chapter, the Design and Construction Standards, and generally recognized and accepted engineering practices. Privately maintained stormwater drainage facilities including channels and swales located outside a public easement shall follow all requirements of the Drainage Design and Construction Standards, with exceptions for the following components: pipe material, pipe size, junction structures, inlets, roof drains, and minimum depth requirements. Variations to the aforementioned components shall not violate the International Plumbing Code, with local amendments, and must be approved by the zoning administrator. Variations are not permitted for any residential use. 
(b)  The ultimate 4% and ultimate 1% annual chance floodplains shall be determined for watercourses draining 50 or more acres. Calculations for floodplains shall utilize generally recognized backwater computational methods and actual field channel and overbank configuration. 
(c)  At a minimum, all stormwater drainage facilities shall be engineer-designed to intercept and transport the projected runoff from a 4% annual chance event. In addition, those flows greater than a 4% annual chance event up to and including a 1% annual chance event shall be contained within private streets, public streets, drainage easements, or a combination thereof. 
(d)  All stormwater drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent the erosion of existing and proposed on-site and off-site facilities. 
(e)  Projected runoff rates for the design and analysis of stormwater drainage facilities shall be based on the expected ultimate developed state of the upstream contributing area and shall apply to any and all references to floodplain, flows, design frequencies or any other hydrologic and hydraulic reference found in this chapter. 
(f)  The requirements provided in this chapter shall not relieve the owner of responsibility under state law to adjacent, upstream, and downstream property owners. 
Sec. 4-86. - On-site facilities, regional program, and fees. 
(a)  On-site detention facilities. Except as stated herein, all development establishing impervious cover or otherwise modifying an existing site shall incorporate on-site drainage facilities to prevent any increase in the peak rate of runoff from storm events having a 50%, 10%, 4%, 2%, and 1% chance of occurring each year. The PDS director may modify this requirement under either of the following circumstances: 
(1)  An approved off-site storage is provided by the developer for the required regulation of peak flows; or 
(2)  Sealed engineering data and calculations are presented which fully describe, explain, and justify recommended alternatives. 
(b)  Regional stormwater management program. 
(1)  Participation. In lieu of required on-site or off-site detention facilities, a developer may request to participate in the regional stormwater management program. The PDS director may accept a tract of land in the regional stormwater management program if the proposed development, including any off-site improvements will not result in additional identifiable adverse flooding of other property. A comprehensive engineering report providing engineering data and calculations which fully describe and justify participation in the program shall accompany all participation requests. 
(2)  Regional stormwater management program fees. 
a.  The fees are as follows: 
$  800.00/acre Single-family $1,600.00/acre Multifamily $2,400.00/acre Commercial/Industrial  
1.  Adjustment of these fees may be allowed by the PDS director, in consultation with the utilities director, if it is determined that certain impervious coverage restrictions, (e.g., special watershed ordinances), reduce the actual land use. However, the minimum fee shall not be less than $800.00/acre. 
2.  Upon approval of participation, the full fee will be due prior to approval of construction plans for single-family projects and upon building permit approval for multifamily, commercial, and industrial projects. 
Sec. 4-87. - Computations and plans. 
(a)  Sealed engineered plans for proposed drainage facilities shall be submitted to the PDS director for acceptance prior to construction. 
(b)  Computations for all drainage related design shall be submitted with the application for either a site development permit or subdivision improvement permit. Data submitted shall include a drainage area map, a summary of methodology employed and resulting data, land use and runoff coefficient assumptions and other pertinent hydrologic and hydraulic data. Additional data may be required by the city engineer. 
(c)  Certification shall be submitted by an engineer licensed in the State of Texas that the plans and computations are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Following construction, but prior to acceptance of improvements by the city, the design engineer shall furnish certification that based upon his or her periodic inspection of the work all improvements, including those covered by this section, have been constructed in compliance with the city's requirements. 
Sec. 4-88. - Subdivision and addition plats. 
(a)  Preliminary and final plats for additions or subdivisions shall show the limits of the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain for all waterways draining 50 or more acres by hatch marking said floodplain on the plat. In addition, all preliminary and final plats shall show the limits of zones A and AE as depicted on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if such zones fall within the boundaries of the plat. 
(b)  The final plat of any proposed addition or subdivision showing the limits of the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain shall contain the following plat note: 
"No fences, structures, storage or fill shall be placed within the limits of the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain unless approved in accordance with city ordinances." 
(c)  The final plat of any proposed addition or subdivision containing any property within SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, TF or TH zoning districts, or single-family condominiums or detached townhomes contained within a Planned Unit Development, shall provide public right-of-way, drainage easements or separate lots dedicated for such purposes, as approved by the city, to cover at a minimum the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain areas, drainage channels, pipe systems, and any other related drainage facilities. All other final plats shall provide drainage easements or separate lots dedicated for such purposes, as approved by the city, to cover at a minimum the ultimate 4% annual chance floodplain areas, drainage channels, pipe systems and any other related drainage facilities. 
(d)  If any lot is adjacent to the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain, the final plat shall establish minimum finished floor elevations for all such lots at two feet above the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain elevation. 
(1)  For single-lot plats containing multiple foundations, a separate exhibit shall be provided prior to recordation indicating the minimum finished floor elevation for each proposed slab adjacent to the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain. 
(e)  The final plat shall contain a statement by an engineer certifying the easements, slab elevations and any other drainage related notes are in compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  No portion of any land located in the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain shall be counted toward the minimum lot area requirement. 
Sec. 4-89. - Drainage channels. 
(a)  No channel modifications shall be undertaken within the area of the ultimate 1% annual chance floodplain without permission of the city engineer. Such permission shall be based upon certified engineering data and calculations furnished by the proposing permittee. 
(b)  All constructed or modified earthen channels shall be designed utilizing a side slope of 3:1, or flatter, to allow for future maintenance and promote adequate slope stability. 
Sec. 4-90. - Streets and storm sewers. 
(a)  All street sections shall be in accordance with city standards with an allowable design drainage capacity for gutter flow no deeper than the top of the curb. 
(b)  Depth of flow in streets is to be controlled to allowable levels by modification of crossfall, gradient changes, or the use of curb inlets and storm sewers. 
(c)  Curb inlets shall be spaced as required to control flow in streets to allowable levels and placed to minimize interference of runoff to traffic flow, particularly at intersections. 
(d)  All storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete, minimum size 18 inches diameter, and installed in compliance with the city's standard specifications for public works construction for the city. 
Sec. 4-91. - Bridges and culverts. 
(a)  All bridge or culvert structures shall be designed to carry and/or store the upstream runoff from a 4% annual chance event. 
(b)  Runoff from the 1% annual chance event may overtop the road surface at bridge or culvert crossings a maximum of six (6) inches for a major or collector street crossing, and a maximum of 12 inches on a minor or residential street crossing. 
Sec. 4-92. - Building permits. 
(a)  Plans submitted for building permits other than single-family residential or duplex construction shall include the necessary drainage related facilities designed and provided for in compliance with this chapter and the drainage criteria manual. 
(b)  Plans and design calculations for all drainage facilities shall be submitted to the PDS director for review and approval prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  The design engineer shall certify that the plans and calculations for all drainage facilities are in compliance with the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Following construction, but prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the design engineer shall certify that the public works improvements, including those covered by this section, have been constructed in compliance with the city's requirements based on his/her inspection of the completed work. 
Secs. 4-93, 4-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 4-95. - Constructions plans submission. 
(a)  Submittal. Subdivision improvement construction plans shall be submitted for review and acceptance by the PDS director for all development for which public improvements are required. 
(b)  Developer must retain engineer. The developer must retain the services of a civil engineer, registered in the state, whose seal shall be placed on the subdivision improvement construction plans in accordance with the Texas Engineering Practice Act. The engineer shall be responsible for the services as described in the Design and Construction Standards. The services performed by the engineer shall be as designated in the latest edition of the Manual of Professional Practice-General Engineering Services, published by the Texas Society of Professional Engineers, and shall include both design and inspection as defined therein. 
(c)  Submittal content. Except as provided herein, after preliminary plat approval, subdivision improvement construction plans may be submitted to the PDS director for acceptance. The subdivision improvement construction plans submittal shall include all of the information specified in the development packet. 
(d)  State review. All subdivision improvement construction plans must comply with the Texas Accessibility Standards administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. The developer shall submit applicable portions of the subdivision improvement construction plans to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for review. Upon the completion of construction, the developer shall request inspection of all pedestrian facilities by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and pay all necessary fees. The city will not accept the public improvements until the developer provides evidence that the plans have been reviewed and approved by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and that payment of the required inspection fees has been made. 
(e)  Expiration of accepted subdivision improvement construction plans. The subdivision improvement construction plans will expire two years from the date of acceptance by the PDS director if construction has not commenced. Even after construction has commenced, the accepted subdivision improvement construction plans will expire three years from the date of acceptance. If accepted subdivision improvement construction plans expire, the plans shall be resubmitted for review and acceptance to ensure compliance with the current Design and Construction Standards. 
(f)  Preconstruction conference. After the issuance of the subdivision improvement permit, a preconstruction conference shall be required prior to commencement of construction of the public improvements. The preconstruction conference shall be held with the PDS director and include the following people: Developer, developer's contractor, developer's engineer and other parties as determined by the PDS director. 
Sec. 4-96. - Construction of public improvements. 
(a)  Requirement. All public improvements required by these regulations shall be installed and constructed by the developer, or his successors in title, within three years from the issuance of the subdivision improvement permit. All improvements shall conform with the provisions of this chapter and the permitted plans. 
(b)  Failure to complete improvement. Where public improvements are not completely constructed and accepted within the three years, the city may do the following: 
(1)  Where an additional fiscal security was required by Section 4-98, obtain the funds under the security to complete the public improvements using a third party selected by the city; and/or 
(2)  Exercise any other rights available under the law. 
(c)  Sidewalk construction. 
(1)  Sidewalks for single-family, two-family, and single-lot townhouse lots. Except as provided in subsection 6-26(c), a developer shall install sidewalks on the rear of double frontage lots, on the side of a corner lot and where shown on the subdivision improvement construction plans. 
(2)  Sidewalks for common-lot townhouse, multifamily and nonresidential lots. A developer shall install sidewalks for common-lot townhouse, multifamily and nonresidential lots that abut a street and where shown on the subdivision improvement construction plans. A subdivision shall not be accepted until the sidewalk has been constructed in accordance with the regulations of this chapter and has been inspected and approved by the PDS director. 
(3)  Deferment of sidewalk construction. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section, except under the following circumstances, as determined by the transportation director: 
a.  Where the existing cross section of the street makes immediate construction of a sidewalk impractical; 
b.  Where a nonresidential subdivision abutting an existing street is isolated from any other sidewalk by a distance of twice the frontage of the subdivision; or 
c.  Where construction or reconstruction of the street where a sidewalk is to be placed is imminent and the sidewalk would be destroyed if constructed. 
d.  Where construction of a single-family home within a residential subdivision would potentially damage or destroy a sidewalk immediately adjacent to the lot, the sidewalk shall be constructed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each individual residence. 
The city may require a cash payment by the developer in lieu of construction of the sidewalk if the transportation director determines that the sidewalk should not be built within the three-year period of the construction plans. The cash payment shall equal the city's estimate of the cost of constructing and installing the sidewalk and associated features, such as but not limited to appurtenances and drainage features, at the time of permit issuance of the public improvements. The developer shall pay the cash payment prior to the issuance of the public improvements permit. 
(4)  State review. All sidewalks must comply with the Texas Accessibility Standards administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, whichever is more restrictive. The developer shall submit its sidewalk plans to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for review and upon completion of the construction, for inspection. The city will not accept the public improvements until the developer provides documentation that the sidewalk plans have been reviewed and approved by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. The developer is responsible for all fees associated with the state plan review and inspection and must submit to the city evidence of the payment of all required inspection fees. 
(d)  Benchmarks. 
(1)  Designation. A permanent benchmark shall be designated with each addition or subdivision. Benchmarks shall be located on public property in a location acceptable to the PDS director. Benchmarks are considered public improvements and shall consist of a brass disk, furnished by the city, set in a concrete structure of such mass and dimensions and constructed on an unyielding foundation that, in the opinion of the PDS director, will ensure the integrity of the benchmark. 
(2)  Installation. Prior to acceptance of the public improvements, benchmarks shall be installed by the developer. The elevation, horizontal datum and description of each benchmark installed shall be certified by a surveyor and submitted to the PDS director on a form provided by the city and contained in the development packet. In the event that public improvements are not required, benchmarks shall nevertheless be installed by the developer and the certified elevation and description provided to the PDS director prior to plat recordation. 
(3)  Modification. The PDS director may modify the benchmark requirement if he/she determines one of the following: 
a.  The requirement would create needless redundancy of benchmarking because an established public benchmark exists in the immediate vicinity, is readily accessible, and will not be removed or made inaccessible by construction associated with the addition or subdivision; 
b.  The requirement creates undue hardship on the developer; 
c.  The city's supply of brass disks is exhausted or there is no feasible opportunity to install a brass disk in a suitable structure. In this case, the PDS director may approve a permanent benchmark established in conformance with generally accepted surveying and engineering practices; or 
d.  Lack of development within the subdivision or addition. 
Sec. 4-97. - Required. 
    The developer shall construct or provide all applicable public improvements required by this chapter. All improvements which the developer is required to make shall be made by the developer at his expense without reimbursement by the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city may contract with a developer to construct public improvements relating to the development in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, subch. C; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.071 et seq. 
Sec. 4-98. - Fiscal security. 
(a)  Prior to the submittal of the plat recordation package, an applicant must post fiscal security for the public infrastructure included in the subdivision improvement permit issued by the PDS director. 
(1)  Amount. The amount of fiscal security posted by the applicant shall equal the estimated cost plus ten percent (10%) for one (1) year for all public improvements that have not been constructed and received a passing inspection. The applicant's engineer must provide the PDS director with a sealed and certified opinion of the probable cost for approval. 
(2)  Types. An applicant may post as fiscal security: 
a.  A performance bond; or 
b.  A letter of credit, with language approved by the city attorney, as provided in the development packet, and only at the discretion of the PDS director. 
(3)  Return of fiscal security. The city shall return the fiscal security to the applicant when a final acceptance letter of the subdivision improvement permit has been issued. If requested by the applicant, the amount of fiscal security will be reduced as items are constructed and pass inspection. 
(4)  Expenditure of fiscal security. The city may draw on the fiscal security and pay the cost of completing the public improvements if it determines that the applicant has breached the obligations secured by the fiscal security, or the three-year time period for the installation and construction of the required public improvements has expired. The city shall refund the balance of the fiscal security, if any, to the applicant. The applicant shall be liable for the cost that exceeds the amount of fiscal security, if any. 
Sec. 4-99. - Inspection and acceptance. 
(a)  Entry and inspection. 
(1)  The PDS director and other city employees shall have the right to enter upon the construction site for the purpose of conducting inspections. The PDS director shall conduct inspections of the public improvements during construction to ensure general conformity with plans and specifications as accepted. If the PDS director finds upon inspection that any of the public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with this chapter and the Design and Construction Standards, then the developer shall be responsible for making the necessary changes to insure compliance. 
(2)  Upon completion of the public improvements, the developer shall arrange with the PDS director for a final inspection to determine that the public improvements have been installed and in conformity with the accepted subdivision improvement construction plans. The developer shall pay all necessary inspection fees prior to the acceptance of the public improvements by the city. 
(b)  Substantial completion. If the developer wishes to start construction of homes before a Certificate of acceptance is issued by the PDS director, the developer must request a Certificate of Substantial Completion. The PDS director may issue a Certificate of Substantial Completion if he/she determines that the public improvements are substantially complete so that it is safe to issue permits for initial homes pursuant to Sec. 8-109. 
(c)  Acceptance of improvements. 
(1)  Request acceptance of public improvements. Upon completion of the construction of the public improvements, the developer shall request that the PDS director accept the improvements for maintenance. Concurrent with the request for acceptance of the public improvements for maintenance, the developer shall submit all information required for acceptance of improvements specified in the development packet. 
(2)  Certificate of Acceptance. Upon satisfactory completion of the public improvements and receipt of the information and items requested for the acceptance, the PDS director shall issue a Certificate of Acceptance for the public improvements and shall forward a copy of the Certificate of Acceptance to the developer. 
Sec. 4-100. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all public improvements for one year after acceptance of said public improvements by the city. Prior to issuance of the letter of acceptance by the PDS director pursuant to Section 4-99, a maintenance guarantee, in favor of the city, shall be provided by the general contractor by means of a warranty bond in the duration and amounts specified in Sec. 4-98, subject to the approval of the city, in the form specified in the development packet. The general contractor shall provide a two (2) year guarantee for 25% of street improvements and a one (1) year guarantee for 10% for all other improvements, in favor of the city by means of a warranty bond, subject to the approval of the city, in the form specified in the development packet. 
Chapter 6 - STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL POLICY 

Sec. 6-1. - General policy. 
(a)  All streets shall be planned to properly integrate with the existing and proposed system of local, collector and arterial streets. 
(b)  Local streets shall be designed to conform to existing topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility installation, and provide safe access to property. 
(c)  Streets shall be provided to the boundary lines of the tract being subdivided, unless the transportation director determines that such an extension is neither necessary, nor desirable. 
(d)  All plats shall provide for the appropriate extension of existing and proposed streets in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Streets shall be designed to accommodate anticipated traffic generators such as schools, businesses, shopping centers, and population densities. 
(f)  The location of arterial streets shall conform to the General Plan. 
(g)  Curbing shall be required for the purpose of drainage, safety, delineation, and protection of the pavement edge. Curbing shall be designed so as not to interfere with the movement of pedestrian traffic. 
(h)  Except as provided in Sec. 6-26, sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets. 
(i)  Streets and improvements associated with streets shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
(j)  Streets shall provide adequate access for emergency and service vehicles, enhance walkability by ensuring connected transportation routes, and provide continuous and comprehensible traffic routes. 
Secs. 6-2-6-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 6-11. - Streets. 
(a)  Street classification and characteristics. 
(1)  Local streets. The purpose of a local street is to provide lot street frontage and carry traffic to a higher classification street. Local streets are divided into three subcategories: Local-residential, local-nonresidential or local-rural. Unless approved by the transportation director, a local street shall not connect to two separate higher classification streets or connect directly to arterial streets. Local streets may be designated as private streets. 
(2)  Collector streets. Collector streets are divided into two subcategories: Local and major. The purpose of collector streets is to convey traffic from intersecting local streets and to expedite the movement of traffic to an arterial street or other collector street. Generally, major collector streets shall not permit on-street parking. No collector street in a residential development shall be designated as a private street. Collector streets in nonresidential private street developments may be designated as private streets. 
(3)  Arterial streets. The purpose of an arterial street is to carry high volumes of through traffic. Arterial streets serve as a link between major activity centers within the urban area. Access is usually limited to intersections, multifamily developments and commercial driveways. All arterial streets are designated in the general plan. An arterial street shall not end as a cul-de-sac. Generally, arterial streets shall not permit on-street parking. No arterial street shall be designated as a private street. 
(b)  New streets. 
(1)  Right-of-way. A developer shall dedicate or convey at the city's option the amount of right-of-way for each type of street as stated in the Design and Construction Standards. Except as provided below, the developer must dedicate or convey the required right-of-way for all streets within the subdivision as shown on the plat. The city may reduce the amount of right-of-way dedication for an arterial street based on the design consideration, existing land uses, existing development of adjoining properties, and dimensions of the proposed addition or subdivision. In all cases, the amount of right-of-way dedicated for any one street within the addition or subdivision shall not exceed 120 feet wide or 15 percent of the total acreage on the plat submitted. 
(2)  Street improvements. All public and private streets shall be designed and built in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. The developer must construct the full cross section of the arterial streets designated on the general plan which are located within the subdivision unless the TIA for the addition or subdivision documents a need for a lesser cross section. In such a case, the developer shall construct the cross section required by the TIA. 
(c)  Private streets. Private streets may be permitted, subject to the provisions of Secs. 4-56 and 6-19. 
(d)  Substandard existing street right-of-way. Whenever a proposed subdivision abuts an existing street that has a substandard right-of-way width for either the existing street or for a future street, the developer shall dedicate the additional right-of-way for the existing street or future street. The developer shall dedicate one-half of the amount required for the type of street to be upgraded measured from the existing centerline of the right-of-way or up to 15 percent of the total acreage of the addition or subdivision, whichever is less. The city may reduce the amount of right-of-way dedication requirement based on design consideration, existing land uses, existing development of adjacent properties, and dimensions of the proposed addition or subdivision. 
(e)  Stub streets. 
(1)  Except for gated communities, a proposed subdivision or addition must provide access to adjacent land subdivided by stubbing appropriate streets to the boundaries of the proposed addition or subdivision. When the abutting land is platted, the developer shall integrate the stubbed streets into the existing traffic system of streets in a logical manner as well as continue the same street classification of the stub street. The developer shall present a schematic plan to demonstrate how the stub street will eventually extend through the adjacent property and connect with a collector or arterial street. 
(2)  Temporary paved turnarounds shall be provided at the end of stubbed streets which are more than 250 feet long. 
(f)  Culs-de-sac. 
(1)  Local streets may terminate in a cul-de-sac. Collectors and arterial streets may not terminate in a cul-de-sac. 
(2)  Except as provided herein, the maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 600 feet, measured from the centerline of the nearest intersecting outlet street to the centerpoint of the turnaround; except that a longer length may be allowed upon a recommendation by the fire department and if the planning and zoning commission determines any of the following: 
a.  That no secondary access can be reasonably provided to the portion of the subdivision which is to be served by the cul-de-sac; 
b.  That limited access to the subdivision is due to a topographical condition on the property or a particular physical surrounding; or 
c.  That the cul-de-sac is temporary and the street is planned to extend to the adjacent property. 
(g)  Curbing. All streets shall have standard curbing and gutter except for the local-rural street classification where ribbon curb is allowed. All raised medians and islands located within the street pavement shall be bordered by standard curb and gutter, unless otherwise approved by the transportation director. All concrete curb and gutter shall be installed and constructed according to the Design and Construction Standards. 
(h)  Curb ramps. 
(1)  Curb ramps are required within a street wherever a sidewalk or pedestrian route intersects with a curb. The design and construction of curb ramps shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards, and shall meet the Texas Accessibility Standards, administered by the state department of licensing and regulation and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. 
(2)  Whenever a sidewalk or pedestrian route crosses a raised median, the raised median shall be cut through level with the street, or shall have curb ramps at both median curbs plus a level area at least four feet long between the curb ramps in the median. 
(i)  Access. All lots shall be provided with frontage on an existing or proposed public or private street. 
Sec. 6-12 - Connectivity. 
(a)  With the submittal of a preliminary plat for a new single-family or two-family subdivision, a connectivity index shall be included and calculated for the road network in the subdivision. The roadway connectivity index shall be a minimum of 1.35, however additional pedestrian links shall be provided to increase the overall connectivity index to a minimum of 1.40. Subdivisions with a roadway connectivity index of 1.40 or greater shall not be required to provide additional pedestrian links. 
(b)  The connectivity index shall be calculated by dividing the total number of links by the total number of nodes in the proposed subdivision. 
(1)  Arterial streets shall not be included in the calculation of the connectivity index except when it is necessary to travel along an arterial street to reach any two points in the subdivision. 
(2)  Stub streets that will eventually connect the subdivision to a future subdivision or arterial or collector street shall not be counted as a node. The segment of the stub street shall count as a link. 
(3)  Alleys shall not be counted as a link, and locations where an alley intersects with a street shall not be counted as a node. 
(4)  Any location where a street name changes (as approved by the zoning administrator) shall be considered a node. 
(5)  Any location where a street T-intersects with another street of any classification shall be considered a node. 
(6)  Any curve or bend of a street that exceeds 75 degrees shall receive credit as a node. 
(7)  Any curve or bend of a street that does not exceed 75 degrees shall not be considered a node. 
(8)  Links on existing adjacent local streets that are not part of the proposed subdivision shall not be included in the connectivity index calculation if those streets are proposed as the only street connections that will be active at the time of the proposed subdivision's approval. 
(c)  Subdivisions shall have a minimum number of connections to public roads and a minimum number of stub streets where necessary to connect to future subdivisions on adjacent tracts of land as follows: 
(1)  Less than 75 lots: one (1) connection to a public road and one (1) stub street; 
(2)  For 75 lots up to 150 lots: two (2) connections to a public road and one (1) stub street; 
(3)  For 151 lots up to 300 lots: three (3) connections to a public road and two (2) stub streets; 
(4)  For 301 lots up to 400 lots: four (4) connections to a public road and three (3) stub streets; 
(5)  For 401 lots up to 500 lots: five (5) connections to a public road and four (4) stub streets; 
(6)  For 501 lots up to 800 lots: six (6) connections to a public road and five (5) stub streets; 
(7)  For 801 lots and more: one (1) additional connection to a public road and one (1) additional stub street for each additional 200 lots; 
(8)  One (1) additional stub street may substitute for one (1) public road connection requirement. 
(d)  A subdivision may have a roadway connectivity index of less than 1.35, provide fewer connections to public roads, or provide fewer stub streets than required by the above where specific features or constraints of the land being subdivided make strict compliance impossible or impractical. Such features include the following: 
(1)  Natural features such as bodies of water, severe elevation changes, karst features, or monarch trees; 
(2)  Important cultural or archeological features such as historic landmarks or burial grounds; 
(3)  Incompatible land uses adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(4)  Adjacent subdivisions which do not provide stub streets or other opportunities to connect to the proposed subdivision; and 
(5)  Situations where intersection and driveway separation requirements prevent the ability to provide additional connections to a public road. 
    The applicant shall attach to the plat application an explanation of how the connectivity of the proposed subdivision is hindered by the presence of any noted features. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the application if it determines the connectivity of the proposed subdivision cannot meet the requirements of this section due to the site constraints. Alternately, the Planning and Zoning Commission may deny the application if it determines the proposed subdivision's connectivity can be reasonably improved in spite of the presence of said features. 
Sec. 6-13. - Medians and islands. 
(a)  Standards. Medians and islands shall be landscaped with grass turf or constructed of stamped pattern concrete, brick, stone or concrete pavers, or other engraved concrete surfaces approved by PDS director. Grass turf areas shall not be less than six feet in width. All medians and islands shall be bordered by standard curb and gutter, unless otherwise approved by the transportation director. 
(b)  Median openings. Median openings on arterial streets shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
Sec. 6-14. - Intersections. 
(a)  Proposed intersections shall be designed to meet the minimum spacing requirements, curb radii, and corner sight distances required in the Design and Construction Standards, and based on the following design specifications: 
(1)  Streets shall intersect at right angles. In the event of physical constraints that prevent right angles, a modification of up to 20 degrees may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission upon recommendation by the transportation director. 
(2)  The right-of-way line at street intersections shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
(3)  The centerline of intersecting streets shall be a minimum of 200 feet from other street intersections. This offset shall not apply to streets intersecting a street if a raised median is provided and no median opening is aligned with either of the offset streets. Future median openings are prohibited where two streets offset and intersect an arterial street at a distance of less than 200 feet; provided, however, median openings may be allowed for one-way traffic circulation subject to the approval of the transportation director. 
Sec. 6-15. - Acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(a)  Acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be provided along existing and proposed arterial streets when required by the findings of a city-approved TIA. 
(b)  Additional right-of-way shall be dedicated by plat if required to accommodate acceleration/deceleration lanes or turning lanes. 
Sec. 6-16. - Street names and addresses. 
(a)  Street names. Each preliminary plat shall indicate proposed street names for streets within the addition or subdivision. The PDS director shall review and approve the proposed street names according to the following standards: 
(1)  Street names shall not conflict with or duplicate any existing street names within Williamson County and the portion of Travis County north of the Colorado River. The disapproval of a proposed street name may be based on but is not limited to the following: close pronunciation to another street name, street name is too difficult to pronounce, street names with undesirable meanings or connotations, street names with language translation problems or street names that may cause the theft of a street sign. 
(2)  New streets which are extensions or in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street unless otherwise approved by the PDS director. 
(3)  Street suffix terms shall be assigned in accordance with the guidelines contained in the latest edition of the "Street Naming and Property Numbering Systems", provided in Report Number 332 by the Planning Advisory Service of the American Planning Association. A copy of the report is maintained by the planning department. 
(b)  Final plat. Approved street names shall be shown on the final plat. 
(c)  Street addresses. Street addresses shall be assigned by the PDS director. 
Sec. 6-17. - Street lighting. 
(a)  Requirement. The developer shall provide street lighting along all streets including culs-de-sac and at all intersections. The street lighting requirements for local, collector and arterial streets shall be in conformance with the spacing, height, illumination and other specifications found in the Design and Construction Standards. 
(b)  Illumination plan. An illumination plan for all streets within the plat shall be filed with the construction plans. The plan shall show the proposed location of the street lights and any electrical facilities within the street right-of-way or public utility easements. The street lighting facilities shall be complete and operational prior to acceptance of the public improvements. The illumination plan is subject to the approval of the PDS director. 
Sec. 6-18. - Signage, striping and signalization. 
(a)  Signage and striping. The developer shall design, install and pay all costs for traffic control signs and pavement striping. Traffic control signs and pavement striping shall conform to the accepted construction plans and to the most recent edition of the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, a copy which is on file with the transportation director. 
(b)  Signalization. The developer shall design, install and pay all costs for providing any required traffic signalization system identified in an approved TIA, including all related devices, conduits, wiring and junction boxes. 
Sec. 6-19. - Nonresidential private street development. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent of these nonresidential private street development regulations to: 
(1)  Allow nonresidential private street development to occur within the city on a limited and restrictive basis; and 
(2)  Provide for nonresidential private street development as alternative types of development to allow the city to expand its development types. 
(b)  Guidelines. The following guidelines are to be satisfied as part of the review and approval process for all nonresidential private street development: 
(1)  All nonresidential private street development shall be located in areas zoned as a planned unit development district (PUD) in accordance with Secs. 10-22 and 2-76. 
(2)  Each application for a nonresidential private street development PUD shall be subject to the approval of the commission and the city council, on a case by case basis, based upon the criteria described in this section. However, an applicant who meets the stated criteria will not be entitled to the nonresidential private street development PUD as a matter of right, but shall obtain approval of the nonresidential private street development PUD at the discretion of the commission and city council. 
(3)  A nonresidential private street development shall not contain a gated or guarded entrance to limit access to the private street system by members of the general public. 
(c)  General requirements. All nonresidential private street development PUDs shall include the following minimum requirements in the PUD ordinance and/or development plan included therein: 
(1)  The private street system must comply with design standards in this chapter. All ordinances, rules, regulations, design standards and construction standards which govern public streets shall apply to nonresidential private street development, including, but not limited to, street and roadway width, paving, drainage, sidewalks, submission of plans, and street lighting requirements. 
(2)  The private street system within a nonresidential private street development shall provide perpetual access for all lots within the development, for police and other emergency vehicles, public and private utility maintenance and service personnel, solid waste collection services, the U.S. Postal Service, and government employees in pursuit of their official duties. 
(d)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Each nonresidential private street development plat shall contain the following wording on the face of the plat: 
"The streets have not been dedicated to the public, for public access nor have they been accepted by the City of Round Rock as public improvements, and the streets and roadways shall be maintained by the property owners association within the subdivision, except that the streets and roadways shall always be open to the public, as well as emergency vehicles, public and private utility maintenance and service personnel, solid waste collection services, the U.S. Postal Service, and governmental employees in pursuit of their official duties". 
"The undersigned, his successors, and assigns hereby agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any governmental entity and public utility for damages to the private streets occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by the City, governmental entity or public utility, for damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of said private street; for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, governmental entity or public utility of the said private streets. The owners of all lots contained in this plat shall release the City, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. The indemnifications contained in this paragraph apply regardless of whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the City, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents". 
"The undersigned, his successors, and assigns hereby agrees that the City is not obligated to provide certain City services on the private streets contained within the development, including, without limitation, routine police patrols, street lighting, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports". 
(2)  A PUD for a nonresidential private street development must be approved by the city prior to the approval of the final plat. The city shall consider the PUD application after review and recommendation by the city staff. Subject to city council approval, the requirements of this chapter may be modified in the ordinance adopting the PUD. 
(3)  Easements. Nonresidential private street development plats shall provide the following easements: 
a.  Public utility easements containing the private streets and public utilities; 
b.  Additional public utility, drainage and storm sewer easements required by the city, public utilities, or other public agencies; 
c.  Preexisting easements unaffected by the platting process; and 
d.  Such private service easements, including but not limited to, utilities, fire lanes, street lighting, government vehicle access, mail collection and delivery access, and utility meter reading access, as may be necessary or deemed mutually convenient by the applicant and the city. 
(4)  Private streets and alleys must be constructed within one or more separate lots owned by the property owners association. Such lots must conform to the city's standards for public street and alley right-of-way. An easement covering the street lots shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the lots for utilities and the maintenance of same. This right shall extend to all utility providers, including telecommunications companies, operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to, fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs governmental service or function, or emergency access. 
(5)  With respect to the maintenance and repair of public utilities located within the boundaries of the special purpose lots for private streets, the city's obligation to restore the surface of the special purpose lot shall be limited to the repair or restoration of any grassed area, broom-finished concrete driveway or sidewalk, concrete roadway curb, or asphaltic concrete roadway surface that is removed or disturbed in the course of installing, operating, repairing, or accessing any utilities, lines, or associated appurtenances owned by the city or public utilities. The city and public utilities shall not be obligated to repair or restore any other item so removed or disturbed, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, non-grass groundcover, grass other than common St. Augustine or Bermuda, walls, posts, fences, lighting other than street lighting required under Sec. 6-7, decorative paving, or structures. The city and public utilities shall have final authority in determining the limits of any such repair or restoration, the satisfactoriness of such repair or restoration, and that such repair or restoration is in keeping with the standards of other such repairs or restoration provided elsewhere in the city. 
(6)  All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended, and city ordinances and regulations. 
(7)  The PUD for a nonresidential private street development may contain provisions to allow driveway access from properties outside the development and adjacent to a private street, as determined by the city. 
(e)  Property owners associations. 
(1)  A nonresidential private street development PUD shall have an approved property owners association. The property owners association shall require membership by all property owners within the nonresidential private street development PUD, and have provisions to assess and/or place liens on owners for nonpayment of street maintenance dues. The property owners association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets, appurtenances, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities. The property owners association shall provide for the payments of dues and assessments required to maintain the private streets. The property owners association covenants and bylaws shall be approved by the director of planning and city attorney. The approved document must be filed for record contemporaneously with the filing of the final plat in the county records department. 
(2)  The property owners association covenants and bylaws shall provide for a street maintenance reserve fund for the maintenance, repair and reconstruction of private streets, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities, access control structures and equipment. This reserve fund shall be maintained in a separate account and may not be co-mingled with any other property owners association funds. A portion of the assessments levied by the property owners association will be placed in the street maintenance fund. The portion of the assessments collected from lot owners and placed in the street maintenance fund will be based on the current maintenance and replacement schedule prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or an individual holding an RS ("reserve specialist") designation from the Community Associations Institute. In conjunction with approval of the final plat, the basis and formula for calculating the amount of assessments to be deposited in the street maintenance fund, shall be subject to review and approval by the director of transportation and the PDS director. The property owners association shall provide to the city: (i) annually an affidavit setting forth the fund balance and any expenditures therefrom; and (ii) at least once every three years, an updated maintenance and replacement schedule prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or a reserve specialist. No more than once annually, the basis and formula for calculating the amount of assessments to be deposited in the street maintenance fund may be amended, subject to the review and approval of the director of transportation and the PDS director. 
(3)  The property owners association covenants shall contain provisions that allow the city to assume the duty of performing the maintenance obligations should the property owners association dissolve or in any way fail or refuse to maintain its obligations. The covenants shall further provide that the city may use the outstanding balance in the street maintenance reserve fund for maintenance or in the alternative, levy an assessment upon each lot on a pro rata basis for the cost of such maintenance. 
(4)  Membership requirements. Every lot owner within the nonresidential private street development shall be a member of the property owners association. 
(5)  The property owners association documents shall indicate that the streets within the nonresidential private street development are private, owned and maintained by the property owners association, and that the city has no obligation to maintain or reconstruct the private streets, related private storm sewers and drainage facilities. The covenants shall include the following provision: 
"The property owners association shall be responsible for contacting the City of Round Rock Transportation Services Department every two years, or as needed, from time of initial completion to schedule an inspection, to include city staff and the property owners association's representative for reviewing the private streets". 
(6)  The property owners association covenants and bylaws shall include language, approved by the city attorney, whereby the association agrees to fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs or causes of action of any nature whatsoever, whether real or asserted, brought for or on account of any injuries or damages to persons or property, including death, resulting from or in any way connected with the construction, maintenance or operation of the private streets. 
(f)  Voluntary conversion of private streets to public streets. The city may, but is not obligated to, accept private streets for public access and maintenance. The procedure must conform to all of the following provisions: 
(1)  The property owners association must submit a petition signed by 100 percent of its members. 
(2)  All of the streets must be in a condition that is acceptable to the city, in its sole judgment. 
(3)  All structures not consistent with a public street development must be removed at the expense of the property owners association and to the satisfaction of the city. 
(4)  If any maintenance of the streets and roadways is required, the city may use the outstanding balance in the reserve fund for such maintenance. Any remaining balance in the fund shall be returned to the lot owners at the time the private street and/or roadway is converted to a public street on a fair and equitable basis to be determined by the city council. If the outstanding balance is insufficient to perform the required maintenance, the property owners association shall provide additional funds as required. 
(5)  Each lot owner shall execute an instrument of dedication for filing of record, the form of which shall be approved by the city attorney's office. 
(g)  Design standards. The design and construction of the infrastructure within a nonresidential private street development shall conform to the same rules, regulations, standards, and specifications established for standard subdivisions with public streets. 
(h)  Street lights on private streets. Street lighting shall be provided on private streets in accordance with Sec. 6-16. It shall be the responsibility of the property owners association to pay for the cost of operating the streetlights on private streets. 
(i)  Additional requirements or standards. The foregoing requirements and standards for nonresidential private street development PUDs are considered to be the minimum requirements. However, nothing contained herein shall be considered as a limitation on the city council's discretion to modify these or other requirements or standards to make them more or less restrictive, as required by the unique circumstances of each PUD application. 
Secs. 6-20-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 6-26. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  ADA requirement. All sidewalks must be designed and constructed to meet the Texas Accessibility Standards administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended. 
(b)  Design. Unless excepted in this section, sidewalks for all street classifications shall be installed on both sides of the street right-of-way or within a sidewalk easement. A sidewalk shall be allowed to meander within the right-of-way or an easement upon approval of the PDS director. Sidewalks are required along one side of a local rural street pursuant to Sec. 4-34. Sidewalks are required along street frontage of parks pursuant to Sec. 4-65(c)(2). Sidewalks shall not intersect at driveway wings unless otherwise approved by the PDS director. 
(c)  Exceptions. Sidewalks shall be required on all streets, except on streets where pedestrian access is provided within the approved subdivision through an alternative sidewalk design as approved by the PDS director. 
(d)  Size. 
(1)  Local residential, local rural and local collector streets: A sidewalk along a local residential, local rural or local collector street be a minimum of four (4) feet in width when separated by a distance of at least three (3) feet from the roadway curb. Sidewalks closer than three (3) feet to the roadway curb shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. Where ribbon curb is installed on local rural streets, the sidewalk shall be at least eight (8) feet from the ribbon curb unless otherwise approved by the PDS director. 
(2)  Local nonresidential, major collector and arterial streets: A sidewalk along a local nonresidential, major collector or arterial street must be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and a minimum eight (8) feet from the curb. 
(e)  Construction. The sidewalk construction specifications shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. Sidewalks shall be installed as shown on the construction plans and in accordance with Sec. 4-96(c) unless construction is deferred in accordance with Sec. 4-96(c)(3). 
Secs. 6-27-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

Sec. 6-31. - General. 
    A traffic impact analysis (TIA) conducted in accordance with the most recently adopted Design and Construction Standards (DACS) shall be submitted with a voluntary annexation, zoning map amendment (original zoning or rezoning), concept plan, preliminary plat, final plat, replat, or building permit application when the proposed development will generate 100 or more peak hour vehicle trips, unless otherwise waived by specific procedures outlined in the DACS. 
Chapter 8 - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS AND BUFFERS 

Sec. 8-1. - General compatibility standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Compatibility standards are intended to protect lower-intensity properties and residential neighborhoods from the adverse impacts sometimes associated with adjacent and nearby higher intensity development. These standards apply to all new development in any zoning district except for single-family and two-family houses. In cases where an individual zoning district identifies a different standard than outlined herein, the stricter standard shall apply. 
(b)  Standards . 
(1)  Visual screening . Screening is required for detention/water quality ponds; dumpsters, trash receptacles, outdoor storage; ground-mounted equipment; and other similar structures and facilities. Screening standards are located in Sec. 8-40. 
(2)  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment. All roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view. Screening shall utilize the same or similar materials as the principal structure. 
(3)  Noise. The noise regulations found in Chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances shall apply, along with the following additional standards: 
a.  Increased setbacks for car wash facilities, outdoor paging systems, speakers, remote ordering appliances, and drive-through lanes associated with certain uses may be found in Sec. 2-91. 
b.  Air pumps and vacuums located at car wash facilities, gas stations, and convenience stores shall not be located within 150 feet of a residential property line. 
(4)  Lighting . 
a.  Site lighting design requirements. 
1.  Fixture (luminaire). The light source shall be completely concealed (recessed) within an opaque housing and shall not be visible from any street right-of-way or residential property line. Light fixtures within gas station canopies shall be flush with the underside of the canopy. 
2.  Light source (lamp). Only incandescent, fluorescent, compact fluorescent (CFL), light-emitting diodes (LED), metal halide, or color corrected high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type shall be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site throughout any master planned development. 
3.  Mounting. Except as required by subsection (b)(4)c. below, fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light does not exceed one (1) foot candle at any property line shared with a nonresidential use and two (2) foot candles at any property line abutting a public street (right-of-way). 
4.  All site and building lighting shall be accomplished with light that does not flash, blink or pulse. 
5.  Athletic facilities associated with schools, places of worship, and charitable nonprofit organizations may exceed the fixture height requirement if they implement reasonable measures to limit adverse impacts on neighboring properties that may result from the increased fixture height. 
b.  Excessive illumination. 
1.  Interferes with use or enjoyment. Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates and substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of any other lot is prohibited. Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another lot if it clearly exceeds the requirements of this section, or if the standard could reasonably be achieved in a manner that would not substantially interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
2.  Glares or is excessive. Lighting shall not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive illumination onto streets in a manner that may district or interfere with the vision of drivers on such streets. 
c.  Compatibility with residential properties . 
1.  Lighting shall be directed away from any residential properties. 
2.  The cone of light shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles at any residential property line. 
3.  Exterior shielding of light fixtures or other light mitigation measures shall be required if deemed necessary by city staff during the site plan review process. 
Sec. 8-2. - Compatibility buffers. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to set forth requirements regarding the design, installation, construction and maintenance of compatibility buffers for all property other than those specifically exempted below. A compatibility buffer shall be composed of a landscape buffer and a compatibility fence as provided below. Compatibility buffering is intended to minimize the effects of SR (Senior), MF-1 (Multifamily - low density), MF-2 (Multifamily - medium density), MF-3 (Multifamily - urban), C-1 (General commercial), C-1a (General commercial-limited), C-2 (Local commercial), OF-1 (Office - Low Rise), BP (Business park), LI (Light industrial), I (Industrial), PF-1 (Public facilities), PF-2 (Public facilities - medium intensity), and PF-3 (Public facilities - high intensity), land uses which share a common lot line with existing or planned single-family or two-family uses, while maintaining the flexibility of allowing such more intense land uses in appropriate circumstances. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land within the city limits and in areas where this section is in effect by contractual agreement. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, the requirements of this section shall apply to: 
a.  Any new development or construction requiring a permit; 
b.  Any change of land use from a residential use to a nonresidential use; or 
c.  Any change, conversion, or addition of commercial land uses that result in an increase in the parking requirements. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Restoration of a building or structure which has been damaged, destroyed or demolished to an extent less than 50 percent of its fair market value (as determined by the most recent appraisal of land value of the appraisal district in which the building or structure is located); 
(2)  Exterior or interior renovation of a structure; 
(3)  Land located within the central business district; or 
(4)  Lots where the adjacent single-family or two-family property is occupied by a place of worship, civic building such as fire or police station, park, pond, or designated open space. 
(d)  Special exceptions. A landowner may apply for a special exception to be granted by the ZBA to exempt the proposed use from the requirements of this section based on one or more of the following factors: distance to existing residential structures on the abutting single-family or two-family property, likelihood that the abutting single-family or two-family property will be developed into single-family dwelling units if presently vacant, change in elevation, or presence of natural features such as creeks or trees. In order for an exemption to be granted, the ZBA must conduct a public hearing and find that the presence of such factors substantially meets the intent of the compatibility buffer requirement by providing adequate separation or buffering between the proposed use and the single-family or two-family property. 
(e)  Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer at least eight (8) feet wide shall be provided for all sites subject to this section. Based on the linear footage that extends along the length of the property line between higher and lower intensity land uses, the minimum quantity of landscaping shall be determined by the following requirements: 
(1)  One large tree per 50 linear feet with a minimum caliper of three (3) inches, selected from the list of approved evergreen tree species in Appendix B of the Tree Technical Manual; and 
(2)  One medium tree per 50 linear feet with a minimum caliper of two (2) inches, selected from the list of approved evergreen tree species in Appendix B of the Tree Technical Manual; and 
(3)  All trees utilized shall be of an evergreen species. 
Other than the required landscaping and associated irrigation, nothing shall be placed within the landscape buffer, including without limitation, accessory buildings, parking lots, storage of materials and refuse containers. The landscape buffer may not be used as a utility easement. 
(f)  Compatibility fence. In addition to the above landscaping requirement, a compatibility buffer shall also have a compatibility fence installed and maintained on the applicable property boundaries. Materials and installation of the compatibility fence shall comply with the most recent edition of "Selected ASTM Standards for Fence Materials and Products", a copy of which shall be maintained by the zoning administrator. Structural plans and specifications for fences shall be submitted at the same time as other construction plans required by this section. In approving said plans and specifications, the development services manager shall consider the site's soil characteristics, wind loadings, and other environmental considerations. 
A landowner may select from two options for complying with the requirements for a compatibility fence required by this section. The options are set forth below: 
(1)  Pre-cast concrete panel or architectural concrete masonry unit (CMU) fence option. 
a.  Fence materials, construction standards, and miscellaneous requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Pre-cast concrete panels shall be installed per manufacturer's specifications; 
2.  Construction details or shop drawings must be sealed by a civil engineer, structural engineer, or landscape architect and provided prior to the issuance of a building permit; 
3.  Both sides of the fence shall have a finished face; and 
4.  The fence shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
(2)  Masonry fence option. 
a.  For the purposes of this subsection (e)(2), "masonry fence" shall mean a fence constructed of brick or natural stone. The term shall not include cement-based siding such as HardiePlank, Fencecrete, or similar construction materials. 
b.  Masonry materials, construction standards, and miscellaneous requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Brick or natural stone; 
2.  A cast-in-place structural footing; 
3.  Top capped; 
4.  Both sides of the fence shall have a finished face; 
5.  The fence shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet; and 
6.  Construction details or shop drawings must be sealed by a civil engineer, structural engineer, or landscape architect, shall include wind load calculations certified by an engineer qualified by experience and/or training in structural evaluation in accordance with the most recently adopted International Building Code, and be provided prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
c.  If a landowner selects the masonry fence option, he shall be entitled to take advantage of reduced setback requirements as set forth in the lot and building dimensional standards table for the applicable zoning district. 
Secs. 8-3-8-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 8-10. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The physical appearance of the built environment is an important component of the character, value, and human experience of a community. Landscape treatment and site design function to integrate natural elements into these manmade systems, particularly architectural features and transportation infrastructure. The intent is to make Round Rock a more sustainable and attractive place in which to live, visit and do business. 
(2)  Regulations must serve to provide attractive, functional and efficient landscaping, the cost of which is justified by the enhancement of property values and the creation of a sense of place through the cumulative impact of development. 
(b)  Intent. 
(1)  To ensure that all planting requirements serve not only to benefit the community aesthetically, but also contribute functionally whenever opportunities to do so are presented. 
(2)  To utilize planting and landscape elements to mitigate the negative impacts of development by screening unsightly features, reducing the heat island effect, and buffering incompatible uses. 
(3)  To provide incentives for creative subdivision and site design. 
(4)  To implement site design and planting requirements which minimize the need for maintenance and utilize sound water conservation practices. 
(5)  To provide for landscaping regulations that encourage the preservation of protected trees, as defined in Sec. 1-50. 
(6)  To establish monarch trees as focal points that should be highlighted by proposed development. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land area (public and private) within the zoning jurisdiction of the city and in areas where this section is in effect by contractual agreement. 
(1)  Application of landscape requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to: 
a.  All new development or construction on vacant or previously developed land, that requires site plan approval; 
b.  All new single-family or two-family residences in the SF-2 (Single-Family - Standard Lot), SF-3 (Single-Family - Mixed Lot), and TF (Two-Family) zoning districts. Such requirements may be found in subsection (l) below; 
c.  Any change of land use which results in redevelopment of a residential use to a nonresidential use; 
d.  Any change, conversion, or addition of commercial land uses that result in the requirement for additional parking to be constructed. In this case, the landscape requirements shall apply to only the newly proposed parking area and other areas of the site being modified by development activities; and 
e.  Detention ponds and water quality ponds that are part of any development including residential subdivisions. Common development that encompasses more than one lot shall be treated as one for the purposes of application of this section. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in stages, or multiple building permits for a project shall not prevent it from being considered a common development, provided that a comprehensive site plan is submitted for all portions of the development being considered as a common development. 
(2)  Exemption from landscape requirements. The requirements of this section specifically shall not apply to the following: 
a.  New construction of detached single-family homes in the SF-R (Single-Family - Rural), SF-1 (Single-Family - Large Lot), and SF-D (Single-Family - Downtown) zoning districts; 
b.  Expansions or modifications to an existing detached single-family residence in any zoning district; 
c.  Restoration of a building or structure which has been damaged, destroyed or demolished to an extent less than 50 percent of its fair market value (as determined by the most recent appraised value of the appraisal district in which the building or structure is located); 
d.  Exterior or interior restoration of a designated historic structure; 
e.  Medians in street rights-of-way; 
f.  Ground-mounted equipment located in street rights-of-way. 
(d)  Landscape plans. The submittal of landscape plans shall not be required for new homes in the SF-2, SF-3, and TF zoning districts, but shall be required with the following: 
(1)  Standard site plan. Landscape requirements identified in this section and in the format specified by the development packet necessary to obtain a standard site plan approval shall be depicted on a landscape plan. This landscape plan shall be signed and sealed by a landscape architect. 
(2)  Small project site plan. Landscape requirements identified in this section and in the format specified by the development packet necessary to obtain a small project site plan approval shall be depicted on a site or landscape plan. If the plan includes 10 or more trees, the plan shall be signed and sealed by a landscape architect. If the plan includes less than 10 trees, the plan shall be signed and sealed by a landscape architect, professional engineer, landscape design professional, licensed nurseryman, or urban forester. 
(e)  General planting requirements. 
(1)  The planting specifications and standards included in the Tree Technical Manual are applicable unless otherwise stated herein. 
(2)  All trees shall be planted in a pervious area no less than four (4) feet wide in any direction measured from the center of the tree, unless otherwise stated herein. Said pervious area shall be covered with mulch to a minimum average thickness of three (3) inches, except for the area within a six (6) inch radius of the tree trunk which shall have no mulch or other material above the root ball in order to prevent or reduce the possibility of bark rot. 
(3)  No more than 50 percent of the required trees and shrubs shall be of the same species without the approval of the zoning administrator. Such approval may only be granted in order to achieve a specific design intent of the landscape architect. 
(4)  Improved soils containing a minimum 20% organic content shall be provided in all required landscape areas in accordance with the following: 
a.  Turf areas to a minimum depth of four (4) inches; 
b.  Planting beds to a minimum depth of eight (8) inches; and 
c.  Tree planting pits shall be 50% excavated soil and 50% prepared soil. 
(5)  All landscaping shall be separated from vehicular use areas by some form of barrier such as raised concrete curbing, bollards, curb stops, or other suitable permanent alternative. 
(6)  All landscape beds shall be separated from sod areas by some form of barrier such as steel edging, masonry materials, or another equivalent durable material as approved by the zoning administrator. No plastic materials shall be allowed. Provided however, the barriers may be designed in such a way to capture, filter, reuse or infiltrate rainwater with the purpose of protecting and conserving water resources. 
(7)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between access drives and parking aisles. 
(8)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, allowed to grow, or planted so that it impedes vision between the height of three (3) feet and 10 feet above the curb within a sight visibility triangle, as defined in Sec. 1-50. 
(9)  No artificial plant material may be used in any form to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(10)  Berms shall not encroach upon the critical root zones of existing trees, as regulated by chapter 8, Article III, Tree Protection and Preservation. 
(11)  Wherever sod or turf grass is used, such grass shall be of a drought-tolerant species. 
(12)  Any landscaping placed in utility easements shall not be counted towards the minimum landscaping requirements. 
(13)  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, the zoning administrator may allow large trees to be placed closer to a building in order to achieve an urban streetscape. 
(14)  At the time of planting, all trees shall have the following caliper measurements: 
a.  Large trees: three (3) inches; 
b.  Medium trees: two (2) inches; 
c.  Small/ornamental trees: one (1) inch. 
(15)  All trees planted to meet the landscaping standards herein shall be protected trees regardless of size. 
(f)  Interior parking lot landscape requirements by zoning district. 
(1)  TH (Townhouse), SR (Senior), MF-1 (Multifamily - Low Density), MF-2 (Multifamily - Medium Density), MF-3 (Multifamily - Urban), C-1 (General Commercial), C-1a (General Commercial - Limited), C-2 (Local Commercial), OF-1 (General Office), OF-2 (Mid-Rise Office), BP (Business Park), PF-1 (Public Facilities - Low Intensity), PF-2 (Public Facilities - Medium Intensity), PF-3 (Public Facilities - High Intensity), MU-R (Mixed-Use - Redevelopment and Small Lot), and MU-G (Mixed-Use Greenfield and Large Lot) zoning districts. 
a.  Large trees shall be provided in parking areas. The construction of off-street parking areas requires the planting of one large tree in each island so that there are no more than 10 contiguous parking spaces between islands, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  End islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking bay. Interrupting islands shall be provided within each parking bay as required herein. End islands and interrupting islands shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet from face of curb to face of curb and shall contain a large tree. Head-to-head parking bays shall include two (2) such end islands. 
c.  In a row of parking immediately adjacent to a perimeter parking lot landscape area, required interrupting islands may be eliminated by planting two (2) additional large trees in the adjacent landscape area for each interrupting island so eliminated. 
d.  A median island with a minimum width of nine (9) feet, from face of curb to face of curb, shall be required between every six (6) single parking bays and along primary internal and external access drives. Medium or large trees shall be planted at a rate of one per each 50 linear feet or fraction thereof. Median island intervals may be expanded in order to preserve existing trees, provided an alternative median location has been approved by the zoning administrator. 
e.  Other plant materials may be substituted for a large tree between the building and the first drive aisle as per the foundation landscape requirements provided in subsection (h) below. Specifically, plant materials totaling 30 foundation treatment points as set out in the table in subsection (h)(1)c. below, shall be provided in the required island for each large tree to be substituted. 
f.  The preservation of existing healthy trees of a protected species, as set forth in the definition of "protected tree" in Sec. 1-50, may be used as credits towards the landscaping required by this subsection. These credits may not be used to replace an end island or median island tree unless the preserved tree is located within the required end island or median island. Each preserved tree is credited towards the adjacent 10, 20, or 30 parking spaces, accordingly: 
1.  Each healthy large tree with a diameter of at least four (4) inches but less than eight (8) inches within 10 feet of a parking area will be counted as a credit towards one required parking lot tree. 
2.  Each healthy protected large tree with a diameter of eight (8) inches to 20 inches preserved within 15 feet of a parking area will be counted as a credit towards two (2) required parking lot trees. 
3.  Each healthy protected large tree with a diameter of more than 20 inches preserved within 20 feet of a parking area will be counted as a credit towards three (3) required parking lot trees. 
g.  The area within islands and medians shall not include sod or turf grass, and shall not include more than 50 percent decorative groundcover material, unless approved by the zoning administrator. The remainder of the area shall consist of planting groundcover. 
h.  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, large trees required to meet the tree island requirements may be planted closer than 30 feet from a building, but in no event closer than 12 feet from a building. 
(2)  LI (Light Industrial) and I (Industrial) zoning districts. 
a.  End islands shall be provided at the terminus of each parking bay. End islands shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet from face of curb to face of curb. Head-to-head parking bays shall include two (2) such end islands. A large tree shall be planted in each end island. 
b.  The area within islands and medians shall not include sod or turf grass, and shall not include more than 50 percent decorative groundcover material, unless approved by the zoning administrator. The remainder of the area shall consist of planting groundcover. 
c.  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, large trees required to meet the tree island requirements may be planted closer than 30 feet from a building, but in no event closer than 12 feet from a building. 
(g)  Parking lot landscape buffers by zoning district. 
(1)  TH (Townhouse), SR (Senior), MF-1 (Multifamily - Low Density), MF-2 (Multifamily - Medium Density), MF-3 (Multifamily - Urban), C-1 (General commercial), C-1a (General commercial - limited), C-2 (Local commercial), OF-1 (General Office), OF-2 (Mid-Rise Office), BP (Business Park), LI (Light industrial), PF-1 (Public Facilities - Low Intensity), PF-2 (Public Facilities - Medium Intensity), PF-3 (Public Facilities - High Intensity), and MU-G (Mixed-Use Greenfield and Large Lot) zoning districts. 
a.  Landscaping shall be provided between parking areas and all public streets in an eight-foot (8') wide linear planting bed. The minimum landscaping required for this purpose shall be based on the measured linear footage of parking including vehicular circulation routes that extend along the length of the property line (excluding ingress/egress to the public road) adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
b.  The required minimum quantity of landscaping is as follows: 
1.  One large tree or two small trees per 40 linear feet, or fraction thereof; 
2.  One small tree per 60 linear feet, or fraction thereof; and 
3.  One large shrub, small shrub, or ornamental grass per four (4) linear feet, or fraction thereof. Any combination of large shrubs, small shrubs, and ornamental grasses is acceptable. 
c.  There shall be no gap between required landscaping exceeding 25 percent of the length of the landscaped area, unless approved by the zoning administrator. 
d.  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, small trees may be grouped no closer than 12 feet apart and large trees may be grouped no closer than 30 feet apart for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this subsection (g). 
e.  If there are overhead utilities above the landscape area, then the required large and/or small trees may be placed in additional interrupting islands within the first row of parking adjacent to the public street. Such islands shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet from face of curb to face of curb. In addition, the owner shall have the option of reducing the eight-foot (8') wide linear planting bed described in subsection (g)(1)a. above, to a four-foot (4') wide area to accommodate only shrubs. 
f.  The area within islands and medians shall not include sod or turf grass, and shall not include more than 50 percent decorative groundcover material, unless approved by the zoning administrator. The remainder of the area shall consist of planting groundcover. 
(2)  I (Industrial) zoning district. 
a.  Landscaping shall be provided between parking areas and all public streets in an eight-foot (8') wide linear planting bed. The minimum landscaping required for this purpose shall be based on the measured linear footage of parking, including vehicular circulation routes that extend along the length of the property line (excluding ingress/egress to the public road) adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
b.  The required minimum quantity of landscaping is as follows: 
1.  One large or medium tree per 40 linear feet (75 percent of these trees shall be of a large tree); 
2.  One small tree per 30 linear feet; and 
3.  One large shrub per eight linear feet. 
c.  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, small trees may be grouped no closer than 12 feet apart and large trees may be grouped no closer than 30 feet apart for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this subsection (g). 
d.  If there are overhead utilities above the landscape area, then the required large trees may be placed in additional interrupting islands within the first row of parking adjacent to the public street. Such islands shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet from face of curb to face of curb. In addition, the owner shall [have] the option of reducing the eight-foot (8') wide linear planting bed described in subsection (g)(2)a. above, to a four-foot (4') wide area to accommodate only shrubs. 
(3)  MU-1 (Mixed-Use Historic Commercial Core), MU-2 (Mixed-Use Downtown Medium Density) and MU-R (Mixed-Use - Redevelopment and Small Lot) zoning districts. 
a.  Landscaping shall be provided between parking areas and all public open space in an eight-foot (8') wide linear planting bed. The minimum landscaping required for this purpose shall be based on the measured linear footage of parking including vehicular circulation routes that extend along the length of the property line adjacent to the public open space. 
b.  The required minimum quantity of landscaping is as follows: 
1.  One large tree or two (2) small trees per 40 linear feet, or fraction thereof; 
2.  One small tree per 60 linear feet, or fraction thereof; and 
3.  One large shrub, small shrub, or ornamental grass per four (4) linear feet, or fraction thereof. Any combination of large shrubs, small shrubs, and ornamental grasses acceptable. 
c.  There shall be no gap between required landscaping exceeding 25 percent of the length of the landscaped area, unless approved by the zoning administrator. 
d.  Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, small trees may be grouped no closer than 12 feet apart and large trees may be grouped no closer than 30 feet apart for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this subsection (g). 
e.  The area within islands and medians shall not include sod or turf grass, and shall not include more than 50 percent decorative groundcover material, unless approved by the zoning administrator. The remainder of the area shall consist of planting groundcover. 
(h)  Foundation treatment by zoning district. 
(1)  SR (Senior), C-1 (General commercial), C-1a (General commercial - limited), C-2 (Local commercial), OF-1 (General Office), OF-2 (Mid-Rise Office), BP (Business Park), LI (Light industrial), PF-1 (Public Facilities - Low Intensity), PF-2 (Public Facilities - Medium Intensity), PF-3 (Public Facilities - High Intensity), and MU-G (Mixed-Use Greenfield and Large Lot) zoning districts. 
a.  The purpose of this subsection (h) is to outline requirements for the treatment of landscape areas adjacent to buildings in the aforementioned zoning districts. The intent of this section is to allow a variety of landscape treatments in order to achieve particular design goals, e.g., increased building visibility, view corridors to signage, and highlighting special architectural features. Minimum requirements are determined based on the arrangement of parking in the street yard and vary according to the site plan layout. A minimum number of foundation treatment points (FTPs) must be provided based on the site layout and the categories set forth in subsection (h)(1)b. below. Notwithstanding the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual, large trees required to meet the foundation treatment requirements may be planted closer than 30 feet to a building, but in no event closer than 12 from a building. 
b.  Foundation treatment points (FTP) determination by category. 
1.  Category 1: Building with three (3) or more single parking bays in the street yard. 
For Category 1 site plans, FTP requirements are determined by multiplying the linear footage of the building's street-facing facades by a factor of four (4). For example, a Category 1 building with 100 linear feet of street-facing facade requires 400 FTPs (100 x 4 = 400). 
2.  Category 2: Building with one or two (2) single parking bays in the street yard. 
For Category 2 site plans, FTP requirements are determined by multiplying the linear footage of the building's street-facing facades by a factor of three (3). For example, a Category 2 building with 100 linear feet of street-facing facade requires 300 FTPs. (100 x 3 = 300). 
3.  Category 3: Buildings with no parking in the street yard. 
For Category 3 site plans, FTP requirements are determined by multiplying the linear footage of the building's street-facing facades by a factor of two (2). For example, a Category 3 building with 100 linear feet of street-facing facade requires 200 FTPs. (100 x 2 = 200). 
c.  Foundation treatment point credits. The number of required FTPs shall be achieved by providing a combination of no less than three (3) of the following elements contained in the table below to be located between the building and the first drive aisle. Additional elements may be considered and a point value will be established by the zoning administrator on a case by case basis. 
Landscape Feature Points Credited Specimen tree (6" caliper or larger) 60 Medium or large tree 30 Ornamental tree 15 Large shrub 5 Small shrub 3 Groundcover planting 2 (per sq. ft.) Groundcover - decorative 1 (per sq. ft.) Perennials and annuals 0.5 (per sq. ft.) Permanently irrigated container plantings 5 (per sq. ft.) Decorative paving 2.5 (per sq. ft.) Shade structure 30 Shade structure with vines 33 Site furniture 30 Bike rack 20 Trash receptacle 20  
(i)  Irrigation. 
(1)  Underground automatic system. All required landscape areas shall be irrigated by an underground automatic system that may include a drip irrigation system. This system shall adhere to manufacturer specifications and the rules and regulations established by TCEQ or successor agency. In addition, an irrigation system must be designed by a landscape architect or irrigator licensed by the state as described in subsection (3) below. 
(2)  System requirements. An irrigation system shall comply with the following: 
a.  Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage and adjusted for prevailing winds. The system shall promote minimum runoff and minimum overspray onto non-irrigated areas (i.e., paving, walkway, buildings). 
b.  Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. 
c.  Adjustable flow controls shall be required on circuit remote control valves. Pressure regulation components shall be required where static pressure exceeds manufacturer's recommended operating range. 
d.  Valves and circuits shall be separated based on water use requirements, so that turf areas can be watered separately from shrubs, trees and groundcover areas. A minimum of one bubbler each shall be provided for all large and medium size trees, except 4" caliper or larger trees shall have a minimum of two (2) bubblers. 
e.  Serviceable check valves shall be required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage adjacent to paving areas. 
f.  All automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with an electronic controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controller(s) shall have multiple cycle start capacity and a flexible calendar program, including the capability of being set to water every five (5) days. 
g.  All automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with a rain and freeze sensor shut-off device. 
h.  Drip irrigation shall have flag heads at the end of the drip tubing. 
(3)  License requirements . 
a.  Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction must hold a valid license, as defined by 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 30 and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1903, or as defined by 22 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 365 and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1301. 
b.  A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, § 1903.002(c)(1) if he is performing irrigation work in a building or on premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. See V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
(4)  Permit required . 
a.  Any person installing an irrigation system within the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction is required to obtain a permit from the city. Any irrigation plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 344. 
b.  Exemptions. 
1.  An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, such as gray water irrigation, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety; or 
2.  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 251.002. 
c.  The city building inspections department shall be responsible for issuing irrigation system permits and collecting fees. To obtain a permit an applicant must submit a plan, complete an application provided by the department, and pay the applicable fee. 
(5)  Water conservation . All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation. 
(6)  Design, installation and operation . V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1903.053 (standards), and 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 344, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference as the minimum standards and specifications for designing, installing, and operating an irrigation system within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(7)  Items not covered by the subsection . Any item not covered by this subsection and required by law shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, V.T.C.A., Water Code, 30 Tex. Admin. Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule. 
(8)  Fees . The fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit may be found in Sec. 8-106. These fees will be in amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including but not limited to staff time and other overhead costs. 
(9)  Enforcement . 
a.  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subsection as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this subsection is declared to be a nuisance. 
b.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this subsection and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the subsection or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the subsection; and 
2.  Other available relief. 
(j)  Alternative compliance. 
(1)  In cases where a particular site opportunity exists; a creative design has been proposed; or where there is an unusual site encumbrance, an application for an alternative landscape plan which does not strictly comply to the standards of this section may be submitted for approval to the zoning administrator. If the zoning administrator denies the application for the alternative plan, the applicant may, within 15 business days after receipt of notice of such denial, appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals (ZBA). 
(2)  An application for alternate compliance must include a letter stating how the plan meets the purpose and intent of the Code and the details of the methods used to meet such intent. In addition, a comparison detailing the landscape elements required to satisfy strict compliance versus the alternative plan must be provided. 
(3)  In rendering a decision on an alternate compliance plan, the zoning administrator shall consider appropriate circumstances including, but not limited to: 
a.  Does the plan result in a creative arrangement of new large or medium trees? 
b.  Does the plan maximize water conservation? 
c.  Does the plan minimize the removal of existing trees or alteration of other significant natural features, such as rock outcroppings, floodplain or waterways? 
d.  Is the plan contextually comparable to surrounding developments in the immediate area? 
e.  Is the site encumbered by easements that prohibit placement of landscaping as required by this section? 
(k)  Implementation. 
(1)  Inspection. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project, a landscape architect, or the identified professional as determined for small project site plans, shall inspect each site and certify on the appropriate city form that the site meets the requirements of this section and conforms to the approved site plan and/or landscape plan. Upon receipt of the certification, the zoning administrator shall verify that all requirements have been met. 
(2)  Certificates of occupancy. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer/owner shall either have completed the installation of all required landscaping or shall file with the zoning administrator fiscal security (by bond, certificate of deposit, letter of credit or cash security) satisfactory to the city, in the amount of a contractor's estimate using current market prices for materials and installation of the required landscaping plus a 20 percent contingency. The contractor's estimate shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. 
b.  Any developer/owner wishing to file fiscal security must also grant license to the city to enter upon the land for the purposes of installing the required landscaping in the event of nonperformance. 
c.  Except as provided in subsection d. below, all required landscaping must be installed or planted no later than 45 days from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless otherwise approved in writing by the city. 
d.  In the event that mandatory water restrictions have been implemented by the city council or city manager in accordance with Sec. 44-233 of the Code of Ordinances, the developer/owner shall comply with the applicable restrictions and regulations contained therein. 
(3)  Maintenance. 
a.  All required landscaping, irrigation systems, fences, walls, berms, vegetation and other landscape components shall be maintained by the owner or agent in a healthy, safe and operating condition. 
b.  Maintenance practices shall consist of all regular and normal maintenance operations of landscaping including, but not limited to, weeding, irrigation, fertilizing, pruning, mowing and litter pick-up. Plant material that exhibits severe levels of insect or pest infestation, disease and/or damage, shall be appropriately treated, and all dead plant material shall be removed and replaced with living plant material where required according to the city approved plan for the site. 
c.  Street right-of-way between a property line and curb or street pavement adjoining the property shall be maintained by the adjacent landowner. 
d.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain and properly irrigate all landscaping required by this section. Failure to replace dead or diseased plant material within 30 days of written notification by the city shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
e.  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage required landscaping through tree topping, over pruning or chemical poisoning. It shall be an affirmative defense that a maintenance/pruning plan was approved by the zoning administrator and that the work was performed in compliance with said approved plan. In the event that required landscaping has been so severely damaged due to tree topping, over pruning or chemical poisoning that it has died, the developer/owner shall replace the landscaping within 45 days of written notice from the city. 
(l)  Requirements for new construction of single-family and two-family residences in the SF-2 (Single-family - Standard Lot), SF-3 (Single-family - Mixed Lot), and TF (Two-family) zoning districts. 
(1)  Drought tolerant turf grass shall be planted on all portions of a residential lot not covered by buildings, hardscaping, or planting beds. 
(2)  The front yard of all residential lots shall contain trees at the following minimum rate, according to lot width at the front building line: 
  80 feet or less Greater than 80 feet Large trees 1 2 Small trees 1 3  
(3)  Residential lots that abut parks, trails, or similar public open spaces on the side or rear yard shall contain a minimum of one (1) large tree and one (1) small tree in each yard that abuts said space. 
(4)  All large trees shall have a caliper of three (3) inches and small trees shall have a caliper of one (1) inch at time of planting and shall be container grown. 
(5)  Large trees shall not be planted closer than five (5) feet to any lot line, fire hydrant, underground utility (excluding irrigation), or water meter box, and no closer than four (4) feet to any sidewalk, driveway, or curb. 
(6)  Improved soils with a minimum 20% organic content shall be provided in all required landscape areas to a minimum depth of four (4) inches. 
(7)  Underground irrigation shall not be required for landscaped areas. However, should underground irrigation be implemented it shall be in accordance with subsection (i) above. Irrigation may be supplemented with a rainwater harvesting system. 
(8)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, allowed to grow, or planted so that it impedes vision between the height of three (3) feet and 10 feet above the curb within a sight visibility triangle. 
(9)  All minimum required trees shall be in conformance with the preferred species listed in the Tree Technical Manual. 
(10)  No artificial plant material may be used in any form to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
Secs. 8-11-8-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION 

Sec. 8-15. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Trees have a positive economic effect on the city by enhancing property values, mitigating drainage and flooding issues, improving air quality, helping save energy, and improving health and quality of life, thereby making the city a more attractive place in which to live, visit and do business. The purpose and intent of this article is: 
(1)  To protect, maintain and manage the city's existing forest resources by providing regulations relating to the cutting, removal or destruction of protected trees; 
(2)  To encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to urban development of wooded areas; 
(3)  To minimize tree loss and provide for replacement of trees removed and destroyed resulting from development; 
(4)  To provide an objective method to evaluate a development's impact on trees and wooded areas and identify whether and how the impact may be reduced; 
(5)  To provide incentives for creative subdivision and site design which preserve trees while allowing development in wooded areas; and 
(6)  To provide for the enforcement and administration of tree protection, thereby promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare and enhancing the quality of life. 
(7)  To clearly define protected trees and monarch trees and ways in which their encroachment limits differ. 
(8)  To clearly define the limitations for encroachment of hazardous activities related to protected trees and monarch trees. 
(9)  To define the penalties for violation of the encroachment limits for protected trees and monarch trees. 
Sec. 8-16. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to remove any protected tree without first securing a tree removal permit as specified in Sec. 8-19. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to damage a protected tree, such as through tree topping, over pruning or chemical poisoning. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person to continue work or removal of trees after the forestry manager or zoning administrator has issued a stop work order. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a person to engage in any hazardous activities as described in Sec. 8-22(d), which causes damage to the crown or trunk or disturbs the critical root zone of a protected tree without the written approval of the forestry manager. 
Sec. 8-17. - Sizes and types of protected trees. 
(a)  Size . Except as provided below, a tree having a diameter of eight inches or more is a protected tree: 
(1)  On all developed lots in zoning districts SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, MH, TF, and MU-L, and on developed lots smaller than 15,000 square feet in all other zoning districts, only monarch trees are protected trees. 
(2)  On all undeveloped lots in zoning districts SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, MH, TF, and MU-L, and on undeveloped lots smaller than 15,000 square feet in all other zoning districts, trees having a diameter of 20 inches or more are protected trees. 
(b)  Type . Trees of all species that meet the size requirement in subsection (a) of this section are protected, except for Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry), Melia azedaragh (China-Berry), Sapium sebiferum (Chinese Tallow), Maclura pomifera (Osage-orange), Juniperus ashei (Texas Common Cedar), and Prosopis glandulosa (Honey Mesquite). 
(c)  Monarch tree. Except as provided in Sec. 8-25, any tree designated as a monarch tree pursuant to Sec. 8-18 is a protected tree that cannot be removed, unless its designation is removed; and the designation of a monarch tree shall not be removed without city council action, as provided for in Sec. 8-18. 
(d)  Measurement of trees. Tree size is determined by measuring the diameter at 41/2 feet above the ground level. Trees that split into multi-trunks below 41/2 feet shall use the sum the largest trunk and one-half of the diameter of each additional trunk measured 41/2 feet above the natural grade level to determine the diameter. 
Sec. 8-18. - Champion tree registry, designation of monarch trees and removal of designation. 
(a)  Champion tree registry. The forestry manager shall identify the largest tree within a tree species within the city limits and list the trees in the city's champion tree registry as champion trees. The champion tree registry shall be adopted by city council and reviewed from time to time and adjusted as necessary. The city council shall consider the champion tree registry when adopting or amending monarch tree criteria. 
(b)  Designation of monarch trees. All trees of the following species and size or larger are designated as monarch trees: 
TREE SPECIES SIZE American Elm 38" Bald Cypress 34" Burr Oak 32" Catalpa 32" Cedar Elm 25" Italian Stone Pine 20" Live Oak 36" Magnolia 14" Pecan 34" Post Oak 24" Shumard Oak/Texas Red Oak 21" Sycamore 37"  
(c)  Removal of designation. A written request by the property owner for removal of a monarch tree designation may be submitted to the zoning administrator for consideration by the city council. After city council approval of a monarch tree designation removal, the city clerk shall notify the property owner in writing of the designation removal. 
(d)  Designation by the city council. 
(1)  Nomination. The city council may consider designating a tree as a monarch tree upon the nomination by any person and with the written consent of the property owner. 
(2)  Designation. A tree may be designated a monarch tree by the city council upon a finding that it is unique and of importance to the community due to any of the following: 
a.  It is an outstanding specimen of a desirable species; 
b.  It is one of the largest or oldest trees in the city; or 
c.  It possesses a distinctive form, size, age, location, and/or historical significance. 
(3)  Notification. After city council approval of a monarch tree designation, the city clerk shall notify the property owner in writing of the designation. 
(4)  Removal of designation. A written request by the property owner for removal of a monarch tree designation may be submitted to the zoning administrator for consideration by the city council. After city council approval of a monarch tree designation removal, the city clerk shall notify the property owner in writing of the designation removal. 
Sec. 8-19. - Tree removal process. 
(a)  Applicability of Sec. 8-19. A dead tree is not considered a protected tree and is not subject to the tree removal permit requirements set forth in this section. The process for removal of a dead tree that was previously designated a monarch tree by city council or was considered a protected tree at the time it was alive, is as follows: 
(1)  For removal of a dead tree that was previously designated a monarch tree by the city council: 
a.  A property owner shall request that the forestry manager inspect the tree. 
b.  The forestry manager shall inspect the tree within 15 working days of the request and determine if the tree is dead or alive. 
c.  Upon a determination by the forestry manager that the tree is dead, the city manager shall approve or deny the removal request. 
If the forestry manager determines that the tree is still alive, and the property owner wishes to remove the tree, the owner must comply with the protected tree removal permit process set forth in this section. 
(2)  For removal of a dead tree that was not previously designated a monarch tree by the city council, but was considered a protected tree at the time it was alive: 
a.  A property owner shall request that the forestry manager inspect the tree. 
b.  The forestry manager shall inspect the tree within 15 working days of the request and determine if the tree is dead or alive. 
c.  Upon a determination by the forestry manager that the tree is dead, the forestry manager shall approve or deny the removal request. 
If the forestry manager determines that the tree is still alive, and the property owner wishes to remove the tree, the owner must comply with the protected tree removal permit process set forth in this section. 
(b)  Protected tree removal permit process. 
(1)  Protected tree removal permit. This process is reserved for those situations provided for in Sec. 8-21 and where the subdivision process or site plan process does not apply. Unless the removal is part of the subdivision process or the site plan process, a protected tree shall not be removed without a permit. In all other cases, a permit is required to remove a protected tree. By way of clarification, a permit is required to remove a protected tree as part of the application for a building permit for lots zoned SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, MH and TF. Applications for protected tree removal permits are reviewed by the forestry manager or his designee. 
(2)  Tree removal permit application. The application for a protected tree removal permit shall be made by the owner of the property on which the protected tree is located, and shall be accompanied by documentation showing: 
a.  The approximate location of the tree; 
b.  The diameter of the tree trunk measured at 4 1/2 feet above grade; 
c.  The approximate drip line of the tree; 
d.  The species and/or common name of the tree; 
e.  The approximate size of the lot, tract or parcel on which the tree is located; 
f.  Reason for the proposed removal; 
g.  Such other information as required by Chapter 2, Zoning, or as otherwise may be reasonably required by the forestry manager; and 
h.  A tree replacement plan, as provided for in Sec. 8-20. 
(3)  Application review. Upon receipt of the application, the forestry manager shall inspect the subject tree and approve or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Processing of application. An application for a protected tree removal permit shall be processed within 15 working days from the date the application is received. 
(5)  Tree protection removal and replacement. 
a.  Except as specifically provided in Sec. 8-21, replacement trees shall be required if any protected tree is removed. See Sec. 8-20 for tree replacement requirements. 
b.  A tree replacement plan shall accompany any tree removal permit application. The tree replacement plan will be reviewed in conjunction with the protected tree removal permit application and will be approved or denied by the forestry manager. 
(c)  Protected tree removal through the subdivision process . Tree removal requests, tree surveys and tree replacement plans for all projects requiring plat approval shall be submitted in conjunction with the subdivision approval process. An electronic copy of the tree survey list, including mitigation calculations, shall be provided with the application. 
(1)  Tree survey . 
a.  A tree survey, a tree protection plan, and a tree replacement plan will be reviewed by the zoning administrator as part of the plat approval and subdivision construction improvement acceptance process. The tree survey shall include all trees in the subdivision and off-site trees whose critical root zones encroach into the subdivision or limits of construction. 
b.  A tree survey will not be required if a land surveyor certifies that there are no protected trees on the proposed subdivision, or trees whose critical root zones encroach within the limits of construction. 
c.  A partial tree survey may be permitted if the zoning administrator determines that the replacement and protection requirements of this article have been met. 
d.  A tree inventory in lieu of a tree survey may be accepted by the zoning administrator to document trees outside of the limits of construction shown on the subdivision improvement construction plans provided that the critical root zones of said trees do not encroach into the limits of construction. 
e.  A request to use a tree inventory or a partial tree survey shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator in conjunction with the concept plan submittal. The zoning administrator shall provide written notification approving or disapproving the request within the concept plan review cycle. 
(2)  Tree removal . 
a.  The developer of a subdivision who finds it necessary to remove one or more of the protected trees on the site may remove a limited number of said protected trees without being subject to the tree replacement requirements of Sec. 8-20. In order for a subdivision site to qualify under this Section, the zoning administrator shall first calculate the total number of diameter inches of protected trees on the site. Then the developer may remove protected trees whose total diameters are not more than 30 percent of the diameter inches of all protected trees on the site. Provided however, this Section shall first be applied to the smallest protected tree on the site and then to the remainder of the protected trees in ascending order according to their diameters. If the developer wishes to remove more than 30 percent of the diameter inches of all protected trees on the site, the developer shall comply with the requirements of Section 8-20 for trees in excess of said 30 percent. 
b.  The tree replacement plan pursuant to Sec. 8-20 will be reviewed in conjunction with the preliminary plat review or subdivision improvement permit review process. 
(d)  Protected tree removal through the site development permit process. Tree removal requests, tree surveys, tree protection plans and tree replacement plans for all projects requiring site plan approval, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, as part of the site plan application approval process. An electronic copy of the tree survey list, including mitigation calculations, shall be provided with the application. 
(1)  Tree survey . 
a.  A tree survey, tree protection plan, and tree replacement plan shall accompany all site plans submitted in accordance with Sec. 10-45 of this code and will be reviewed by the zoning administrator. The tree survey shall include all trees on the subject site and off-site trees whose critical root zones encroach onto the site or limits of construction. 
b.  A tree survey will not be required if a land surveyor certifies that there are no protected trees on the proposed site or within the limits of construction. 
c.  A partial tree survey may be permitted if the zoning administrator determines that the replacement and protection requirements of this article have been met. 
d.  A tree inventory in lieu of a tree survey may be accepted by the zoning administrator to document trees outside the limits of construction provided that the critical root zones of said trees do not encroach into the limits of construction. 
e.  A request to use a tree inventory or a partial tree survey shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator in conjunction with the preliminary site plan submittal. The zoning administrator shall provide written notification approving or disapproving the request within the preliminary site plan review cycle. 
(2)  Tree removal . 
a.  A developer of a project who finds it necessary to remove one or more of the protected trees on the site may remove a limited number of said protected trees without being subject to the tree replacement requirements of Sec. 8-20. In order for a site to qualify under this Section, the zoning administrator shall first calculate the total number of diameter inches of protected trees on the site. Then the developer may remove protected trees whose total diameters are not more than 30 percent of the diameter inches of all protected trees on the site. Provided however, this Section shall first be applied to the smallest protected tree on the site and then to the remainder of the protected trees in ascending order according to their diameters. If the developer wishes to remove more than 30 percent of the diameter inches of all protected trees on the site, the developer shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 8-20 for trees in excess of said 30 percent. 
b.  A tree replacement plan and tree protection plan shall accompany the site development permit application to the zoning administrator. The tree replacement plan and tree protection plan will be reviewed in conjunction with the site development permit application and will be approved or denied by the zoning administrator. 
c.  When replacement trees are required, replacement shall be in accordance with Sec. 8-20. 
(3)  Reduced parking space requirement for preserving larger protected trees. A property owner who preserves a protected tree having a diameter of 15 inches or more and who does not disturb more than 25 percent of the said tree's critical root zone shall qualify for a parking space credit as set forth herein. The property owner shall be entitled to reduce his/her parking requirement by one parking space for each 162 square feet of area, or fraction thereof, left undeveloped in order to preserve the protected tree. However, in no case shall the owner receive a reduction in parking spaces in excess of ten percent of the total required parking spaces. See Sec. 8-22(c) below regarding the disturbance a monarch tree's critical root zone. 
Sec. 8-20. - Tree replacement. 
(a)  Requirements and regulations . 
(1)  Except as expressly provided herein, when protected trees are removed, tree replacement shall be required. 
(2)  Replacement trees of the same or similar species as the protected tree to be removed shall be planted as required in the tree replacement schedule in subsection (a)(6) of this section. Each replacement tree shall be a minimum of three inches caliper and a minimum of ten feet in height and five (5) foot spread, when planted. All replacement trees shall comply with generally accepted criteria such as those provided in the Tree Technical Manual. 
(3)  Each replacement tree shall have an underground automatic irrigation system and watering schedule in accordance with the generally accepted methods in the Tree Technical Manual. 
(4)  Each replacement tree shall be planted on the same subdivision or development site from which the tree was removed. In the event that there is not a suitable location for the replacement tree(s) on the same site, as determined and certified by a landscape architect and approved by the zoning administrator, or if the zoning administrator determines that replacement trees are unable to survive on the site based on information submitted by the landscape architect, the owner of the site will be allowed to do one of the following if approved by the zoning administrator: 
a.  Make a cash payment into the tree fund in accordance with the tree replacement schedule provided in subsection (a)(6) below, which shall be used to fund tree plantings or tree replacement on public property; or 
b.  Plant trees on public property according to the tree replacement schedule provided in subsection (a)(6) below, as approved by the forestry manager. 
(5)  Replacement trees required under the subdivision process shall be planted no later than two years from the date of the acceptance letter for the subdivision public improvements, provided that fiscal security is posted in accordance with Sec. 8-23. 
(6)  The tree replacement schedule is provided below and the replacement inches shall be calculated as follows: Total diameter of trees in a single category multiplied by the tree replacement ratio for that category equals the tree replacement required for that category of trees. The tree replacement ratio applies to the diameter of the existing tree to be removed. 
Diameter of Existing Tree Tree Replacement Ratio inches Tree Replacement Fee 
(per inch) 8 to 19.99 inches 1.0 $150.00 20 inches to Monarch 2.0 $300.00 Monarch and larger 3.0 $450.00  
Example: If an existing 12-inch tree is removed, 12 inches of tree replacement results or a fee of $1,800.00 shall be paid (12 inches multiplied by $150.00). If an existing 20-inch tree is removed, 40 inches of tree replacement results or a fee of $6,000.00 shall be paid (20 inches multiplied by $300.00). 
(7)  Except as provided herein, any replacement tree that dies prior to the expiration of two years after a site development or subdivision improvement permit acceptance letter is issued shall be replaced by the developer or owner. This paragraph shall not apply to any replacement trees planted on lots zoned for single-family or two-family uses. 
(8)  All replacement trees shall be considered protected trees regardless of size. 
(b)  Tree replacement fee. 
(1)  Fees are based on the ratios in the table in subsection (a)(6) above. Payment is calculated as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  The tree replacement fee shall be tendered in the form of a cashier's check or other form of payment acceptable by the city, payable to the city. 
(3)  The cashier's check or other form of payment acceptable by the city shall be submitted to the zoning administrator at the time of site plan approval; prior to subdivision construction plan acceptance; prior to plat recordation; or upon the tree removal permit approval, depending on the applicable review process. 
(c)  Tree credits . 
(1)  Except for those species listed in Sec. 8-17(c), trees with diameters of three or more inches and less than eight inches located on-site may be credited toward the replacement trees required under this article. For applicable lots under Sec. 8-17(a)(2), trees with diameters of three to 19 inches located on-site may be credited toward the replacement trees required under this article. 
(2)  Up to 50 percent of the inches to be replaced may be done through tree credits. 
(3)  The trees selected for consideration toward the amount of replacement trees required shall be indicated on the tree survey and the tree replacement plan. 
(4)  The trees shown on the tree survey and the tree replacement plan as the trees proposed for tree credits shall be protected in the same manner as a protected tree. 
(5)  The forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, will review the trees proposed for tree credits provided in the tree survey and tree replacement plan and will approve or deny the use of the recommended trees as credits toward the replacement trees required. The review of the forestry manager or the zoning administrator, as appropriate, shall be based on the assessed health, structure, habit, disease, or decline of the tree. 
Sec. 8-21. - Tree removal without replacement. 
(a)  A protected tree may be removed without replacement, provided approval is granted under Sec. 8-19, and one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The protected tree is damaged by natural causes or is diseased beyond the point of recovery; 
(2)  The protected tree should be removed as a safety measure because it is in danger of falling; 
(3)  The protected tree threatens to damage property; 
(4)  The location of the protected tree prevents reasonable access to the property; or 
(5)  The location of the protected tree precludes all reasonable and lawful use of the property on which it is located. 
(b)  Transplanting a protected tree to a suitable location on the same property or off-site, as approved under Sec. 8-20, shall not require replacement, provided that the owner complies with the generally accepted transplanting methods described in the Tree Technical Manual and posts either a cash deposit or a letter of credit. The letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in the amount of 100 percent of the tree replacement fee required by Sec. 8-20. The city may draw on the letter of credit if, within two years of the date of the above-described transplanting, the forestry manager reasonably determines that the tree is dead or is in such a state of decline that it is likely to die. In that event, the cash deposit or the amount drawn on the letter of credit shall be deposited in the tree fund. 
Sec. 8-22. - Tree protection measures. 
(a)  Critical root zone. During construction, temporary tree protection devices shall be installed at least to the limit of the critical root zone or drip line, whichever is greater, for any protected tree to be preserved when the respective critical root zone is within the limits of construction. The temporary tree protection device shall consist of a chain link fence with a minimum height of five feet with posts located at a maximum spacing of 10 feet installed in a manner that is nonintrusive to any tree canopy and critical root zone. 
(b)  Disturbance of critical root zone for protected trees. 
(1)  If any of the hazardous activities described in subsections (d)(3), (4), (5), (8) or (9) below, occurs within six feet of the trunk of a protected tree, such tree shall be considered removed and shall be replaced as required herein. 
(2)  If disturbance of the critical root zone of a protected tree occurs more than six feet from the trunk and is 25 percent or less of the critical root zone, no replacement or mitigation shall be required. 
(3)  If disturbance of the critical root zone of a protected tree exceeds 40 percent of the critical root zone, such tree shall be considered removed and its removal shall be mitigated as set forth in Sec. 8-20. 
(4)  If disturbance of the critical root zone of a protected tree occurs more than six feet from the trunk and is 40 percent or less, but exceeds 25 percent, the owner shall be required to mitigate such disturbance by selecting one of the following methods: 
a.  The owner shall replace 50 percent of the tree replacement inches or pay 50 percent of the tree replacement fee required by Sec. 8-20; or 
b.  The owner shall post either a cash deposit or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in the amount of 100 percent of the tree replacement fee required by Sec. 8-20. The city may draw on the letter of credit if, within two years of the date of the above-described disturbance, as determined by the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator reasonably determines that the tree is dead or is in such a state of decline that it is likely to die. In that event, the cash deposit or the amount drawn on the letter of credit shall be deposited in the tree fund. 
(c)  Disturbance of critical root zone for monarch trees . 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any of the hazardous activities described in subsections (d)(3), (4), (7), (8) or (9) below to encroach into the enhanced critical root zone of a monarch tree. The enhanced critical root zone shall be defined as the area within 75% of the radial distance of the critical root zone. For example, a 40" diameter live oak having a 40-foot radius critical root zone has a 30-foot radius enhanced critical root zone. 
(2)  Hazardous activities as described in subsections (d)(3), (4), (7), (8) or (9) below may impact a maximum of 10% of the critical root zone of a monarch tree. Any impact shall comply with the requirement described in subsection (c)(1) above and be approved by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Hazardous activities as described in subsections (d)(1), (2), (5) or (6) below, are prohibited anywhere within the critical root zone of a monarch tree. 
(4)  Any pruning or trimming of a protected tree designated as a monarch tree shall only occur if the forestry manager or zoning administrator has granted a monarch tree trimming permit. 
(d)  Hazardous activities. Activities hazardous to the health of any protected tree being preserved are prohibited, including but not limited to the following and as generally described in the Tree Technical Manual: 
(1)  Physical damage. Any physical damage, including tree topping and/or excessive pruning. 
(2)  Equipment cleaning and liquid disposal. Cleaning equipment, depositing or allowing harmful liquids to flow overland within the limits of the critical root zone. This includes paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, tar or similar materials. 
(3)  Grade changes. Grade changes (cut or fill) within the limits of the critical root zone unless adequate construction methods are approved by the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate. 
(4)  Impervious paving. Paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials within the limits of the critical root zone in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill a tree. 
(5)  Material storage. Storing materials intended for use in construction or allowing waste materials due to excavation or demolition to accumulate within the limits of the critical root zone. 
(6)  Tree attachments. Attaching to a tree any signs, wires, or other items, other than those of a protective nature. 
(7)  Vehicular traffic. Vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic, parking, or storage within the limits of the critical root zone, other than on pre-existing or approved pavement. This restriction does not apply to single incident access within the critical root zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, vehicular access necessary for emergency services, routine utility maintenance, emergency restoration of utility service, or routine mowing operations. 
(8)  Utility encroachment. Installation of utilities and appurtenances within the critical root zone or crown except as otherwise approved by the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate. 
(9)  Excavation and trenching. Excavation and trenching within the limits of the critical root zone, except as otherwise approved by the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate. 
(e)  Plans . Details and notes prohibiting the above activities as generally provided in the Tree Technical Manual shall be included on all tree protection plans and tree replacement plans. 
Sec. 8-23 - Fiscal security for trees. 
(a)  Posting of fiscal at subdivision. The owner must post fiscal security with the city prior to a request for recordation of the final plat or prior to subdivision construction plan acceptance, whichever comes first, if the replacement trees required under the approved tree replacement plan have not been installed and accepted by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Posting of fiscal for phased site plans. The owner must post fiscal security with the city if the tree replacement plan is to be implemented in phases as part of an approved site plan that is in phases. This fiscal security is intended to apply to those situations where protected trees are removed in one phase of the development and the replacement trees are intended to be planted in a subsequent phase of the development. The fiscal security must be posted prior to final site plan approval. 
(c)  Amount. The amount of fiscal security posted by the owner shall equal the estimated cost plus ten percent to complete the approved tree replacement plan. The owner's landscape architect shall provide the zoning administrator with a sealed opinion of the probable cost for his approval. 
(d)  Time. The fiscal shall be posted for a two-year time period. 
(e)  Administrative fee. The owner shall pay an administrative fee equal to five percent of the amount to be posted for all fiscal posting. 
(f)  Types. In a form approved by the city attorney, an owner may post as fiscal security: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  A performance bond; or 
(3)  A letter of credit. 
(g)  Expenditure of fiscal security. The city may draw on the fiscal security and pay the cost of completing the tree replacement plan approved if it determines that the owner has breached the obligations secured by the fiscal security or the two-year time period for the installation of the replacement trees has expired. The city shall refund the balance of the fiscal security, if any, to the owner. The owner shall be liable for the cost that exceeds the amount of fiscal security, if any, including any costs incurred by the city to draw on the fiscal security. 
(h)  Return of fiscal security. The city shall return the fiscal security to the owner when final inspection approval is provided by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 8-24. - Administration and enforcement. 
    This article will be administered and enforced by the forestry manager and the zoning administrator. 
(a)  Administration . 
(1)  The role of the forestry manager is to: 
a.  Provide technical advice to the zoning administrator regarding trees; 
b.  Provide technical advice regarding protected trees and tree replacement plans to the planning and zoning commission through the plat review process; 
c.  Approve or disapprove of the removal of protected trees unrelated to the site plan or subdivision processes; and 
d.  Review and recommend updates to this tree protection and preservation ordinance and the Tree Technical Manual. 
(2)  The role of the zoning administrator is to approve or disapprove protected trees to be preserved, removed, or replaced as part of the site plan and subdivision process. 
(3)  The role of the planning and zoning commission is to approve or disapprove protected trees to be preserved, removed, or replaced as part of the subdivision process. 
(b)  Enforcement . 
(1)  Inspections. The forestry manager and zoning administrator are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Powers and duties. The forestry manager and zoning administrator shall have the following powers: 
a.  To enforce the provisions of this article, file complaints in municipal court against persons who violate any of its provisions. 
b.  To enter any premises for the purpose of inspecting the trees provided for in the tree surveys and tree replacement plans; the protection of trees on the site; the trees being installed; the trees being removed or to perform his/her official duties. 
c.  To ensure compliance with this article where a tree replacement plan has been submitted and approved. 
d.  To issue a stop work order to a person to cease performing any work being done without a requisite permit or otherwise in violation of this article. 
(3)  Faulty work. 
a.  If the installation of replacement trees are found to be of substandard quality, incorrectly or defectively installed or found not to be installed in accordance with the tree replacement plan and the Tree Technical Manual, the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, shall notify the owner in writing of all the changes that need to be made in order for the work to conform with the tree replacement plan and the provisions of this article. 
b.  If the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, finds that the protected trees on the site were damaged due to construction during the subdivision or site plan process, the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, shall notify the owner in writing identifying the damaged trees and the owner shall replace the damaged trees in accordance with Sec. 8-20. 
c.  A subdivision plat shall not be recorded, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued, or fiscal security shall not be released until the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, re-inspects the site and finds that the changes requested have been completed correctly and in accordance with the tree replacement plan and the provisions of this article or the fiscal security posted is paid into the tree fund. 
(4)  Final inspection. 
a.  Upon the completion of all the installation of trees, the owner shall notify the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, that the work is ready for final inspection. 
b.  If faulty work or substandard plant material is found, the owner shall be notified of the necessary changes to be done in accordance with Sec. 8-24(b)(3), above. If such work is found to be correctly installed and in accordance with the tree replacement plan, the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate, shall provide written notification to the appropriate city official that the owner has met the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 8-25. - Exceptions. 
(a)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other natural disaster, the requirements of this article may be waived as deemed necessary by the emergency management coordinator or other designee of the city manager. In addition to rights granted by easement, utility service providers, lawfully within the right-of-way, may remove trees during the period of an emergency that are determined by the provider to be a danger to public safety and welfare by interfering with utility service. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, remove and maintain any protected tree located on a right-of-way, easement, public parkland or any other city-owned property as may be necessary to ensure public safety. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed any protected tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature or location unreasonably interferes with the construction, maintenance or replacement of wastewater lines, water lines, drainage facilities, streets or other public improvements. Before removing a monarch tree for any of the reasons provided above, a city department shall consult with the forestry manager and/or zoning administrator, as appropriate, to determine whether a monarch tree may be removed, with the final decision being made by the city manager. 
Sec. 8-26. - Violations. 
    Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Sec. 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances, and each protected tree that is unlawfully removed or damaged shall constitute a separate offense. Criminal prosecution shall not preclude civil action by the city to recover for the damage or loss of the tree, and the city attorney is hereby authorized, without further authorization from the city council, to institute and prosecute a lawsuit against any person who unlawfully removes or damages a protected tree, to recover the reasonable value of the tree. 
Sec. 8-27. - Appeals. 
(a)  Denial of protected tree removal permit. If an application for a protected tree removal permit is denied, the applicant may appeal such action to the zoning board of adjustment by filing written notice of such appeal with the zoning administrator within ten days of notice of the denial of the application by the forestry manager or zoning administrator, as appropriate. The board shall have 45 days from the date of the appeal to review said denial. The board may affirm or reverse the determination of the forestry manager or zoning administrator. If the board fails to act within 45 days, the appeal shall be automatically granted and a protected tree removal permit issued. 
(b)  Denial of tree removal request through the subdivision process. If a protected tree removal request is denied, the applicant may appeal such action to the city council by filing written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days of notice of the denial of the application by the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall have 30 days from the date of the appeal to review said denial. The city council may affirm or reverse the determination of the planning and zoning commission. If the city council fails to act within 30 days, the appeal shall be automatically granted and a protected tree removal request approved. 
(c)  Denial of tree removal request through the site development or subdivision improvement permit process. If a protected tree removal request is denied, the applicant may appeal such action to the zoning board of adjustment by filing written notice of such appeal with the zoning administrator within ten days of notice of the denial of the application by the zoning administrator. The board shall have 45 days from the date of the appeal to review said denial. The board may affirm or reverse the determination of the zoning administrator. If the board fails to act within 45 days, the appeal shall be automatically granted and a protected tree removal request approved. 
Sec. 8-28. - Tree fund. 
(a)  The tree fund shall consist of fees generated as a result of tree replacement requirements as well as general donations for public tree plantings. 
(1)  Establishment of fund. A tree fund is hereby established. 
(2)  Funds to be deposited . Tree replacement fees for the installation of replacement trees, as provided for in Sec. 8-20, shall be deposited in the tree fund. 
(3)  Use of funds. Expenditures from the tree fund shall be used solely for purchasing and installing trees and associated irrigation on public rights-of-way, public park land or any other city-owned property, and for administering the tree fund. 
Secs. 8-29-8-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES 

Sec. 8-35. - Lot fences. 
(a)  Standards . All lot fencing shall comply with the following standards unless otherwise stated within a specific zoning district, in which case the standard within the zoning district shall apply: 
(1)  General standards . 
a.  All fences shall provide a finished face to abutting public rights-of-way. 
b.  Fences for nonresidential uses shall provide a finished face to abutting single-family, two-family or townhouse uses. 
c.  Fences shall not conflict with sight visibility triangles at street intersections or obstruct views from adjacent driveways. 
d.  Fence posts for all new fences shall be constructed of rust-resistant metal parts, concrete based masonry, or concrete pillars of sound structural integrity. 
e.  Fence posts and fence panels for non-wood fences shall be capped. 
(2)  Maximum height . 
a.  Front street yard, non-wrought iron (residential uses): three (3) feet. 
b.  Front street yard, wrought iron (residential uses): six (6) feet. 
c.  All street yards, non-wrought iron (nonresidential uses): three (3) feet. 
d.  All street yards, wrought iron (nonresidential uses): six (6) feet. 
e.  All other yards (all non-industrial uses): eight (8) feet. 
f.  All other yards (light industrial and industrial uses): 10 feet. 
Secs. 8-36-8-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SCREENING 

Sec. 8-40. - Screening. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to screen specific uses or structures from public view. All landscape material required in this subsection shall be provided in an eight-foot wide linear planting bed unencumbered by easements. Buffers shall provide a visual barrier between land uses, enhance the streetscape, and provide privacy. The spacing requirements between trees in the Tree Technical Manual shall not apply to this subsection. Compliance with this subsection requires that all detention ponds, water quality ponds, ground-mounted equipment (i.e., transformers, air conditioner units), dumpsters, trash receptacles, donation receptacles, refuse storage containers, outdoor storage, loading docks, substations, large utility cabinets, water and wastewater pumping stations, storage sites, and other similar uses be sufficiently screened. Required landscape material shall be located to maximize the screening of these facilities. 
(2)  All proposed detention and water quality facilities shall be screened from public view by means of the following landscape elements: 
a.  Water quality ponds/detention ponds with structured walls. 
1.  One medium tree shall be planted for every 40 linear feet or portion thereof around the boundary of the pond; 
2.  One small tree shall be planted for every 30 linear feet portion thereof around the boundary of the pond; and 
3.  One large shrub shall be planted for every eight (8) linear feet or portion thereof around the boundary of the pond; or 
4.  The foregoing tree and shrub requirements may be eliminated and replaced with the following: 
(i)  The exterior walls of the pond shall be clad with limestone and/or other textured design features; and 
(ii)  If a chain-link fence is utilized, a native/adapted vine in at least a five-gallon container shall be planted for every eight (8) linear feet of fence. 
b.  Water quality ponds/detention ponds with earthen berms shall be planted with one large tree for every 40 linear feet around the boundary of a non-structured detention/retention pond. 
(3)  Dumpster and trash receptacles. All dumpsters, trash receptacles, and refuse storage containers shall be located within an enclosure providing screening by means of both the following landscape elements: 
a.  A decorative masonry wall having a minimum height of six (6) feet on three (3) sides and a gate on the fourth side. The gate shall be constructed with an opaque, non-masonry material. The construction materials of the wall shall match material used on the principal building located on the same lot. 
b.  Small shrubs shall be arranged as foundation planting around the perimeter of the pad area except the side where the gate is located. One small shrub shall be planted at each end of and every three (3) linear feet in a three-foot (3') wide landscape area. The landscape requirements of this subsection do not apply when the enclosure is an architectural extension of a principal building. 
(4)  Donation receptacles . All donation receptacles shall be located within an enclosure providing screening by means of a decorative masonry wall on three (3) sides. The wall shall be at least as tall as the donation receptacle it screens. The construction materials of the wall shall be complementary to the material used on the principal building located on the same lot. 
(5)  Ground-mounted equipment. All proposed ground-mounted equipment shall be screened by the planting of one large shrub every four (4) linear feet around the boundary of the equipment in a planting bed with edging. 
(6)  Substations, water/wastewater stations. Proposed electric substations, water pump stations and wastewater lift stations shall be screened from public views by means of a six-foot decorative masonry wall on a minimum of three sides. Smooth-face concrete masonry units are prohibited. The following landscape elements shall be incorporated: 
a.  An eight-foot (8') wide planting bed with one small evergreen tree per 12 linear feet; provided that said trees shall be planted no closer than eight (8) feet and no more than 16 feet apart; or 
b.  A five-foot (5') wide planting bed with one large shrub for every four (4) linear feet. Shrubs may be planted in a variety of configurations, but at no time shall be planted greater than six (6) feet apart. 
(7)  Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 8-65. In addition, outdoor storage shall be screened as follows: 
a.  Limited outdoor storage. 
1.  An eight-foot (8') wide planting bed with one small evergreen tree per 12 linear feet of wall constructed; provided that said trees shall be planted no closer than eight (8) feet and no farther than 16 feet apart; or 
2.  A five-foot (5') wide planting bed with one large shrub for every four (4) linear feet; provided that said shrubs shall be planted no closer than six (6) feet apart. 
b.  General outdoor storage. An eight-foot (8') wide planting bed with one small evergreen tree per 15 linear feet and one large evergreen tree per 30 linear feet of wall constructed; provided that said trees shall be planted no more than 15 feet apart. 
(8)  Loading docks. All loading docks visible from public view shall be screened by means of the following screening and landscaping elements: 
a.  A decorative masonry wall having a minimum height of six (6) feet. If the wall includes a gate, it shall be constructed with an opaque, non-masonry material. The construction materials of the wall shall match material used on the principal building located on the same lot; 
b.  One medium or large tree per 40 linear feet of wall constructed (75 percent of selected trees shall be of an evergreen species); 
c.  One small tree per 15 linear feet of wall constructed (75 percent of selected trees shall be of an evergreen species); provided that said trees shall be planted no more than 15 feet apart; and 
d.  One large shrub per four (4) linear feet of wall constructed; provided that said shrubs shall be planted no more than six (6) feet apart. 
Secs. 8-41-8-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 8-45. - General. 
(a)  Applicability . 
(1)  New development . The off-street parking and loading standards of this section apply to any new building constructed and to any new use established. 
(2)  Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking and loading standards of this section apply when an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged. Additional off-street parking and loading spaces will be required to serve the entire building or use. The number of off-street parking and loading spaces provided for the entire use (pre-existing + expansion) shall equal at least 100 percent of the minimum requirement established in the off-street parking requirements table, in Sec. 8-46(a) of this section. 
(b)  No reduction below requirement. Existing parking and loading spaces may not be reduced below the requirements established in this section. Any change in use that increases applicable off-street parking or loading requirements will be deemed a violation of this code unless parking and loading spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 8-46. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements table. The following table lists minimum off-street parking requirements by land use category: 
Off-Street Parking Requirements Use General Requirement Additional Notes Residential Uses Single-Family: attached, detached, zero lot line, village residential 
(SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, MH, TF) For lots in platted subdivisions recorded prior to January 1, 2002: 2 off-street spaces per dwelling unit. 
For lots in platted subdivisions recorded in 2002 and later: 4 per dwelling unit; a minimum of 2 spaces shall be garage-enclosed Townhouse 4 per dwelling unit. 
Additional 5 percent of total number of required spaces 
A minimum of 2 spaces per unit shall be garage-enclosed MF-1 1 per 1 or 2 bedroom unit; 
2 per 3+ bedroom unit. All minimum parking shall be garage enclosed spaces. MF-2 1.5 per 1-bedroom unit; 
2 per 2-bedroom unit; and 
2.5 per 3+ bedroom unit. 
Additional 5 percent of total number of required spaces Upper story residential 1.5 per bedroom Group home, six or fewer persons N/A Assisted living 0.5 per dwelling unit; 
1.5 per 2 employees Variations to this standard shall be considered by the zoning administrator to reflect the mobility needs of the targeted population of a specific development Senior housing, attached 
(independent living) 1 per dwelling unit Public and Civic Uses Community Service 1 per 250 ft. GFA Day care, in-home six or fewer children N/A Day Care 3.5 per 1,000 ft. GFA Vehicle stacking spaces included in any student drop-off area may qualify as permitted parking spaces provided the drop-off area meets the specifications described in Sec. 8-52(e), below Elementary and Middle Schools 3 per classroom High Schools 10 per classroom All other Educational Facilities, including higher education A parking study shall be required to determine the required number of parking spaces. Government Facilities 1 per 250 ft. GFA; and 
1 per fleet vehicle Hospitals 4 per patient bed Institutions 1 per 250 ft. GFA; and 
1.5 per 2 employees Community Parks Varies Parking requirement based on uses in park; must be reviewed and approved by zoning administrator Amenity Centers 1.5 per 250 ft. GFA; 1 per 300 square feet of designated outdoor recreation areas Parks (community, linear/linkage, neighborhood, regional/metropolitan); Parks and Recreation facilities; Country Clubs Varies Parking requirement based on uses in each park/club; must be reviewed and approved by zoning administrator Golf Courses 4 per hole; and 
1.5 per 250 ft. GFA of accessory use structures Cemeteries, Columbaria, Mausoleums, Memorial Parks and Crematoria 1 per 50 internment plots (cemeteries and memorial parks); 1 per 350 ft. GFA (mausoleum and crematorium) Funeral Home 1 per 100 ft. GFA 
Minimum of 20 spaces Park and Ride Facility N/A All other Passenger Terminals 2 per 250 ft. GFA Place of Worship, no accessory uses 1 per 3 seats Place of Worship, with accessory uses 1 per 3 seats in place of worship 
Spaces necessary to accommodate accessory uses based on requirement for accessory use Wireless Transmission Facilities None Major Utilities 1 per facility; 
1 additional per 250 ft. GFA; and 1 per fleet vehicle Intermediate Utilities None Minor Utilities None Commercial Uses Restaurants/bars 1 per 100 ft. GFA; and 
1 per 100 square ft. of outdoor seating areas Outdoor entertainment facilities Stadium: 1 per 4 people based on maximum seating capacity 
Amusement park/Miniature golf course: 1 space for each 200 ft. GFA of enclosed building space devoted to customer service and administration, plus 1 space for every 3 people that the outdoor facilities are designed to accommodate at maximum capacity Indoor entertainment activities 1 per 250 ft. GFA; or 1 per 4 seats for theaters. 
1 additional per 500 ft. GFA up to 50,000 ft. GFA; 1 per 1,000 ft. thereafter, excluding theaters Event center 1 space per two occupants based on maximum occupancy Office 1 per 250 ft. GFA Medical Office Building 1 per 200 ft. GFA Animal hospital/veterinary clinic 1 per 200 ft. GFA Call Center 8 per 1,000 ft. GFA Bed and Breakfast 1 per bedroom; and 
1.5 per 2 resident owners Hotel/Motel/Lodging 1 per bedroom; 
1.5 per 2 employees; and 
1 per 150 ft. of conference space over 2,000 ft. GFA Shopping Centers (mixture of uses) = 100,000 sq. ft. 1 per 225 ft. GFA All other Retail Sales and Service 1 per 250 ft. GFA Self-Service Storage 1 space per 50 storage units Car wash, full-service 1 per 150 ft. GFA Shall meet off-street stacking space requirements from this section Car wash, self-service 1 per facility Shall meet off-street stacking space requirements from this section Auto repair, service, and body shop facilities 1 per 250 ft. GFA; 1 additional per 1,000 square feet of outdoor lot, storage or repair bay area Shall meet off-street stacking space requirements from this section Auto sales, rental or leasing facilities 1 per 500 ft. GFA indoor facility; and 1 additional per 1,000 ft. GFA outdoor lot area All other auto sales and service 1 per 250 ft. GFA; and 5 per service bay Industrial Uses Light Industrial Service, Manufacturing and Assembly 1 per 500 ft. GFA indoor facility; and 1 per additional 1,000 ft. GFA outdoor facility; and 1 per 2,500 ft. indoor storage area Warehouse and Freight Movement 1 per 500 ft. GFA indoor facility; and 1 per additional 1,000 ft. GFA outdoor facility; and 1 per 2,500 ft. indoor storage area Mineral Extraction 1 per 300 ft. GFA indoor facility; and 1.5 per 2 employees Waste-Related Service 1 per 250 ft. GFA; and 1 per additional 1,000 ft. GFA outdoor facility; 1 per 2,500 ft. indoor storage area Wholesale Trade 1 per 300 ft. GFA indoor facility; and 1 per additional 1,000 ft. GFA outdoor facility; and 1 per 2,500 ft. indoor storage area Heavy Equipment Sales and Leasing 1 per 250 ft. GFA; and 1 additional per 500 ft. GFA up to 50,000 ft. GFA Office/Warehouse 1 per 500 ft. GFA  
(b)  Residential parking requirements. 
(1)  Applicability. This subsection (b) shall apply to any lot in a residential zoning district, as identified in Chapter 2, Zoning Districts and Use Regulations, except for the AG (Agricultural), MF-2 (Multifamily - Medium Density) and MF-3 (Multifamily - Urban) zoning districts. 
(2)  Standards. Driveways and improved surfaces shall be constructed and designed pursuant to the driveway standards as stated in the Design and Construction Standards Transportation Criteria Manual (DACS), as adopted or amended by the city. 
(3)  Driveway maintenance. Improved driveways and improved surfaces shall be maintained in good and safe condition, free of holes, cracks, spoiling or other failures that may affect the use, drainage or longevity of the material. This shall not prohibit the use of approved surfaces specifically designed to include an alternative component, for example, grass or sand between paving stones. 
(4)  Street yard coverage. For non-corner residential lots, no combination of improved driveways and/or improved surfaces shall cover more than 50 percent of the street yard. For corner residential lots, no combination of improved driveways and/or improved surfaces shall cover more than 25 percent of the street yard. The regulations of this subsection shall not affect or prohibit the construction of the minimum driveway, as required by the DACS. 
(c)  Screening. Where vehicle parking on a residential lot is required to be screened, the screening shall consist of: 
(1)  A solid, opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height; 
(2)  Vegetation consisting of a solid hedge row or evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six (6) feet; or 
(3)  A combination of the subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
Screening shall not be required in the rear yard for vehicles parked on an improved driveway that is constructed in accordance with the DACS. 
(d)  Unimproved driveways and unimproved parking areas; nonconforming use. 
(1)  An unimproved driveway and an unimproved parking area, which are located in a street yard or a side yard shall be considered as nonconforming uses and subject to the regulations regarding nonconforming uses in Sec. 2-98(c). Specifically, such unimproved driveway or unimproved parking area shall not be extended or expanded, nor changed except to an improved driveway, an improved surface used for parking, or an unimproved surface. 
(2)  If the building or structure that is served by the unimproved driveway is damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent of its fair market value (as determined by the most recent appraised value of the appraisal district in which the building or structure is located), and if such building or structure is repaired or replaced, the unimproved driveway shall no longer be permitted, and all off-street parking shall be required to be on an improved driveway. 
(3)  If the building or structure that is served by the unimproved driveway is increased by 25 percent or more in the square footage, the unimproved driveway shall no longer be permitted, and all off-street parking shall be required to be on an improved driveway. 
Sec. 8-47. - Alternative parking plan and shared parking. 
(a)  Alternative parking plan. An alternative parking plan may be approved by the zoning administrator for specific developments that are deemed to require a different amount of parking than the standards shown in the off-street parking requirements table. The zoning administrator shall establish conditions necessary to insure the adequacy of future on-site parking when approving an alternate parking plan. Any alternative standard shall meet the criteria below: 
(1)  The use of the building is specific and occupied by a single user. 
(2)  The applicant provides a detailed breakdown of his or her parking requirements indicating employee counts, shift distribution and visitor or customer needs. 
(3)  The applicant provides a site plan showing how additional parking to meet standard requirements would be provided if the use changed or parking needs increase. 
(b)  Shared parking. Required parking for one use may satisfy the requirements for another use if the nonresidential uses have different peak hour parking needs and the following: 
(1)  The following documentation shall be submitted to the city as part of the review process if requesting shared parking: 
a.  The names and addresses of the uses and the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking; 
b.  The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared; 
c.  An analysis showing that the peak parking demands for the different uses occur at different times and that the parking area will supply at least the minimum number of required spaces for each use during its respective peak parking time; 
d.  A legal instrument such as an easement that guarantees access to the joint parking for all uses; 
e.  A shared parking agreement executed by all the users and the owner of the property proposed to be used for parking; and 
f.  The agreement shall be notarized and recorded, with a provision that the consent of the city must be obtained for termination of the agreement. 
(2)  In the event of the termination of an existing shared parking agreement, a new shared parking agreement shall be executed within 60 days prior to termination. If a new shared parking agreement is not executed, then documentation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator supporting that the uses on all affected properties meet their respective parking requirements. This process of amending a shared parking agreement applies to all existing parking agreements impacted by sale, change of use, or expansions on any affected property. 
(c)  Alternative agreements. In limited cases, off-site parking agreements, and reciprocal access and parking agreements may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 8-48. - Exceptions to off-street parking requirements. 
    The property owners of lots 8 through 19, block 9; lots 1 through 9, block 22; and lots 11 through 19, block 8; all in the original plat of Round Rock, are not required to comply with the off-street parking requirements stated in Sec. 8-47 of this section. 
Sec. 8-49. - Downtown development area special requirements. 
(a)  The property owners of all properties located within the downtown development area which are zoned C-1 (General commercial) and are adjacent to streets with rights-of-way, 80 feet wide or greater, other than Round Rock Avenue, Mays Street, and the east side of South Lampasas Street from Bagdad Street to the alleyway between Bagdad Street and East Main Street, shall be permitted to utilize said rights-of-way for on-street parking spaces to meet the city's parking requirements. 
(b)  In order to utilize the rights-of-way for parking spaces as provided above, all of the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  The property owner shall set aside, within the property's buildable area, an open, undeveloped, unpaved area having the same square footage as that portion of the right-of-way used for on-street parking. 
(2)  The property owner shall maintain the on-street parking area, including, but not limited to, landscaping, pavement repair, drainage and striping. 
(3)  For each 15 on-street parking spaces or fraction thereof, the property owner shall provide either two landscaped islands nine (9) feet by 20 feet or one landscaped island 18 by 20 feet as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  The property owner shall submit to the city a site plan depicting the on-street parking spaces, the required landscaped islands, and the open, undeveloped portion of the property, for the review and approval of the zoning administrator and the director of public works prior to construction of any on-street parking spaces. 
(5)  Any on-street parking spaces located on West Main Street shall be constructed with brick pavers comparable in color and style with the brick pavers used for the sidewalks adjacent to Round Rock Avenue between IH 35 and Mays Street. 
(6)  The director of public works shall determine that the use of on-street parking will not adversely affect drainage within the area. 
(7)  No on-street parking shall be located within 40 feet of any curb corner. 
(8)  All parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet by 18 feet. 
Sec. 8-50. - Rules for computing requirements. 
    The following rules apply when computing off-street parking and loading requirements: 
(a)  Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one use shall provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. 
(b)  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half or less will be rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-half will be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
(c)  Area measurements. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all square-footage-based parking and loading standards shall be computed on the basis of gross floor area, as defined in Sec. 1-50. 
(d)  Occupancy-based standards. For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on employees, residents or occupants, calculations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number of spaces. 
(e)  Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in the off-street parking requirements table, the zoning administrator shall apply the off-street parking standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require a parking study in accordance with an alternative parking plan, as described in Sec. 8-47, above. 
Sec. 8-51. - Location, setbacks and buffering of required parking. 
    Except where an alternative parking plan has been approved by the zoning administrator, all required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use. Unless otherwise expressly stated, off-street parking areas shall be set back in accordance with Sec. 8-10. 
Sec. 8-52. - Parking space and parking lot design. 
(a)  Parking space dimensions. Required off-street parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet in width by 18 feet in length. Parallel parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of eight and a half (8.5) feet in width by 22 feet in length. 
(b)  Aisle widths. Drive aisle widths adjoining off-street parking spaces shall comply with the following standards: 
Minimum Width for Specified Parking 90 degrees 75 degrees 60 degrees 45 degrees or less 26 ft. 23 ft. 16 ft. 12.5 ft.  
    Note: Two-way aisles shall always require a minimum width of 26 feet. 
(c)  Markings. 
(1)  Each required off-street parking space and off-street parking area shall be identified by surface markings at least four (4) inches in width. Markings shall be visible at all times. Such markings shall be arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking and storage of vehicles. 
(2)  One-way and two-way accesses into required parking facilities shall be identified by directional arrows. 
(d)  Surfacing and maintenance. All off-street parking areas, drive aisles, internal roadways, and loading areas for all uses shall be paved and kept in a dust-free condition at all times. 
(e)  Access and circulation. 
(1)  Required parking spaces shall not have direct access to a street or highway. Access to required parking spaces shall be provided by on-site driveways. Off-street parking spaces shall be accessible without backing into or otherwise reentering a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Site plans for retail developments greater than a cumulative 50,000 gross square feet shall designate a primary vehicle circulation route entering and exiting the development. 
a.  Landscape median islands or end islands, as described in Sec. 8-10(f)(1)d., shall be immediately adjacent to the primary vehicle circulation route for the entire length of the route (excluding pedestrian access and the face of primary buildings). 
b.  Parking is prohibited along primary vehicle circulation routes in order to prevent overflow stacking onto rights-of-way and primary circulation routes. Parking is prohibited adjacent to the entire elevation of a building which includes the primary pedestrian access to cause internal circulation conflicts. 
(3)  Day care facilities which incorporate a drop-off area must designate said area on the site plan. The drop-off area shall be separated from all internal drive aisles by a physical barrier such as a median, curbing, a building or other similar site improvements, and shall not impede on- or off-site traffic movements including access for emergency vehicles. Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet. Stacking spaces shall qualify toward the minimum parking requirement. 
(f)  Tandem parking. Tandem parking in the multifamily or senior zoning districts shall be permitted only when it is located in front of a garage, which is attached to a dwelling unit and the tandem space is assigned only to the dwelling unit to which the garage is attached. 
Sec. 8-53. - Use of required parking spaces. 
(a)  Required off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating condition. Required spaces may not be used for storage of trash dumpsters, the display of goods for sale or lease, for motor vehicle repair or service work of any kind, storage of vehicles, boats, motorhomes, campers, mobile homes, or building materials, or for display or storage of vehicles for lease, sale or rent. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on any lot or street other than a residential lot of the owner or a site specifically designed and approved by the zoning administrator to accommodate them. 
Sec. 8-54. - Vehicle stacking areas. 
(a)  Minimum number of spaces. Off-street stacking spaces shall be provided as indicated in the following table: 
Minimum Off-Street Stacking Spaces Activity Type Minimum Spaces Measured From Bank teller lane 4 Teller or window Automated teller machine lane 3 Automated Teller Machine Restaurant drive-through lane 6 Order box 4 Order box to pick-up window Car wash stall, automatic 4 Entrance to wash bay Car wash stall, self-service 2 Entrance to wash bay Gasoline pump island 2 Pump island Pharmacy drive-through lane 3 Service window Dry Cleaner drive-through lane 3 Service window Other Determined by zoning administrator  
(b)  Design and layout. Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards: 
(1)  Size. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet in size. 
(2)  Location. Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic movements or movements into, or out of off-street parking spaces. 
Sec. 8-55. - Parking and storage of large vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  Outdoor storage or parking of tractor-trailers, semi-trucks, semi-trailers, or other vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating of 17,000 pounds or more, shall be prohibited in any residential district and in the C-2 and OF-1 zoning districts. This prohibition shall not apply to pickup trucks, or personal recreational equipment. Construction equipment shall not be stored on lots in residential or commercial districts except during the period of permitted construction. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the vehicles described in Sec. 8-55(a) of this section in any district for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight, or merchandise. 
(c)  Screening from public rights-of-way or lower intensity residential uses shall be required in multifamily developments for areas designated or available for parking and storage of recreation vehicles, boats, small trailers and other noncommercial equipment. Such screening shall consist of permanent material such as concrete, masonry, wood, steel, etc. 
Sec. 8-56. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  No use of public right-of-way. At no time shall goods be loaded or unloaded from the right-of-way of a collector or arterial street. No part of any vehicle shall be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a collector or arterial street while being loaded or unloaded. 
(b)  Location. Plans for location, design and layout of all loading spaces shall be indicated on required site plans. Loading space size shall be based on need and in accordance with standard engineering requirements as determined by the zoning administrator. 
Secs. 8-57-8-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACCESS AND CIRCULATION 

Sec. 8-60. - Access and circulation. 
(a)  Location of existing and planned transit routes. Any proposed development shall take into account the location of existing and planned transit routes and provide vehicular and pedestrian connections (including hike and bike trails) to any transit points within or adjacent to the development. 
(b)  Easements. 
(1)  Emergency access drives. Emergency access drives shall be at least 24 feet in width. 
(2)  Street access. No use shall be permitted to take direct access to a street except as permitted in this section. 
a.  Local streets. All residential uses may take direct access to local streets. Nonresidential uses shall not take direct access to local streets, except when no higher street classification is available. 
b.  Collector streets. No single-family dwelling shall take direct access to collector streets, except when no local street is available. 
c.  Arterial streets. No residential use, other than multifamily, shall take direct access to arterial streets. When uses take access to an arterial street, the point of access shall be directly across from another existing point of access, or spaced at least 200 feet from any intersecting street or other point of access to the arterial. 
(3)  Driveway connections to adjacent development. 
a.  Except as provided below, driveway connections to adjacent development shall be provided and clearly identified on any site plan submitted pursuant to this chapter. All driveway connections shown on a site plan shall be constructed and stubbed, and future development of adjacent property shall complete a connection to any existing stub. 
b.  The zoning administrator may waive the requirement for a driveway connection required above, in those cases where unusual topography, site conditions, or incompatible uses would render such an easement of no useable benefit to adjoining properties. 
c.  The zoning administrator may approve the closure of driveway access in those cases where adjoining parcels are subsequently developed with a residential use. 
(c)  Design requirements and standards. 
(1)  Minimum access. Each parcel of land which legally exists on the effective date of this chapter and which abuts a street right-of-way shall be permitted at least one access point, except where restricted by plat note or separate instrument easement. 
(2)  Additional access. The zoning administrator may require more than one access point onto a collector or arterial street for a single parcel during site plan review, provided that the number and location of access points onto local streets and the additional access points onto collector and arterial streets shall be approved by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the roadway from which access is being taken. 
(3)  Width of access. The width of access driveways shall be determined by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the roadway from which access is being taken. However, in no case shall an individual driveway width be greater than 45 feet, except that the width of a landscaped center median shall not count towards this standard. 
(4)  Closure or relocation of existing access points. The zoning administrator, in conjunction with the highway authority having jurisdiction over the roadway from which access is being taken, shall have the authority to require the closure or relocation of existing access points where multiple access points to the site are available. 
(5)  Curb cuts at intersections. A curb cut for a corner parcel at the intersection of any streets shall be located the maximum practical distance from the edge of the right-of-way of the intersecting streets, without intrusion into any required buffer. The number and location of the curb cut shall be approved by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the street from which access is being taken. 
Secs. 8-61-8-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY 

Sec. 8-65. - Outdoor storage and display. 
(a)  General. Outdoor storage and display is allowed in certain nonresidential districts in accordance with this section. Any merchandise, material or equipment situated outdoors shall be subject to the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this section, outdoor storage and display shall be broken down into the following categories. 
(b)  Permitted outdoor storage and display. Outdoor storage and display shall only be allowed in the districts designated in the table below: 
Permitted Outdoor Storage and Display Table Category C-1 C-1a C-2, 
OF, 
BP PF-1, 
PF-2, 
PF-3 LI, I, 
MI SR OS MU-1, MU-2, 
MU-R, MU-G MU-L Outdoor display X X X X X Limited outdoor 
storage X X X X X X General outdoor 
storage X X X Temporary outdoor 
storage X X X X X X X  
(c)  Categories of outdoor storage and display. 
(1)  Outdoor display. 
a.  Outdoor display is display of items actively for sale. 
b.  Outdoor display shall be allowed adjacent to a principal building wall and, except as provided in this subsection, extend to a distance no greater than 10 feet from the wall. Such display is prohibited to block windows, entrances or exits, and shall not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the sidewalks. 
c.  Outdoor display located more than 10 feet from the wall of a principal building shall be fenced in by a masonry, wrought iron or similar material fence/wall. The location and fencing of such a display shall be approved by the PDS director. 
d.  Outdoor display in the OS district shall only be permitted in metropolitan and regional parks. 
e.  Outdoor display in the downtown development area and in the MU-1 and MU-2 districts may be permitted in limited quantities provided it does not impede pedestrian traffic. 
f.  Outdoor display in the LI district shall be limited to plants and landscape materials for sale at nurseries and similar landscaping supply establishments. 
(2)  Limited outdoor storage. 
a.  Limited outdoor storage is temporary storage of goods in individual packaging and not in storage containers. Organic materials in plastic packaging are considered limited outdoor storage. 
b.  Limited outdoor storage shall be screened from view outside the site by a solid masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height. Limited outdoor storage in the I (Industrial) and MI (Mining) districts is exempt from the screening requirements provided that district buffering standards have been met. 
c.  Limited outdoor storage shall not be allowed in any off-street parking spaces. 
d.  In the MU-1, MU-2, MU-L, MU-R, and MU-G districts, limited outdoor storage shall not be allowed in the street yard. 
(3)  General outdoor storage. 
a.  General outdoor storage consists of all remaining forms of outdoor storage including temporary, as provided for in Sec. 2-92, not classified as outdoor display or limited outdoor storage. General outdoor storage also includes items stored in shipping containers, conexes, and semi-trailers not attached to a truck. 
b.  Shipping containers, conexes, and semi-trailers not attached to a truck shall not be stacked more than two units high. In the C-1 (General commercial) district, shipping containers, conexes, and semi-trailers shall not be stacked. 
c.  General outdoor storage shall be allowed in unlimited quantity, provided that the storage area is screened from any public right-of-way by means of an opaque wall at least six (6) feet in height. General outdoor storage in the I (Industrial) and MI (Mining) districts is exempt from the screening requirements provided that district buffering standards have been met. General outdoor storage in the C-1 (General commercial) district shall be screened from any public right-of-way or abutting property by means of a masonry wall that provides a complete screening of the storage. The construction materials of the wall shall match material used on the principal building located on the same lot. 
d.  Except for the I (Industrial) and MI (Mining) districts, no general outdoor storage shall be permitted within the following areas: 
1.  A required front setback; 
2.  Between a front setback and the building front; and 
3.  Between a side setback along a public right-of-way and any building or structure. 
e.  General outdoor storage shall not be allowed in any off-street parking areas. 
f.  General outdoor storage in the OS district shall only be permitted in metropolitan and regional parks. 
g.  The placement of general outdoor storage shall not conflict with any public utilities, easements or rights-of-way. 
h.  The location of general outdoor storage shall meet the accessory building requirements for that zoning district. 
i.  Where general outdoor storage is temporary, as provided for in Sec. 2-92, the zoning administrator may require alternative screening depending on the uniqueness of the situation. 
(d)  Additional outdoor storage and display requirements. 
(1)  Required to show on-site plan. All limited outdoor storage and general outdoor storage areas shall be clearly shown on the site plan submitted for the property. 
(2)  Right-of-way. Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in the city's ordinances, all outdoor storage and display shall be located outside the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Screening requirements. Outdoor storage shall meet the applicable screening requirements of Sec. 8-40. 
(e)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Vehicles (including boats) for sale as part of a properly permitted vehicle sales use shall not be considered merchandise, material or equipment subject to the restrictions of this section. Such vehicles shall be located and displayed on a paved vehicle use area, clearly indicated on the site plan, and screened under the same requirements for a parking lot. 
(2)  Waste generated on-site and deposited in ordinary refuse containers and enclosed areas shall not be considered outdoor display and storage. 
(f)  Residential open storage . 
(1)  Open Storage means the placement in an unenclosed area on a lot or tract of land used for residential purposes for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours of an item which is not customarily used or stored outside and/or which is not made of a material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outside environment. 
(2)  Open storage shall be prohibited in the front yard, in a carport, or an unenclosed front porch, driveway, balcony, or any open an unenclosed area visible from any public right-of-way. 
Secs. 8-66-8-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGNS 

Sec. 8-70. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To stimulate a healthy economy by: 
a.  Permitting businesses to inform, identify and communicate effectively; and 
b.  Directing the public through the use of signs on buildings and sites. 
(2)  To protect and enhance the physical appearance of the community in a lawful manner by: 
a.  Providing standards for the appropriate design, scale and placement of signs; 
b.  Satisfying the community's desires for signs that are attractive; 
c.  Avoiding sign standards which are so rigid and inflexible that all signs have a monotonous look and design; 
d.  Considering that areas outside the city may one day be annexed into the city; and 
e.  Addressing abandoned signs that may cause an area to look blighted. 
(3)  To foster public safety along public streets within the community by: 
a.  Ensuring that all signs are in safe and appropriate locations; and 
b.  Ensuring that the information displayed on a sign is clearly visible and legible so that a sign achieves its intended purpose without causing undue distraction. 
(4)  To have administrative review procedures which are the minimum necessary to: 
a.  Balance the community's objectives and regulatory requirements with the reasonable advertising and way-finding needs of businesses; 
b.  Allow for consistent enforcement of this chapter; 
c.  Address nonconforming signs; 
d.  Minimize the time required to review a sign permit application; and 
e.  Address changes in sign manufacturing technology, as necessary. 
Sec. 8-71. - Applicability and intent. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained in the City of Round Rock and its extraterritorial jurisdiction only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Pursuant to the terms of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.902, the provisions of this section regulating signs shall be enforced in, and extended to the city's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as provided below. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not be enforced in that portion of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is in the Brushy Creek Municipal Utility District and that is also located more than 150 feet from the public right-of-way of RM Highway 620 or RM 1431. 
(b)  Intent. The intent of this chapter as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(1)  To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs for business uses and for a limited variety of signs for other uses, subject to the standards and the permit procedures in this chapter. 
(2)  To establish sign development standards, that relate signs to the speed and function of the road type on which they appear or for areas identified by the city with separate standards appropriate for the designated area. 
(3)  To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective sites on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without the requirement for permits. 
(4)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances. 
(5)  To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(6)  To provide for the enforcement of provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 8-72. - Signs exempt from the regulations. 
(a)  The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter: 
(1)  Political campaign signs on private property. 
(2)  Any public purpose/safety sign, including regulatory signs, and any other notice or warning required by federal, state or local law, regulation or resolution. 
(3)  Works of art, including murals, which do not include a commercial message. 
(4)  Holiday decorations containing no commercial message, and displayed only during the appropriate time of the year. 
(5)  Flags that are a symbol of government or political subdivision. 
(6)  Historic-age signs. 
(7)  Building markers. 
(8)  Information signs. 
(9)  Building addresses, except as required on freestanding signs. 
(10)  Barber poles. 
(11)  Signs placed on a fence on property owned or leased by a public or private educational institution with students in grades K through 12. 
(12)  Signs placed on a fence bordering an outdoor sports field or court on property operated by a not-for-profit community recreational organization. 
(13)  Advertising and informational signs internal to a concert venue, stadium, or similar use. 
(14)  Signs internal to a site so that they are not visible from a public right-of-way. 
Sec. 8-73. - Measurement standards. 
(a)  The following standards shall regulate the computation of sign size and height: 
(1)  Building signs. 
a.  Determining sign display area of building signs. 
1.  For a building sign which is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the sign display area's dimensions shall include the entire portion within such background or frame. 
2.  For a building sign comprised of individual letters or other items of information on a wall or surface of the building or accessory structure or mounted on a raceway that blends in with the background onto which it is mounted, the sign display area's dimensions shall be the sum of the regular geometric shapes (rectangle, square, circle, triangle, etc.) encompassing individual items of information. For words, the area of each rectangle encompassing an individual letter may be summed to determine the sign display area of a word. 
3.  The allowable sign display area for each occupant shall be based on the occupant's frontage on a public right-of-way, private street, vehicle drive aisle, or public space internal to a multi-occupant center. Sign display area shall be calculated separately for each building frontage. For any occupant frontage with a wall that is on an angle to a roadway, the occupant frontage length shall be measured by taking 50 percent of the sum of the linear footage allowed for said roadways. The maximum square foot allowance of sign display area shall be calculated in the same manner. 
4.  The amount of display area for a wall sign may be affected by placement requirements found in Sec. 8-76. 
5.  Clearance for building signs over pedestrian walkways shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments. 
6.  Where there is a non-principal building or structure, such as, vehicle service canopies and structured parking facilities, signs shall be considered to be accessory signs and such signs shall not be counted against the sign area allowed. 
7.  When two identical sign display areas, such as on a projecting sign, are placed back to back so that both cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign, the sign display area shall be computed as the measurement of one side of the sign. 
8.  The sign display area for all awnings/canopies shall not exceed the allowable square footage for this type of sign. 
9.  Measurement of vehicle service canopy sign display area shall not include the background and striping on the face of a flat-roofed canopy. 
10.  Window sign display area shall not be included in the total sign display area for building signs. 
b.  Determining occupant frontage lengths for wall signs. 
1.  The facade length of the occupant frontage on the first floor shall be the basis for determining the permissible sign display area for building signs. 
2.  Determining occupant frontage lengths. 
(i)  The length of any occupant frontage shall be equal to the wall length of a building elevation. 
(ii)  No portion of any building elevation shall be counted towards more than one occupant frontage, even when visible from two roadways. 
(iii)  The occupant frontage for a space in a building with multiple occupants shall be measured from the centerline of the demising wall separating the building unit. 
(2)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  Determining area of freestanding signs. 
1.  For freestanding signs, the sign display area shall include any portion of the sign which contains items of information. When more than one sign makes up a freestanding sign, the individual signs shall be totaled to determine the sign display area. For a panel or cabinet contained in a freestanding sign, the sign display area calculation shall include the sign display area of the entire panel or cabinet. When individual letters are pinned to a freestanding sign, the sign display area's dimensions shall be the sum of the regular geometric shapes encompassing individual items of information or the area of each rectangle encompassing individual letters may be summed to determine the sign display area of a word. 
2.  When two identical sign display areas are placed back to back so that both cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign structure, the sign display area shall be computed as the measurement of one side of the sign. 
3.  For any freestanding sign that is on an angle at the intersection of two roadways that have different area standards, the total allowable sign display area shall be measured by summing 50 percent of the square footage allowed for each roadway. 
4.  For an area identification sign, the sign display area shall be measured as a building sign is measured. 
b.  Determining sign height for freestanding signs. 
1.  The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base of the sign or supportive structure at the finished grade, to the highest point of the sign, including all attached components. 
2.  The finished grade of a sign's location from which the height is measured shall be exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the finished grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be measured on the assumption that the finished grade at the base of the sign is equal to the nearest pavement or top of any pavement curb. 
3.  Clearance for freestanding signs shall be measured at the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments. 
4.  Freestanding sign display areas and sign lighting system equipment shall be at least 14 feet above areas accessible to vehicles. 
5.  For any freestanding sign that is on an angle at the intersection of two roadways that have different height standards, the maximum allowable sign height shall be equal to the greater allowable height. 
Sec. 8-74. - Criteria for determining sign standards: road types and special areas. 
(a)  Standards for signs shall be determined either by: 
(1)  The type of road adjacent to the lot or multi-occupant center; 
(2)  The type of road which an occupant frontage faces; or 
(3)  The special area in which the sign is to be located. 
(b)  Road types. All roads fall within one of the following road types: freeways, commercial roads, and neighborhood roads. A roadway type may change over time. A roadway may have more than one type along its length. Sections of a neighborhood road containing only nonresidential uses may have signs utilizing commercial standards where no residential use is located within 100 feet of any new signs proposed on the lot. 
(1)  Freeways. For the purposes of this chapter, freeways shall include only the following roads: 
U.S. Interstate Highway 35; 
State Highway 45/Louis Henna Boulevard; and 
State Highway 130. 
(2)  Commercial roads. For the purpose of this chapter, commercial roads shall include the following roadways: 
Avery-Nelson Parkway; 
A.W. Grimes Boulevard/FM 1460; 
Bass Pro Drive; 
Chandler Road; 
Chisholm Trail (1200-2900); 
College Park Drive; 
County Road 112 (1800 to 2150); 
County Road 172; 
Cypress Boulevard; 
Cypress Cove; 
Dell Way; 
Deep Wood Drive (100-351) 
Double Creek Drive (1200-2600); 
Eagle's Nest Street (west of Sunrise Rd); 
Forest Creek Drive (2100 to 3600); 
Gattis School Road; 
Greenlawn Boulevard (1510 to 1550; 2300 to 3599); 
Hesters Crossing Road; 
Hoppe Trail; 
IKEA Way; 
Kenny Fort Boulevard; 
Kiphen Road; 
Kouri Avenue; 
La Frontera Boulevard; 
McNeil Road; 
Mays Street, North; 
Mays Street, South; 
North Red Bud Lane (100 to 201); 
Oakmont Drive; 
Old Settlers Boulevard, East (1 to 3606); 
Old Settlers Boulevard, West (1 to 1200); 
Palm Valley Boulevard (U.S. Hwy. 79); 
Parker Drive; 
Picadilly Drive; 
Red Bud Lane (2002 to 2885); 
RM 620; 
RM 1431; 
Round Rock Avenue; 
Sam Bass Road (600 to 2111; 2700 to 2715); 
Steam Way; 
Sundance Parkway; 
Sunrise Road (2499 to 4399); 
University Boulevard; 
University Oaks Boulevard; 
Wolle Lane; and 
Wyoming Springs Drive (7000 to 7231). 
(3)  Neighborhood roads. For the purposes of this chapter, any road not classified as a freeway or commercial road shall be considered to be a neighborhood road. 
(c)  Special areas. The special areas are as follows: 
(1)  Original settlement (OS) special area(s). The areas that shall adhere to the requirements pertaining to this special area are: 
a.  Historic overlay. Any tract of land that is part of an historic district or has historic overlay zoning on any portion of the tract. 
b.  Chisholm Trail overlay. Any tract of land that has Chisholm Trail overlay zoning. 
c.  Palm Valley overlay . Any tract of land that has Palm Valley overlay zoning. 
(2)  Downtown master plan (DT) special area. Any parcel that is in the downtown master plan study area, as defined in the 2010 Downtown Master Plan and which has frontage on IH-35 or US Hwy. 79, may use road type standards for size and height rather than DT special area standards unless standards are specifically provided for these road types for this special area. 
Sec. 8-75. - General illumination standards. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to illumination of signs: 
(1)  The brightness and intensity of an illuminated sign shall not be greater than necessary to meet reasonable needs of the business or use served. 
(2)  No sign shall be illuminated to such intensity or in such a manner so as to cause a glare or brightness to a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance to vehicular traffic, pedestrians or adjacent sites. 
(3)  No sign may be illuminated with fixtures that allow for the unshielded upward transmission of light. 
(4)  No exposed neon or bare bulbs shall be used. 
(5)  Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
Sec. 8-76. - Building sign standards. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to all building signs: 
(1)  Building signs shall be integrated with the primary physical features of the building and shall complement the building architecture. 
(2)  The sign display area for building signs shall be determined by linear feet of the occupant frontage, and the roadway or special area where the building is located, as set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (d), below. 
(3)  The sign display area for wall signs shall be the lesser amount of the maximum square foot allowance or the square feet of sign display area per one linear foot of occupant frontage, based on roadway type or special area. 
(4)  Each occupant may have multiple building signs as long as the total building sign display area of wall signs, hanging and projecting signs, and awning/canopy signs does not exceed the total allowance for wall signs for each occupant frontage. 
(5)  Building signs not related to businesses located in the respective building are prohibited. 
(6)  The following standards shall be utilized in the determination of road type for building signs: 
a.  In order to determine the roadway for an occupant frontage, a building that has frontage on a road shall utilize the standards for that road for a single occupant or an occupant frontage in a multi-occupant center. 
b.  For occupant frontages that are internal to a multi-occupant center, the following shall apply: 
1.  Occupant frontages internal to a multi-occupant center with frontage on a freeway or commercial road shall utilize commercial road sign standards. 
2.  Occupant frontages internal to a multi-occupant center with frontage on a neighborhood road on any side of the center shall utilize the neighborhood road sign standards. 
3.  For occupant frontages not in a multi-occupant center and not facing a public right-of-way, the standard for square feet of sign display area for an occupant not facing a public ROW shall be utilized. 
(b)  Wall signs. 
Wall Signs Building Criteria Building shall have a plane that can accommodate the placement of a sign. Number, 
Amount of 
Building 
Signage/ 
Items of 
Information When maximum square footage of sign display area for wall signs is less than 100 square feet, an additional ten square feet of sign display area of wall signs, hanging or projecting signs, or awning/canopy signs shall be permitted. Regardless of the length of frontage, the owner/occupant is entitled to a sign of at least 20 square feet, with the exception of properties zoned MU-L which shall be limited to 8 square feet. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage 
(Amount 
allowed shall 
be whichever 
measurement is less) Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot;
sharing
property
line with
single
family
use in
MU-1,
MU-2, or
MU-L districts Maximum square feet of sign display area 300 square feet. 
Maximum is 600 square feet when occupant frontage exceeds 100 feet and square footage of a business use that is not an institutional, governmental or residential use is greater than 100,000 square feet. 200 square feet. 
Maximum is 600 square feet when occupant frontage exceeds 100 feet and square footage of a business use that is not an institutional, governmental or residential use is greater than 100,000 square feet. 75 none 40 square feet. 
Maximum is 8 square feet for properties with MU-L zoning. 0 Square feet of sign display area per one linear foot of occupant frontage 2.50 2.0 1.50 1 1 0 Placement (on building) A distance of no less than ten percent of the smallest dimension of the entire sign display area of a wall sign shall be provided around the entire sign display area and from any architectural features. For buildings greater than two stories, signs shall be placed on the uppermost story adjacent to the top of the building and/or on the ground floor adjacent to public entrances. Materials & Design All surfaces of a sign shall be finished. Signs shall be mounted to a building so that the attachment device shall not be visible or discernible. Wall signs exceeding 16 square feet of sign display area shall not be a single, flat surface. Wall signs shall be constructed of rigid materials such as wood, metal, and plastic, or an equivalent material. Where internally lit signs are permitted, tag lines and pan-faced signs shall be permitted as wall signs. No plastics of any kind are permitted on wall signs in the OS or DT special areas with the exception of high-density urethane or similar coated product or vinyl coatings used as a paint equivalent. Lighting Internal illumination shall be permitted with the exception of in OS and DT special areas. External illumination and illumination by halation are permitted. Illuminated signs are prohibited for properties with MU-L zoning in the DT special area. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited.  
(c)  Hanging and projecting signs. 
Hanging and Projecting Signs Building Criteria A hanging sign shall be comprised of a panel placed hanging, typically over a defined walkway. Projecting signs shall have a wall from which the sign shall project where the sign shall be perpendicular to a building facade. Number, Amount of Building Signage/Items of Information This type of sign shall only be permitted if total sign display area of all building signs does not exceed the square footage allowance for wall signs. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot Maximum 
square feet 
of sign 
display 
area 20 16 10 10 8 0 Placement (on building) A minimum of eight feet of clearance shall be required from the finished grade to the bottom of the sign for any sign projecting over a pedestrian area. Hanging and projecting signs may hang or project over a sidewalk in a public right-of-way when the front portion of a building or canopy is in or within two (2) feet of the right-of-way. Materials & Design Sign shall be painted or sealed wood, or painted or enameled metal on neighborhood roadways and in OS and DT special areas. Freeways and commercial roadways shall utilize the same materials as wall signs. Lighting External illumination is permitted. Internal illumination and illumination by halation shall be permitted with the exception of on neighborhood roads and in OS and DT special areas. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited.  
(d)  Awning/canopy signs. 
Awning/Canopy Signs Building Criteria Signs shall be integrated into the awning/canopy unless the awning/canopy is made of a rigid material projecting from a building and parallel to the ground, in which case the sign may be mounted onto it. Number, Amount of Building Signage/Items of Information This type of sign shall only be permitted if total sign display area of all building signs does not exceed the square footage allowance for wall signs. The maximum square feet of sign display area for awning/canopy signs applies to total amount of information on all awnings/canopies combined. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot Maximum square feet of sign display area 60 square feet with no more than 50% of the awning covered with items of information. 40 square feet with no more than 33% of the awning covered with items of information. 20 20 12 square feet 
Maximum is 8 square feet for properties with MU-L zoning. 0 Placement (on building) Signs attached to the top of a rigid awning/canopy shall not project above the wall or parapet. Eight feet of clearance shall be required underneath any sign. Materials & Design Sign applied to a flexible surface such as fabric shall be integrated into the fabric. Signs attached to a rigid awning/canopy shall be made of painted or enameled metal or painted or sealed wood. Lighting No illumination shall be permitted except by lighting attached to a building or integrated into a rigid awning/canopy. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited.  
(e)  Fascia-mounted signs. 
Fascia-mounted Signs Building Criteria Signs shall be mounted onto the fascia of a roof on the elevation of a building containing the primary entrance. This type of sign shall only be permitted in situations where a building has a pitched roof which begins less than two (2) feet above the door frame, and no canopy is present. Number, Amount of Building Signage/Items of Information This type of sign shall only be permitted for buildings with frontage on a freeway or commercial road. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot Maximum square feet of sign display area 200 160 0 160 for lots with freeway frontage; 0 for all other lots 0 0 Square feet of sign display area per one linear foot of occupant frontage 2.0 2.0 0 2.0 0 0 Placement (on building) Signs attached to the face of or with brackets or mountings installed on a fascia shall not project above the peak of the portion of the roof to which it is attached. No more than 25% of the height of the sign shall be permitted to extend below the bottom of the fascia. Portions of any sign extending below the fascia shall maintain eight feet of clearance. When taglines are incorporated, they must be backed by the fascia. Materials & Design Signs shall be channel letters, cut letters, or taglines. All portions of a sign shall be constructed of rigid materials. Lighting Internal illumination, external illumination, and illumination by halation are permitted. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited  
Sec. 8-77. - Special purpose building sign standards. 
(a)  Vehicle service canopy signs. 
Vehicle Service Canopy Building Criteria Signs shall be permitted on a canopy that covers a vehicle service area that is an accessory structure not attached to a building. Number, Amount of Building Signage/Items of Information Flat-roofed canopy: Vehicle service canopy maximum sign display area shall be considered as accessory signs and shall be calculated separately from the maximum building sign display area for wall signs. 
Pitched-roof canopy: Up to two hanging signs with a maximum sign display area of ten square feet each shall be permitted on a pitched canopy. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot Percent Coverage on face of all canopy types 25% 25% 25% N/A 25% 0 Maximum square feet of sign display area attached to a canopy per occupant frontage 10 10 10 10 10 0 Placement (on building) Sign shall be placed on or be an integral part of the face of a flat-roofed canopy. Hanging signs shall be permitted to hang from an eave of a pitched canopy or may be affixed to the fascia on the non-gabled sides of the canopy. No sign shall extend above the top edge of a flat roof or peak of a pitched roof. Materials & Design All surfaces of a sign shall be finished. All signs shall be constructed of rigid materials such as wood, metal, and plastic, or an equivalent material. Lighting Internal illumination is prohibited in OS and DT special areas. External illumination and illumination by halation are permitted. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited.  
(b)  Parking garage signs. 
Parking Garage Signs Building Criteria Signs shall be permitted on any structure used solely for the purposes of parking. Number, Amount of Building Signage/Items of Information Parking garage maximum sign display area shall be considered as accessory signs and shall be calculated separately from the maximum building sign display area for wall signs. Sign Size By 
Road Type or 
Special Area 
per Occupant 
Frontage 
(Amount allowed shall be whichever measurement is less) Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Not
Facing
a
Public
ROW Special
Area -
OS; DT Sharing
Property
Line
with SF
or TF
Zoned
Lot Maximum square feet of sign display area 300 300 200 100 200 0 Square feet of sign display area per one linear foot of occupant frontage 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.25 0.25 0 Placement (on building) Parking garage signs placed flush to a facade and a distance of no less than ten percent of the smallest dimension of the sign display area shall be maintained as a margin around the entire sign display area. Signs are prohibited above any wall plane of a garage. Materials & Design Cabinet signs are prohibited for external commercial messages on the exterior of the structure. Cabinet signs may be used for incidental signs. Lighting Internal illumination, external illumination and illumination by halation are permitted. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited except for incidental signs.  
(c)  Banners. Banners shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A sign permit shall be required for the display of all banners. 
(2)  One banner shall be allowed for each single occupancy structure. One additional banner shall be permitted for an additional occupant frontage facing a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Banners shall not exceed 15 square feet in area, unless the occupant frontage onto which the banner shall be placed exceeds 80 linear feet, then a banner may have a maximum area of 40 square feet. 
(4)  Banners may be placed in the following locations: 
a.  The entire banner must be attached and parallel with a wall, and shall not cover any part of a building's windows or doors. 
b.  Banners may be hung from the front of the canopy on the facade with the primary entrance to a building. 
c.  In instances where a banner cannot be accommodated in one of the locations above, other locations may be considered. 
(5)  Banners promoting an aspect of a business may only be attached to the building or unit which houses the business. 
(6)  A banner shall not be displayed for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days per permit with a maximum of three permits issued in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(7)  Banners shall not be tattered, torn or faded and shall remain tautly attached. 
(d)  Banners for a new occupancy or use . Banners for a new occupancy or use shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A sign permit shall be required. A separate fee for the banner for a new occupancy or use shall not be required if the applicant concurrently submits a permit request for a permanent sign. 
(2)  One banner shall be allowed for each single occupancy structure or for each occupant frontage in a multi-occupant center or building and is prohibited to be displayed at the same time as a banner in subsection (c) above. 
(3)  Banners shall not exceed 40 square feet in area. 
(4)  The entire banner must be attached and parallel with the wall not covering any part of a building's windows or doors or hung from the front of the canopy on the facade with the primary entrance to a building. 
(5)  Banners promoting an aspect of a business may only be attached to the building or unit which houses the business. 
(6)  A banner for new occupancy or use shall be allowed for a maximum of 60 days within the first three months of establishment of such new occupancy or use in lieu of a permanent sign. This banner shall be removed when a permanent sign is installed. 
(7)  Banners shall not be tattered, torn or faded and shall remain tautly attached. 
(e)  Building scrim sign. 
(1)  A sign permit shall be required for a building scrim sign. 
(2)  One (1) building scrim sign shall be permitted for a building that is at least two (2) stories tall for one (1) building at a time in a nonresidential development that would qualify for an area identification sign. 
(3)  A building scrim sign shall not be displayed for a period exceeding 60 consecutive calendar days per permit with a maximum of two (2) permits issued in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(4)  Building scrim signs shall not be tattered, torn or faded and shall remain tautly attached. 
(f)  Building signs for temporary occupants of a business use . For building signs for temporary occupants, one (1) sign may be permitted per occupant frontage of a business use occupying a space for seasonal use or similar. The total of all building signs shall be no larger than the square foot limit allowed for wall signs on a designated roadway; however, the panel size restriction for wall signs shall not apply and the material may be a semi-rigid, all-weather material. All other wall sign standards shall apply. The sign shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 120 days. 
(g)  Directory signs . For the purpose of identifying individual tenants in a building with multiple tenants, the total sign area for all panels in a directory sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
(h)  Home occupation sign. In areas zoned for SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, or TF, for the purpose of identifying a customary home occupation, as defined in Sec. 2-93, one home occupation sign shall be permitted. Such sign shall be attached flatwise to the house and shall not exceed two square feet in surface area. 
(i)  Window signs. 
(1)  Window signs are allowed without limitation except as provided below. 
(2)  Window sign display area shall not be included as part of the total signs display area of building signs. 
(3)  Total sign display area of all window signs on any elevation of a building shall not cover more than 25 percent of the glazing on an elevation. 
(4)  The sign display area may not exceed 50 percent of the glazing of each window. 
(5)  Window signs in OS and DT special areas shall not be illuminated. 
(j)  Incidental building signs . For those incidental signs that are not internal to a site, the maximum allowable square footage of sign display area shall be less than or equal to twenty-five (25%) percent of the total wall sign area allowed per occupant frontage. 
Sec. 8-78. - Freestanding sign standards. 
(a)  The standards for freestanding signs shall be determined by the roadway adjacent to the lot or the special area in which the lot is located. 
(b)  The display of the property address number shall be required on the sign structure of freestanding monument and pylon signs, but shall not be counted in the calculation of sign display area. 
(c)  Determining eligibility for freestanding signs. 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall only be permitted for a business use. 
(2)  At least one freestanding monument sign shall be allowed per lot. 
(3)  Other types of freestanding signs may be permitted in lieu of a monument sign, depending on the type of sign and the size of the lot. 
(4)  Low-profile signs may be permitted in addition to monument and pylon signs. 
(d)  Determining the location of freestanding signs. The location of freestanding signs shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A sign shall have a minimum front setback of three (3) feet and a minimum side setback of five (5) feet. 
(2)  A sign shall not be located in or project over a public utility easement unless authorized by all applicable utility providers and the city. 
(3)  Signs shall not be located in parking spaces, drive aisles or any other areas that impede vehicular movement or maneuverability. 
(4)  Any sign located within a sight visibility triangle shall be no more than three feet in height. 
(5)  Signs shall be located within the same lot or multi-occupant center as the business use, except as expressly exempted in this chapter. 
(6)  No freestanding sign or any projection of said sign shall be in or project over a public right-of-way. 
(7)  Where the front setback of a building is less than ten feet, freestanding signs shall meet the freestanding sign size and type allowed for OS and DT special areas. 
(8)  Placement of signs shall meet all other requirements associated with this Code. 
(e)  Number and spacing requirements for freestanding signs. 
(1)  The number of freestanding signs varies depending on the size of the lot and the length of a site's frontage on a roadway. 
(f)  Electronic messaging centers (EMCs)/changeable message. Changeable message using EMCs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Standards for EMC signs are provided by sign type. 
(2)  EMC signs shall only be permitted on freestanding signs, with the exception of theaters which are allowed to place EMCs on buildings. 
(3)  EMCs are prohibited on neighborhood roads, or in OS and DT special areas, with the exception of community facilities, schools, places of worship, and fuel station pricers. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsections (5) and (6) below, one EMC sign is permitted per lot. 
(5)  One EMC sign is permitted per multi-occupant center of less than five acres. 
(6)  One EMC sign is permitted per road frontage for a multi-occupant center of five acres or more. 
(7)  EMCs shall not change their message more than once every eight seconds and shall not be animated. Transitions shall be static/instant, with a transition time of one second or less. 
(8)  The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot candles accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with the EMC displaying a white image for a full color capable EMC, or a solid message for a single-color EMC. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the EMC using the following formula: 
Measurement distance = v[(sign display area of EMC) x 100]  
The difference between the off and solid-message measurements using the EMC measurement distance formula shall not exceed 0.3 foot candles at night. 
(9)  All EMCs shall have automatic dimming capability that adjusts the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day and night and shall be able to be adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot candle measurements in subsection (8) above. 
(10)  All EMCs are prohibited from being located within five (5) feet of a sight visibility triangle regardless of height or size. 
(g)  Sign standards for monument signs. 
Monument: On a Lot Less than Five Acres Site Criteria Every lot is entitled to a monument sign with the exception of properties with MU-L zoning, which may have any other freestanding sign type permitted in the DT special area. Number and Spacing of Signs One per road frontage. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial
RoadNeighborhood
Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 150 75 50 36 Maximum Height 18' 12' 6' 6' Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. No less than 75% of the width of the sign shall be in contact with the ground. For all signs between six and 12 feet in height, a two-foot high stone, stucco, or brick base shall be required; where a different masonry material is used on the primary structure, the zoning administrator may approve the same to be used on the base. For all signs having a height of greater than 12 feet, a three-foot high stone, stucco, or brick base shall be required; where a different masonry material is used on the primary structure, the zoning administrator may approve the same to be used on the base. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 105 mph or greater for any monument sign greater than four (4) feet and up to 10 feet in height. Signs greater than 10 feet in height shall demonstrate a windload of 115 mph or greater. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Freestanding cabinet signs shall have a surround around the cabinet, and the cabinet shall be flush with or inset from the sign surround but may accommodate a two (2) inch retainer and service disconnect switch where necessary. Cabinet signs made entirely of metal are exempt from the requirement to provide a surround. Materials Wood that is painted or sealed, painted or enameled metal, stone, brick, simulated stone, stucco, plastics and/or a combination thereof. Plastics of any kind are prohibited as a component of the sign structure for any monument sign. All non-rigid plastics shall have a minimum five (5) year warranty and are only permitted on the face of a cabinet sign. Alternate materials that resemble permitted materials or match the materials on the primary structure may be considered by the zoning administrator. Plastics of any kind shall not be visible in OS and DT special areas. Lighting External illumination and illumination by halation shall be permitted. Internal illumination shall be allowed with the following exceptions. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited on neighborhood roadways except individual letters or routed cabinets with an opaque background with only the items of information lit or translucent. In special areas, internal illumination shall be prohibited. All internal lighting shall have concealed conduits. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) EMCs shall display text only for up to 40% or 32 square feet of the sign display area, whichever is less. EMCs shall not be allowed on neighborhood roads or in OS and DT special areas with the exception of use for community services, schools, places of worship, or fuel station pricers.  
Monument: On a Lot of Five Acres or More Site Criteria For a lot that is five acres or more. Minimum of 50 linear feet of occupant frontage required. Number and Spacing of Signs If more than one sign, they shall be separated a minimum of 400 feet from any other monument, pylon, pillar, post/panel or armature sign on a site. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial
Road Neighborhood
Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 200 120 60 36 square feet on Neighborhood Roads and 100 square feet on Commercial Roads and Freeways in Special Area Maximum Height 30' 20' 6' 6 feet on Neighborhood Roads and 10 feet on Commercial Roads and Freeways in Special Area Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. No less than 75% of the width of the sign shall be in contact with the ground. For all signs between six and 12 feet in height, a two-foot high stone, stucco, or brick base shall be required; where a different masonry material is used on the primary structure, the zoning administrator may approve the same to be used on the base. For all signs having a height of greater than 12 feet, a three-foot high stone, stucco, or brick base shall be required; where a different masonry material is used on the primary structure, the zoning administrator may approve the same to be used on the base. The base height shall be no more than 1/3 of the total sign height. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 105 mph or greater for any monument sign greater than four (4) feet in height and up to 10 feet in height. Signs greater than 10 feet in height shall demonstrate a windload of 115 mph or greater. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Freestanding cabinet signs shall have a surround around the cabinet, and the cabinet shall be flush with or inset from sign surround but may accommodate a two (2) inch retainer and service disconnect switch where necessary. Cabinet signs made entirely of metal are exempt from the requirement to provide a surround. Materials Wood that is painted or sealed, painted or enameled metal, stone, brick, simulated stone, stucco, plastics and/or a combination thereof. Plastics or similar material of any kind are prohibited as a component of the sign structure for any monument sign. All non-rigid plastics shall have a minimum five (5) year warranty and are only permitted on the face of a cabinet sign. Alternate materials that resemble permitted materials or match the materials on the primary structure may be considered by the zoning administrator. Plastics of any kind shall not be visible in OS and DT special areas. Lighting External illumination and illumination by halation shall be permitted. Internal illumination shall be allowed with the following exceptions. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited on neighborhood roadways except individual letters or routed cabinets with an opaque background with only the items of information lit or translucent. In special areas, internal illumination shall be prohibited. All internal lighting shall have concealed conduits. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) EMCs shall display text only for up to 1/3 of the sign display area, except that fuel station pricers, community services, schools, and places of worship may utilize 50% of the total sign display area. EMCs shall not be allowed on neighborhood roads or in OS and DT special areas with the exception of use for community services, schools, places of worship, and fuel station pricers.  
Low-Profile Sign Site Criteria For a lot that is five acres or more. Number and Spacing of Signs Low-profile signs shall be permitted in addition to a monument or pylon sign where there is a minimum of 200 feet of contiguous lot frontage without another freestanding sign. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial
Road Neighborhood
Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 40 25 N/A N/A Maximum Height 6' 6' N/A N/A Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. One hundred percent of the width of the sign shall be in contact with the ground. A one-foot high stone, stucco or brick base shall be required. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 105 mph or greater for any low-profile sign greater than four (4) feet in height. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Freestanding cabinet signs shall have a surround around the cabinet, and the cabinet shall be flush with or inset from sign surround but may accommodate a two (2) inch retainer and service disconnect switch where necessary. Building address shall not be computed as part of the sign display area. Cabinet signs made entirely of metal are exempt from the requirement to provide a surround. Materials Wood that is painted or sealed, painted or enameled metal, stone, brick, simulated stone, stucco, plastics and/or a combination thereof. Where an alternate material is approved for a monument sign, the same material may be used for a low profile sign. Lighting External illumination, internal illumination, and illumination by halation shall be permitted. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited.  
(h)  Sign standards for pylon signs. 
Pylon: On a Lot Less Than Five Acres Site Criteria For a lot on a freeway that is less than five acres or for a sign on a commercial road within 500 feet of the main lanes of a freeway. Minimum of 50 linear feet of occupant frontage required. Number and Spacing of Signs One per site in lieu of another allowable freestanding sign. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial Road Neighborhood
Road Special Area -
OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 120 0 or 100 if sign is entirely within 500 ft. of the main lanes of a freeway 0 0 Maximum Height 50' 0 or 50 ft. if sign is entirely within 500 ft. of the main lanes of a freeway. 0 0 Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. Two poles shall be required for new pylon signs displaying items of information for more than one occupant. Existing pylon signs with only one pole are not required to add a second pole. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 115 mph or greater for any pylon sign greater than four (4) feet in height. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Cabinet signs shall be flush with or inset from sign surround but may accommodate a two (2) inch retainer and service disconnect switch where necessary. Building address shall not be computed as part of the sign display area. Materials Wood that is painted or sealed, painted or enameled metal, stone, brick, simulated stone, stucco, plastics and/or a combination thereof. All non-rigid plastics shall have a minimum five (5) year warranty and are only permitted on the face of a cabinet sign. Plastics of any kind shall not be visible in OS and DT special areas. Lighting External illumination, internal illumination, and illumination by halation shall be permitted. All internal lighting shall have concealed conduits. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Up to 50 percent of the sign display area may be an EMC.  
Pylon: On a Lot of Five Acres or More Site Criteria For lots of five acres or more on a Freeway or for a sign on a commercial road within 500 feet of the main lanes of a freeway. Minimum of 50 linear feet of occupant frontage required. Number and Spacing of Signs One per frontage permitted every 400 feet with additional monument signs allowed. Total number of signs shall not exceed total number of driveway entrances on the site. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial Road Neighborhood Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 200 0 or 100 if sign is entirely within 500 ft. of the main lanes of a freeway 0 0 Maximum Height 50' 0 or 50 ft. if sign is entirely within 500 ft. of the main lanes of a freeway 0 0 Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. Two poles shall be required for new pylon signs displaying items of information for more than one occupant. Existing pylon signs with only one pole are not required to add a second pole. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 115 mph or greater for any pylon sign greater than four (4) feet in height. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Cabinet signs shall be flush with or inset from sign surround but may accommodate a two (2) inch retainer and service disconnect switch where necessary. Building address shall not be computed as part of the sign display area. Materials Wood that is painted or sealed, painted or enameled metal, stone, brick, simulated stone, stucco, plastics and/or a combination thereof. All non-rigid plastics shall have a minimum five (5) year warranty and are only permitted on the face of a cabinet sign. Plastics of any kind shall not be visible in OS and DT special areas. Lighting External illumination, internal illumination, or illumination by halation shall be permitted. All internal lighting shall have concealed conduits. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Up to 50 percent of the sign display area may be an EMC.  
(i)  Sign standards for pillar signs. 
Pillar Site Criteria For a single occupant on one or more lots with frontage on a Freeway or Commercial Road. Number and Spacing of Signs One may be used in lieu of a permitted monument or pylon sign. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial Road Neighborhood Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 120 48 0 0 Maximum Height 21' 12' 0 0 Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. The entire sign structure shall be considered as sign display area. The entire base of sign shall be in contact with the ground and the sign structure, which includes the sign display area within its shape, shall be a continuous shape from the bottom to the top of the sign. The width of the sign shall be no more than 1/3 of the measurement of its height. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 105 mph or greater for any pillar sign greater than four (4) feet in height and up to 10 feet in height. Signs greater than 10 feet in height shall demonstrate a windload of 115 mph or greater. Sign Display Area Items of information shall be surrounded by a margin of ten percent of the smaller dimension of the sign display area of any panel contained in a freestanding sign. Building address shall not be computed as part of the sign display area. Materials Painted or enameled metal, plastic or masonry. Lighting External illumination or internal illumination shall be permitted. All internal illumination shall have concealed conduits. All external lighting sources shall be shielded from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited  
(j)  Sign standards for post/panel signs. 
Post/Panel Site Criteria Shall be permitted in lieu of a monument sign. Number and Spacing of Signs One per lot in lieu of a monument sign. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial Road Neighborhood Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area N/A 16 16 16 Maximum Height N/A 6' 6' 6' Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. The clearance of the sign from the finished grade to the bottom of the sign display area shall be no greater than four feet. Sign shall be supported by two freestanding posts so that the bottom edge of the sign face is not in direct contact with the ground. The width of a sign's supports shall be the same from the ground to the top of the sign and shall be an integral part of the design of the entire sign. No portion of the sign display area shall extend beyond a sign's panel. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a windload of 105 mph or greater for any post/panel sign greater than four (4) feet in height and up to 10 feet in height. Signs greater than 10 feet in height shall demonstrate a windload of 115 mph or greater. Sign Display Area One (1) panel shall be permitted per occupant plus one (1) additional panel. The entire panel shall be considered to be the sign display area, and the total square footage for all panels shall not exceed the maximum square footage of sign display area. Items of information shall be kept outside a margin measured as ten percent of the smallest dimension of the panel. Materials Posts shall be greater in thickness than the width of the sign display area and be made from painted or sealed wood/composite wood material, painted or enameled metal, stone or brick. Sign display area shall be made of wood/composite wood material that is painted or sealed, or painted or enameled metal. Lighting Only shielded external illumination shall be permitted. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited  
(k)  Sign standards for armature signs. 
Armature Site Criteria Shall be permitted in lieu of a monument sign except for on freeways. Sign shall be cantilevered from one post so that the bottom edge of the sign face is not in direct contact with the ground. The sign's supports shall be an integral part of the design of the entire sign. No portion of the sign display area shall extend beyond the sign's panel. Number and Spacing of Signs One per lot in lieu of a monument sign. Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area Freeway Commercial Road Neighborhood Road Special Area - OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area N/A 16 16 16 Maximum Height N/A 8' 6' 6' Sign Structure Requirements - Bases, Caps, Proportion, etc. The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a wind load of 105 mph or greater for any armature sign greater than four (4) feet in height. Sign Display Area The entire panel shall be considered to be the sign display area. Items of information shall be kept outside a margin measured as ten percent of the smallest dimension of the panel. Materials Posts shall be made from painted or sealed wood/composite wood material or painted or enameled metal. Sign display area shall be made of wood/composite wood material that is painted or sealed, or painted or enameled metal. Lighting Only shielded external illumination shall be permitted. Electronic Messaging Center (EMC) Prohibited  
Sec. 8-79. - Special purpose freestanding sign standards. 
(a)  Sandwich boards. 
(1)  Business uses (as defined in Sec. 1-50) shall be permitted one sandwich board. 
(2)  Sandwich boards shall have a maximum width of 30 inches and a maximum height of 48 inches. 
(3)  Sandwich boards shall be freestanding and shall not be affixed, chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or other structure. The sign shall be internally weighted so that it is stable, self-supporting and windproof. 
(4)  The sandwich board shall be displayed only during the hours of operation of the business. 
(5)  Sandwich boards shall not be a cabinet. 
(6)  Changeable copy on a sandwich board shall not consist of individual plastic or vinyl letters on tracks. 
(7)  The following standards shall be followed when determining the placement of sandwich boards: 
a.  Signs shall be placed in such a manner that they do not interfere with pedestrian traffic, wheelchair ramps, or otherwise cause a safety hazard. Placement on a sidewalk or other improved surface is required, when available; 
b.  When placed on a public sidewalk or sidewalk required for ADA accessibility, ensure that there is a minimum of 48 inches of clear sidewalk; 
c.  Signs shall be placed in such a manner that they do not obscure or interfere with the function of windows or doors; 
d.  Signs shall not be located within five feet of the corner of a building that is at the intersection of two public streets; 
e.  Signs shall only be permitted in the city's right-of-way on sites where there is 10 feet or fewer between a building's front façade and the property line, and a license agreement shall be required. A license agreement may be issued as part of a sidewalk furniture license agreement. 
(b)  Directional signs. Directional signs are allowed without limitation as to the number of signs on a site and may be up to six (6) square feet each and up to six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  Light pole-mounted banners. Light pole-mounted banners shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Each banner shall be limited to no more than 12 square feet in size. 
(2)  There shall be no more than two light pole-mounted banners on each pole. 
(3)  The banners shall be placed on fixtures that are purposefully designed for the pole. 
(4)  The minimum clearance of the banner shall be ten feet as measured from the adjacent grade to the bottom of the banner. 
(5)  The banners shall be maintained in good repair and shall be replaced or removed if they become tattered or torn. 
(6)  The banners shall not be illuminated, except for indirect lighting associated with the main lamp of the pole to which they are mounted. 
(7)  The banners shall be limited to cloth, flexible plastic, vinyl, or similar material. 
(8)  No permit shall be required to display light pole-mounted banners. 
(9)  The banners shall not be displayed in OS and DT special areas, unless a comprehensive plan for the banners is approved by the city. 
(d)  Freestanding signs for temporary occupants of a business use . For freestanding signs for temporary occupants, one (1) sign may be permitted per occupant for a business use that is leasing a space for seasonal or similarly temporary use. The sign shall be no larger than the square foot limit allowed for a freestanding sign on a designated roadway; however, the material may include a decal applied to an existing freestanding sign panel. The sign shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 120 days. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0081, § I, 2-14-2019) 
Sec. 8-80. - Sign maintenance standards. 
(a)  The property owner/occupant shall maintain the sign in a condition appropriate to its intended use and to all city standards, and has a continuing obligation to comply with all building code requirements. It shall be a violation of this section if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Elements of the sign have portions of the finished material missing, broken or otherwise illegible. 
(2)  Any elements of the sign are inoperable, bent, twisted, dented, cracked, splintered, torn, sagging, faded, or leaning at angles other than those at which it was originally erected. 
(3)  The sign is partially disassembled. 
(b)  The sign display area must display information that is current or a blank sign panel must be installed. 
(c)  If the sign is deemed by the city to be in an unsafe condition, the owner/occupant of the business shall be notified in writing, and shall, within 48 hours of receipt of such notification, respond to the city with a plan to correct the unsafe condition, remove the unsafe sign, or cause it to be removed. If after ten days, the unsafe condition has not been corrected through repair or removal, the city may refer the matter to the building official as an unsafe structure to be remedied in accordance with Chapter 8, article X, division 3. 
(d)  Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these regulations, is required to be repaired, repainted, refinished or cleaned, the same may be done without a permit or without any payment of fees provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The sign is not being refaced to display a new occupant, replace a panel or display new items of information; 
(2)  There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or the mounting of the sign itself; 
(3)  There is no enlargement or increase in any of the dimensions of the sign or its structure; and 
(4)  The sign is accessory to a legally permitted, conditional or nonconforming use. 
Sec. 8-81. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  All signs not expressly authorized by this chapter, are prohibited. Prohibited signs include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Off-premises signs unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter. 
(2)  Cabinet signs mounted on buildings. 
(3)  Abandoned signs, with the exception of freestanding signs where items of information shall be removed and the sign display area left so that it does not indicate the former use. 
(4)  Billboard signs. 
(5)  Animated signs. 
(6)  Roof-mounted signs. 
(7)  Inflatable signs. 
(8)  Swooper flags containing any message. 
(9)  Festoons, tethered balloons, pennants, searchlights, streamers, and any clearly similar attention getting features or devices. 
(10)  Portable signs with the exception of sandwich boards. Signs on vehicles or trailers shall be prohibited when the vehicle/trailer is placed in a location not normally expected for such vehicles, and the location apparently has the primary purpose of advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located in the same or nearby property or any other premises. This shall not be interpreted to prohibit "For Sale" or similar signs being placed on vehicles or trailers. 
(11)  Signs containing any words or symbols that would cause confusion because of their resemblance to highway traffic control or direction signals. 
(12)  Merchandise, equipment, products, vehicles or other items which are not available for purchase or rental, but are intended to attract attention, or for identification or advertising purposes. 
(13)  Signs attached to or being held by a human for the purpose of advertising a commercial message for a business use. 
(14)  Signs, posters or outdoor advertising, except as expressly permitted, placed in the public right-of-way or attached to any public property, including but not limited to, electric utility poles, fire hydrants, meters, and public facilities. 
(15)  Signs in locations that interfere with safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation or public safety signals and signs. 
(16)  Signs erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening used as a means of egress. 
(17)  Signs with exposed light bulbs. 
(18)  Bandit signs. 
(19)  Signs attached to a visibly inoperable vehicle. 
Sec. 8-82. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  When Sec. 2-98 requires that a nonconforming building or structure be brought into compliance, all nonconforming signs shall also be removed or brought into compliance with all provisions of the Code. 
(b)  Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition pursuant to Sec. 8-80. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, modified or reconstructed except: 
(1)  When such alteration, modification or reconstruction would bring such sign into conformity with these regulations; 
(2)  When the occupant information changes on an existing freestanding sign without changes to materials or display method; 
(3)  Where a nonconforming sign has been damaged or destroyed to an extent that is less than 50 percent of its fair market value; 
(4)  Continued use of a nonconforming sign with a proposed alteration that would not otherwise be permitted for a nonconforming sign may be requested if the following findings exist: 
a.  The sign is located in a multi-occupant center; and 
b.  The sign is installed in a location that would be allowed by this chapter. 
(d)  A parcel of land on which a nonconforming sign is located may be subdivided or platted without removing the nonconforming sign. However, after the parcel is subdivided, the nonconforming sign must be removed or brought into compliance with all provisions of this Code, prior to the issuance of any further building or development permits on the subdivided lot that contains the nonconforming sign. 
(e)  Appeals of nonconforming sign decisions shall be heard by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(f)  A nonconforming sign shall be removed or made to conform to all regulations in this chapter upon verification that the nonconforming sign has been damaged or destroyed to an extent greater than 50 percent of its fair market value. 
Sec. 8-83. - Sign permitting, fees, review procedures and enforcement. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as provided in the table below, no sign shall be attached, erected or otherwise constructed until all necessary permits are issued by the city. Where a permit is not required for a specific sign type, said sign shall meet all applicable standards. A permit shall be required for the re-facing of any sign in the left column in the table. Re-facing shall be defined as the replacement of the contents within an existing cabinet or other existing sign-related frame structure. Re-facing is used to repair or freshen the look of an existing sign and to change out cabinet panels to match new tenant graphics. Minor changes, such as changing the color of a frame or other structural element, shall not force compliance with this code. Major changes, such as a new cabinet or modifications to a structural element beyond a change in color, shall be in compliance with this code. 
Sign Permit Requirements Table 
Sign Permit Required 
Wall Sign 
Hanging/Projecting Signs 
Awning/Canopy Signs 
Fascia Mounted Signs 
Monument Signs 
Low-Profile Signs 
Pylon Signs 
Pillar Signs 
Post/Panel Signs 
Armature Signs Vehicle Service Canopy Signs 
Parking Garage Signs 
Area Identification Signs 
Banners 
Building Scrim Sign 
Building Signs for Temporary Occupants of a Business Use 
Freestanding Signs for Temporary Occupants of a Business Use 
Subdivision Marketing Signs 
Model Home Complex Signs 
Coming Soon Signs (100 acres or larger) 
Neighborhood Information Kiosks 
Sign Permit Not Required 
Window Signs 
Sandwich Boards 
Directional Signs 
Light Pole Mounted Banners 
Promotional Signs (special event permit may be required, which includes sign review) 
Model Home Signs 
Business Use Marketing Signs 
Building Construction Signs 
Coming Soon Signs (less than 100 acres) 
Open House Signs (Open House License Agreement required. See Sec. 8-86(g)) 
Directory Signs 
Home Occupation Signs 
Garage/Yard Sale Signs 
Single-Family and Two-Family Marketing Signs 
Incidental Signs 
Regulatory Signs 
Neighborhood Event Signs 
Political Campaign Signs 
(b)  Fees. All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee(s) as set forth in appendix A of the Round Rock Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Permission of property owner. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained upon any property or building without the consent of the owner, the person entitled to possession of the property or building, if any, or their authorized representative. 
(d)  Permit application review. 
(1)  The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the city to verify compliance with all applicable laws. 
a.  Applicants for a permit to install an electrical sign shall maintain the appropriate State of Texas electrical sign contractor's license or an electrical contractor's license. 
(2)  For signs located in original settlement (OS) special areas identified in this chapter, the following shall be considered in the review and approval of a sign permit application: 
a.  The design of signs shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding area and other conforming signs. 
b.  The materials used in the construction of the sign shall be the same or similar to those found in the construction of the city's historic districts and historic landmarks in the area. 
c.  Wherever possible, colors from historic palettes shall be used. 
d.  Signs shall not cover, obstruct, damage or otherwise adversely affect the building's salient architectural or historic features. 
e.  The painting or otherwise coating of previously unpainted masonry surfaces requires a Certificate of Appropriateness for property designated as an historic landmark or in the historic district. 
(3)  A comprehensive sign plan (CSP) may be submitted that considers unique conditions, flexibility and creativity. Such CSP is subject to approval by city staff. 
(4)  A CSP shall be required for a planned unit development and is subject to approval by the city council. Once a CSP has been approved, subsequent applications for specific signs shall be approved administratively for compliance with the approved CSP. 
(e)  Permit issuance. 
(1)  Approved plans. Approved plans associated with a permit application shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the city, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
(2)  Validity of permit. If the work authorized by a permit issued under this chapter has not been commenced within 180 days after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(3)  Suspension or revocation. The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit under the provisions of this chapter when the permit is issued in error, is based on incorrect information supplied or is a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Round Rock or laws of the State of Texas or the federal government. Any signs installed under a revoked permit shall be removed within ten days of written notice of the revocation. 
(f)  Inspections. 
(1)  General. All signs for which a sign permit is required shall be subject to inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to be accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. The city shall not be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. The permit and approved plans are to be available and accessible at the job site for all inspections. 
(2)  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the city that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request a final inspection upon completion of installation of any sign requiring a permit. 
(3)  Approval required. No work shall be done on any part of the structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining approval. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction. 
(g)  Appeals. 
(1)  The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Appeals shall be filed no later than ten business days from the final action on a sign permit. 
(3)  The decisions of the zoning board of adjustment shall be final. Any appeal of the ZBA shall be subject to court review as prescribed by law. 
(h)  Removal of signs in a prohibited area. 
(1)  Any sign found within a prohibited area is hereby declared to be illegal and may be removed by the city. 
(2)  Any sign removed by the city shall immediately become the property of the city. 
(3)  The removal of any sign by the city shall not preclude the city from prosecuting any person for violating this subsection. 
Sec. 8-84. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Owners of signs which do not strictly comply with the terms of this chapter may seek an approval as an exception from the zoning board of adjustment. 
(1)  The following shall be considered in the review of a permit application for an exception for a sign: 
a.  The existence of specific site opportunities or constraints. 
b.  Consideration for novelty signs or signs that have a structure that does not conform to freestanding sign types or building sign types listed in Secs. 8-76 and 8-48. 
c.  Situations where a sign's view is obscured by building setbacks, surrounding buildings, existing trees or elevated roadways. 
d.  New and/or innovative concept in sign manufacturing which are not specifically addressed in this chapter. 
(2)  In order for an exception to the sign regulations to be approved, the zoning board of adjustment shall find that: 
a.  There are no associated vehicular safety issues that would result from the location of the sign. 
b.  The sign is compatible with the surrounding development. 
c.  The sign does not result in reduced compliance with regulations in other chapters of the city Code. 
d.  The sign's location meets the requirements pertaining to easements in this chapter. 
e.  The exception is not being used to allow a sign type that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter, with the exception of those meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b or (1)d, above. 
Sec. 8-85. - Area identification and entry feature signs. 
(a)  For the purpose of area identification, an area identification sign or entry feature sign is permitted provided it meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Area identification signs and entry feature signs shall be limited to the following uses: Identification of a residential subdivision, a multi-occupant center with ten or more acres, mixed-use districts developed as one development, universities, business parks, or similar developments with multiple buildings. 
(2)  Signs shall not contain any other form of advertising, and shall identify only the name of the subdivision, district or development. 
(3)  The sign shall be constructed of stone, brick or metal with a stone or brick base. The base shall constitute a minimum of 20% of the total allowable sign height, with no less than 75% of the width of the sign in contact with the ground. No plastics shall be permitted for any portion of the sign. 
(4)  The sign may be located at an off-premises location adjacent to a commercial roadway to identify the primary entrance to the area. 
(5)  A sign located in the sight visibility triangle shall be no more than three feet in height. 
(6)  Only shielded external illumination and illumination by halation shall be permitted. No internal illumination shall be permitted. 
(7)  EMCs shall be prohibited. 
(8)  One sign shall be permitted for each main entrance to a development. If the entry signage is designed to appear as one unit that is divided by the roadway at a main entrance to a residential subdivision, it may be considered as one sign in compliance with this section, provided that the total sign display area of the signage does not exceed the allowable maximum sign display area for the road type. In lieu of a sign at a main entrance, a sign may be placed in conjunction with another prominent decorative feature within the area. The decorative feature shall not be required to meet the maximum height requirement provided in the table below. 
(9)  The sign is prohibited in the public right-of-way unless approved in writing by the city. 
(10)  The sign size shall be as follows: 
Area Identification and Entry Feature Signs Sign Size By Road Type or Special Area   Freeway Commercial 
Road Neighborhood 
Road Special Area - 
OS; DT Max. Sq. Ft. of sign display area 100 or 200 100 75 50 Maximum Height 10' 6' 5' 5'  
(11)  The maximum sign display area for area identification and entry feature signs on freeways shall be 100 square feet, with the exception of mixed-use and nonresidential areas with a total area of greater than 50 acres which may have signs that are up to 200 square feet. 
(12)  The applicant shall be required to provide a structural drawing completed by an engineer demonstrating a wind load of 105 mph or greater for any area identification/entry feature sign greater than four (4) feet in height, 
Sec. 8-86. - Real estate marketing signs. 
(a)  Subdivision marketing. For the purpose of marketing lots within a recorded subdivision, one on-premises sign of not more than 256 square feet for each road abutting the respective subdivision shall be allowed, provided that such sign shall not exceed 30 feet in height. 
(b)  Model home signs. Model home signs shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Each model home complex shall be permitted one freestanding sign and each individual model home shall be permitted one freestanding sign or one wall sign located on the site of a model home. 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall require a permit. Model home wall signs shall not require a permit. 
(3)  Freestanding model home signs shall be a monument, pedestal, armature or post/panel sign. 
(4)  Each model home sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign display area and five feet in height. 
(5)  Model home complex freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of ten feet from street property lines. 
(c)  Single-family and two-family marketing. In areas zoned SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, or TF, for the purposes of marketing a building for sale or lease, one on-premises sign of not more than four square feet shall be allowed. No permit shall be required for such sign. 
(d)  Business use real estate marketing sign. For the purpose of marketing a building or portion thereof, for sale or lease, on a site with commercial, office, business park, industrial or multifamily uses, one on-premises real estate marketing sign shall be allowed. No permit shall be required for such sign(s). The size of a real estate marketing sign shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  On a zoned lot of less than one acre. On a site of less than one acre, the display area of a real estate marketing sign shall not exceed 16 square feet and eight feet in height. 
(2)  On a site of one acre or more, the display area of a real estate marketing sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and eight feet in height. 
(3)  On a site for new construction or major renovation on three acres or more one on-premises real estate marketing sign shall be allowed. Such sign shall have a sign display area of more than 128 square feet and a height of not more than 16 feet. The sign must be removed after two years or when 80% percent of all buildings on the site have been sold or leased, as measured by gross floor area, whichever occurs first. The time period for the sign will begin when the first building permit is issued. After the 128 square foot sign is removed, it may be replaced by a 32 square foot sign. Any freestanding sign greater than 32 square feet shall be constructed of a rigid material and shall not be a banner. 
(e)  Building construction sign. During construction of a business use, one non-illuminated building construction sign per frontage advertising contractors or architects working on such premises shall be permitted in addition to real estate marketing signs permitted in this subsection. Such sign(s) shall not be more than 32 square feet in area and shall be set back at least ten feet from the front property line. Such sign(s) shall be removed immediately upon the completion of the building. 
(f)  Coming soon sign . 
(1)  During construction of a business use that is on a site that is less than five (5) acres, one non-illuminated post and panel sign per frontage advertising that one or more businesses will open soon shall be permitted in addition to real estate marketing signs permitted in this subsection. Such sign shall be made of a rigid material, have a sign display area of not more than 32 square feet, and shall be no more than six (6) feet tall. 
(2)  During construction of a business use that is on a site that is at least five (5) acres but less than 100 acres, one non-illuminated sign per frontage advertising that one or more businesses will open soon shall be permitted in addition to real estate marketing signs permitted in this subsection. Such sign shall be made of a rigid material, have a sign display area of not more than 64 square feet, and shall be no more than 10 feet tall. 
(3)  During construction of a business use that is on a site that is 100 acres or larger, two (2) signs per frontage advertising that a business will open soon shall be permitted in addition to real estate marketing signs permitted in this subsection. Materials and illumination shall be approved by the zoning administrator. Such signs shall have a sign display area of not more than 256 square feet each and shall be no more than 30 feet tall. 
(4)  Coming soon signs shall be removed prior to the installation of permanent signs. 
(g)  Open house sign . Open house signs shall be permitted in certain city rights-of-way in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  License agreement required . Real estate agents, brokers, or homeowners desiring to place open house signs shall obtain a license agreement from the city prior to placing any such signs. 
a.  License stickers. For each license purchased, the licensee will be issued a sticker which shall be placed on the open house sign. Each open house sign placed in a right-of-way must have attached thereto a sticker issued in accordance with the license agreement. 
b.  Condition of signs . The licensee agrees each open house sign will be in good condition and to immediately replace any unsightly or damaged sign as requested by the city. 
c.  Term of license. Unless terminated sooner, each license shall expire one year after the date on which it was obtained. 
d.  Termination at will. It is agreed and fully understood by licensee that the city may terminate the license at will by giving the licensee actual oral or written notice. If the license is terminated at will by the city all signs shall be immediately removed by the licensee. Any signs not removed within three (3) hours of said notice shall become the property of the city. The licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees paid. 
e.  Indemnification. The licensee agrees to hold harmless, defend, and indemnify the city for and from any third party claim or liability (including reasonable defense costs and attorneys' fees) to the extent arising from the licensee's exercise of the license under the agreement. 
f.  Fees. In consideration for the license, the licensee shall pay to the city license fees for each open house sign as set forth in Appendix A: Fees. 
g.  Miscellaneous provisions. 
1.  Compliance with laws. The licensee shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws, the Charter and Ordinances of the city, as amended. 
2.  Non-assignable. The licensee agrees that the license granted by the agreement is personal to the licensee. It is not assignable, and any attempt to assign the license will terminate the license. 
3.  Notices. All notices and other communications in connection with each agreement shall be in writing and shall be considered given as follows: 
i.  When delivered personally to the recipient's address as stated in the agreement; or 
ii.  Three (3) days after being deposited in the United States mail, with postage prepaid to the licensee. 
(2)  Sign placement requirements. Subject to the terms and conditions contained within each agreement, for each residence offered for sale, the licensee shall have the right to place one open house sign on city property at the locations and times specified below: 
a.  Location. In the city-owned or controlled public rights-of-way that is also within 75 feet of the center point of the intersection of any city controlled local street or collector and the following city controlled arterial roadways: 
A.W. Grimes Blvd. 
Bowman Rd. 
University Blvd. 
County Road 112 
Creek Bend Blvd. 
Double Creek Dr. 
Forest Creek Dr. (west of Red Bud Lane (C.R. 122) only) 
Gattis School Rd. 
Greenlawn Blvd. (south of Gattis School Road only) 
Hesters Crossing Rd. 
High Country Blvd. 
McNeil Rd. 
Old Settlers Blvd. (east of Mays Street only) 
Red Bud Ln. (C.R. 122) 
Sam Bass Rd. 
Sunrise Rd. 
Wyoming Springs Dr. 
Open house signs shall not be placed at any intersection of any two of the above-listed arterials or at the intersection of any state or federal highway and any of the above listed arterials. 
b.  Date and time. On Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. 
c.  Number. Except as specifically provided within an agreement, the licensee shall place only one open house sign at any of the above-described locations. If the licensee has more than one property offered for sale for which the licensee is conducting an open house, the licensee may place more than one open house sign at any of the above-described locations, provided that each such open house sign shall show the address of the property offered for sale. 
(3)  Sign contents. An open house sign shall contain only the following information: 
a.  The words "Open House"; 
b.  The words "For Sale by Owner" or the real estate agent's name and/or logo; 
c.  The address of the open house; and 
d.  A directional arrow. 
Sec. 8-87. - Promotional signs. 
(a)  Promotional signs shall be allowed if they comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Promotional signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area; 
(2)  Promotional signs are limited to only one per street frontage; 
(3)  Promotional signs shall be posted no more than 30 days prior to the event and shall be removed within seven days after the event. 
(4)  Any promotional sign placed in or over a street or public right-of-way shall require the approval of the city. 
(5)  One (1) promotional sign may be installed in conjunction with a monument sign by a means specifically designated and integrated into the sign structure for the purpose of displaying a banner. The portion of the promotional sign area identified on the monument sign shall not count towards the maximum allowable sign display area for that monument sign. The banner location shall be identified in the permit drawings for the monument sign. 
Sec. 8-88. - Neighborhood event signs. 
(a)  Neighborhood event signs shall be allowed only if they comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Neighborhood event signs shall not exceed six square feet in area; 
(2)  Neighborhood event signs shall not exceed four feet in height; 
(3)  Neighborhood event signs shall be posted no more than seven days prior to the event and shall be removed within three days after the event; and 
(4)  Neighborhood event signs shall be posted only on private property adjacent to neighborhood roads and within the boundaries of the neighborhood holding or sponsoring the event. 
Sec. 8-89. - Neighborhood information kiosks. 
(a)  Neighborhood information kiosks shall be allowed only if they comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  The sign display area of the kiosk shall not exceed 40 square feet in area; 
(2)  The kiosk shall not exceed seven feet in height; 
(3)  The kiosk shall be constructed only of stone, brick, metal or wood, except that plexiglass may be used to protect the display area; 
(4)  The kiosk shall be placed either on property owned by the homeowners association or neighborhood association or on public property pursuant to a license agreement approved by the city council or city manager; 
(5)  The kiosk shall not be attached to an area identification sign; 
(6)  The kiosk shall not contain any commercial advertising other than the name and address of the sponsor of the kiosk; 
(7)  The kiosk shall contain the contact information of the homeowners association or neighborhood association; 
(8)  The kiosk shall be illuminated only by shielded external illumination; 
(9)  EMC's are prohibited on kiosks; and 
(10)  A permit pursuant to Sec. 8-83 shall be required before a kiosk is constructed. 
Sec. 8-90. - Garage/yard sale signs. 
    Garage/yard sale signs are permitted only on private property on which the garage/yard sale is being conducted. Such signs are permitted no more than 24 hours prior to a sale and must be removed immediately after such sale. 
Sec. 8-91. - Political campaign signs. 
(a)  Political campaign signs located on private property are exempt from the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to post a political campaign sign on or over any public property in the city. 
(c)  A political campaign sign is permitted in the public street right-of-way only if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The sign does not exceed four square feet in total sign display area; 
(2)  The sign is located in a portion of the public street right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property or residence owned or occupied by the person posting or consenting to the posting of the sign; 
(3)  The sign does not interfere with the public's use of the roadway or sidewalk; 
(4)  The sign must not be higher than three feet if it is located within the sight visibility triangle; and 
(5)  The sign is not located in the right-of way of a highway or commercial road. This exception does not include state highways per V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 392.032. 
(d)  In a campaign for political office, the candidate for such office shall be deemed the person responsible for the posting of political campaign signs, unless he first notifies the city clerk of another person who is responsible. In such cases, the candidate shall provide the name, address, telephone number, and signed consent of such other responsible person. In a campaign regarding a ballot measure, the president of the committee supporting or opposing such ballot measure shall be deemed responsible, unless he first notifies the city clerk of another person responsible, in the manner described above. Such candidate, committee president, or other designated person shall be subject to prosecution for any violation of this section. 
(e)  Members of the city staff are hereby authorized and directed to remove any political campaign sign found posted within the corporate limits of the city when such sign is in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  All political campaign signs posted on public property in violation of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be abated as such by the city. All political campaign signs posted on public property shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of at the discretion of the city. 
Secs. 8-92-8-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 8-100. - International Existing Building Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Existing Building Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-101. - Amendments to the International Existing Building Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Existing Building Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 1401.2. Inserted: January 1, 2007. 
Sec. 8-102. - International Building Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Building Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Building Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-103. - Amendments to the International Building Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Building Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 1612.3. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(3)  Section 1612.3. Inserted: of most current date. 
Sec. 8-104. - International Residential Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Residential Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-105. - Amendments to the International Residential Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Residential Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section R101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
Sec. 8-106. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees for the building codes adopted in this division shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
Sec. 8-107. - Proof of liability and workers' compensation insurance required prior to obtaining permit. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity which is required to secure a permit from or the consent of any administrative department within the corporate structure of the city prior to commencing any construction, repair, work, labor or service shall be required to furnish the appropriate department head having the authority to issue said permit, or the authority to give the necessary consent, valid certificates of insurance evidencing therein that said person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity has in full force and effect a valid policy of public liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance, to be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state. The public liability insurance policy shall provide liability insurance in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and the workers' compensation insurance policy shall be in an amount not less than the minimum coverage required by the statutes of the state. 
Sec. 8-108. - Trench safety regulations. 
    All construction projects within the incorporated limits or the extraterritorial limits of the city in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet shall include in all contracts and bid documents detailed plans and specifications for trench safety systems. Said systems shall meet Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and a separate pay item shall be included in the plans and specifications for these systems. 
Sec. 8-109. - Conditions for issuance of building permits for residential construction in new subdivisions. 
(a)  Model Homes . Building permit(s) for up to four Model Homes per Final Plat may be issued when the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  All applicable permits have been issued; 
(2)  All water mains providing service to the subdivision section in which the lot is located have been constructed, installed, and connected to the city's water system by the developer and inspected, tested, and approved by the city; 
(3)  All on-site wastewater mains providing service to the subdivision section in which the lot is located have been constructed and installed by the developer and inspected, tested, and approved by the city; 
(4)  All off-site wastewater mains providing service to the subdivision section in which the lot is located have been constructed, installed, and connected to the city's wastewater system by the developer and inspected, tested, and approved by the city; 
(5)  All streets, curbs, and gutters, required by this Code have been installed and inspected by the city; 
(6)  Staff review has been completed; and 
(7)  All necessary fees have been paid. 
As used herein, Model Home means a housing unit typical of the styles available for sale in a particular subdivision but used for display and sales only. No more than four models shall be permitted for any Final Plat. 
(b)  Initial Homes . Building permit(s) for up to twenty-six Initial Homes per Final Plat, or up to 50 percent of the homes in a Final Plat containing fewer than twenty-six homes, may be issued when the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  All applicable permits have been issued; 
(2)  The developer has been issued a Certificate of Substantial Completion for the Final Plat in accordance with Sec. 4-99; 
(3)  Staff review has been completed; and 
(4)  All necessary fees have been paid. 
As used herein, Initial Homes means a housing unit that may be permitted before a Certificate of Acceptance has been issued for the Final Plat. 
(c)  Other Homes . Building permit(s) for Other Homes may be issued when the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  All applicable permits have been issued; 
(2)  The developer has been issued a Certificate of Acceptance for the Final Plat, although exceptions may be made for completion of landscaping if a bond of the appropriate value is provided; 
(3)  Staff review has been completed; and 
(4)  All necessary fees have been paid. 
As used herein, Other Homes means residential construction other than Model Homes and Initial Homes. 
Sec. 8-110. - Conditions for issuance of building permits for parking lots and access drives. 
(a)  A building permit shall be required for the expansion of existing parking facilities and/or access drives and for the construction of new parking facilities and/or access drives for any existing commercial or industrial use or for a residential use of more than four units. Such permit shall not be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The design of all proposed curb cuts has been accepted by the PDS director and a street cut permit has been issued; 
(2)  The drainage plan has been accepted by the PDS director and all applicable requirements of chapter 4, article VII of this Code have been met; 
(3)  All landscape ordinance requirements have been met and approved by the PDS director; 
(4)  All necessary fees have been paid; and 
(5)  The design of all parking facilities and the location of all access drives have been approved by the PDS director. 
Sec. 8-111. - All principal buildings shall display address that is clearly marked and legible. 
    Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as to be clearly marked and legible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located, with letters painted or applied, of a contrasting color to the background, of not less than 21/2 inches in height. If a building or dwelling is situated in such a way that the numbers cannot be easily seen from the roadway in front of said structure, then a sign or number post must be used in front of the structure and placed in such a way that it can be easily seen from the roadway. 
Sec. 8-112. - Filing of applications. 
(a)  For all applications filed under this article, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Application filed. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, as amended, the rights to which an applicant is entitled shall accrue on the filing of an application that gives the city fair notice of the project and the nature of the permit sought. An application is considered filed on the date the applicant mails by certified mail or delivers the application to the following address: 
City of Round Rock 
Attn: Chief Building Official 
301 West Bagdad Avenue 
Round Rock, TX 78664 
(2)  Expiration of application. An application shall expire 45 days after the date the application is filed if: 
a.  The applicant fails to provide the documents or other information necessary to comply with the city's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the application; 
b.  The city provides the applicant, no later than ten business days after the date the application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
c.  The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the aforesaid 45-day period. 
Sec. 8-113. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any building or structure or portion thereof until the building official of the city has issued either a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to change the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof until the building official of the city has issued a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. 
(3)  For buildings or structures wherein the owner or developer has applied for a building permit, no further application for a certificate of occupancy shall be required. For buildings or structures wherein the owner or developer has not applied for a building permit, a certificate of occupancy shall be applied for in the office of the building official on forms provided by the city. 
(b)  Multi-building projects and phased plans for multi-building projects. 
(1)  Except as provided below, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any building or structure or portion thereof in a multi-building or structure project on a single platted lot until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy for every building or structure in the project. Certificates of occupancy may be issued for separate buildings or structures in a multi-building project on a single platted lot if the owner or developer submits a plan ("phasing plan") as part of the site plan submitted for review and approval to the city's PDS director as provided under Sec. 10-45 of this Code that: 
a.  Requests that the multi-building project ("phased project") be developed and inspected in phases; 
b.  Indicates the specific sequencing of the phasing plan and the number of buildings for each phase; 
c.  Indicates the site improvements showing access, utilities and fire protection for each building and phase; and 
d.  The PDS director approve(s) the phasing plan. 
(2)  Should a developer or owner submit such a phasing plan described above, the last building to be completed in the phased project shall not be occupied until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy for such building and the entire phased project, including all site improvements, is complete. 
(3)  If construction on the phased project ceases before the last building has passed final inspection, and the building permit has expired, the project may be redefined to consist of only those buildings that have passed final inspection, and it shall be unlawful to occupy any building or structure until a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued. Any subsequent construction at the same site shall not occur until appropriately permitted by the building official. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for individual buildings or structures of a multiple building project other than a phased project to be used or occupied until every building in the entire project has been issued a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Issuance. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the following criteria must be met: 
a.  A certificate of zoning compliance, where required, has been issued; 
b.  All fees and costs owed to the city which were generated by or from such building or structure have been paid in full; 
c.  All subdivision improvements required under Chapter 4, Subdivisions, have been accepted by the city as provided for in Chapter 4, article VIII; 
d.  The building or structure has received and passed the final inspection conducted by the building official; 
e.  The site improvements shown in the site development plans (the "plans") approved by the of the PDS director have been completed and have passed all required inspections; 
f.  "As-built" Mylars of the plans have been submitted, reviewed and found satisfactory by the city; 
g.  A letter is submitted, reviewed and found satisfactory by the city certifying that all public and private improvements constructed on the site are in substantial conformance with the plans; 
h.  A final city fire inspection has been conducted and passed; 
i.  The landscaping requirements provided for in Sec. 8-10 have been satisfied; 
j.  A one-year warranty bond in the amount of ten percent of the cost of all public site improvements to be accepted by the city has been submitted and the bond has been reviewed and found satisfactory by the city, or other fiscal arrangements acceptable to the city attorney have been made, guaranteeing the said improvements for one year after acceptance of the improvements by the city. A letter shall accompany the warranty bond certifying the construction costs of the improvements; 
k.  All necessary easements or release of easements have been prepared and/or reviewed, dedicated and recorded; and 
l.  The building official has determined that there are no violations of the provisions of the city's building codes or other laws that are enforced by the building official. 
(2)  Upon meeting the requirements provided for in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
a.  The building permit or application number; 
b.  The address of the building or structure; 
c.  The name and address of the owner; 
d.  A description of that portion of the building or structure for which the certificate is issued; 
e.  A statement that the described portion of the building or structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this Code for the occupancy, division of occupancy and use for which the proposed occupancy is classified; 
f.  The name of the building official; 
g.  The edition of the building code under which the permit was issued; 
h.  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of the building code adopted by the city; 
i.  The type of construction as defined by the building code adopted by the city; 
j.  The design occupant load; 
k.  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required; 
l.  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit; and 
m.  The certificate must be dated and contain the name and signature of the PDS director. 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for the following: 
a.  To occupy a newly constructed building or structure; 
b.  To change the existing occupancy classification of a building, structure or portion thereof from the previous certificate; 
c.  To occupy the interior of a shell that has been finished-out for a specified occupancy; 
d.  To occupy each separate building or structure within a multiple building or structure project or, where multiple buildings are phased together for permit purposes, for all buildings under such permit; and 
e.  To occupy an addition to an existing building or structure. 
(4)  Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as waiving any provisions of the city's ordinances or regulations or state or federal laws or regulations or as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the city's ordinances or regulations or state or federal laws or regulations. 
(5)  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained on file in the office of the building official of the city and copies shall be furnished to citizens in accordance with applicable law. 
(d)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (3) below, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for single-family and two-family occupancies. 
(2)  For all occupancies other than single-family and two-family occupancies, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be considered for issuance by the building official where all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Site construction is substantially complete in conformance with approved plans; 
b.  Any incomplete improvements are not related to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) barrier-free compliance requirements; 
c.  The building official determines that such building or structure or portion thereof may be occupied and used safely; 
d.  Any site improvements not completed are minor in nature and are related to paving, utility adjustments, or similar features; 
e.  A placement/completion schedule is submitted and approved by the city; 
f.  A performance guarantee, letter of credit or other form of financial assurance, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, which is equal to 120 percent of the cost of all incomplete site improvements listed in subsection d. above, as estimated by the developer or owner and concurred with by the building official, is submitted with the application for a temporary certificate of occupancy; 
g.  The city's fire marshal has concurred with the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy; and 
h.  The water and wastewater systems serving the building or structure and the water system providing fire protection to the building or structure have been completed, tested, and are fully operational. 
(3)  Except as provided herein, temporary certificates of occupancy shall not be issued in the event the required landscaping is not installed. For all occupancies, including single-family and two-family occupancies, a temporary certificate of occupancy will be considered for issuance by the building official when the required landscaping has not been installed, only if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Mandatory water use restrictions have been implemented in accordance with Chapter 44, article VIII, of the Code of Ordinances; 
b.  All conditions for the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy have been met with the sole exception of the installation of the required landscaping; and 
c.  A performance guarantee, letter of credit or other form of financial assurance, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, which is equal to 100 percent of the cost of all required landscaping, as estimated by the developer or owner and concurred with by the building official, is submitted with the application for a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
A temporary certificate of occupancy issued hereunder shall expire 45 days after all mandatory water restrictions are lifted by the city. If the required landscaping is not installed prior to the expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy, it shall be unlawful for anyone to occupy the building or structure for which the temporary certificate of occupancy was issued. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(3) above, temporary certificates of occupancy shall be valid for a period of time determined by the building official, but not to exceed 60 days. Said period shall be based upon a reasonable estimate of the time necessary to complete all remaining improvements and to satisfy all remaining requirements. 
(5)  When circumstances beyond the control of the owner or developer warrant, the building official may grant an extension of the temporary certificate of occupancy for one additional period of time not to exceed 60 days. Any further extension of a temporary certificate of occupancy requires the approval of the city council. 
(6)  The building official shall maintain a record of all temporary certificates of occupancy. 
(e)  Revocation or suspension. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy issued hereunder if such certificate was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect information, or if it is determined that the building or structure or any portion thereof is in violation of any city ordinance or regulation or any state or federal law or regulation. 
(f)  Fees. 
(1)  Where no building permit is required but a certificate of occupancy is necessary, an application fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a certificate of occupancy, which fee shall include one inspection. 
(2)  An application fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a temporary certificate of occupancy and shall include one inspection. A fee in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid at the time of filing an application for the extension of a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Reinspection fees shall be paid in accordance with Sec. 8-106. 
(4)  Where an application fee for a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, or extension thereof, has been paid but the application denied, the city shall not refund the application fee. Subsequent applications shall be accompanied by the fee stipulated in subsections (f)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(g)  Authority to disconnect utilities. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to disconnect or have disconnected utility services including, but not limited to, electric, gas, water and/or wastewater services to a building or structure being occupied in violation of this division. 
(2)  In the case of imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the city shall give oral notice to an owner or occupant of a building or structure that is being occupied in violation of this division before disconnecting any utility service and shall, within 24 hours, follow with written notice of such violation. 
(3)  Under all other conditions for disconnection, the city shall give three days' written notice before disconnection. 
(4)  Any utility service disconnected in accordance with this division shall remain disconnected until such time as compliance with this division is achieved and the building official approves such reconnection. All costs for such reconnection or additional amounts that may be required as a result of such disconnection shall be borne by the owner or occupant. 
(5)  The city shall not be liable for any resulting damage to a building or structure or any property of the owner as a result of disconnection of any utility service under this division. 
Sec. 8-114. - Construction work hours. 
(a)  In a residential zone, or within 500 feet of a residential zone, no construction work performed in association with an approved building permit shall occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  In a residential zone, or within 500 feet of a residential zone, no construction work performed in association with an approved grading permit, subdivision improvement permit, or site development permit shall occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
Sec. 8-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 8-116. - International Energy Conservation Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (excluding all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Round Rock, Texas. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Energy Conservation Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-117. - Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section C101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section R101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(3)  Section C108.4. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
(4)  Section R108.4. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
DIVISION 3. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE 

Sec. 8-118. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises. 
Sec. 8-119. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all unsafe buildings or structures, as herein defined, and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
Sec. 8-120. - Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work. 
(a)  Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the building to comply with all the requirements of the International Building Code provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the International Building Code for new construction. The building official shall determine, subject to appeal to the building standards commission, the extent, if any, to which the existing building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the International Building Code for new construction. 
(b)  Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work shall not cause an existing building to become unsafe as defined in Sec. 1-50. 
(c)  If the occupancy classification of an existing building is changed, the building shall be made to conform to the intent of the International Building Code for the new occupancy classification as established by the building official. 
(d)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding subsections of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of this Code or in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed; but not more than 25 percent of the roof covering of a building shall be replaced in any period of 12 months unless the entire roof covering is made to conform with the requirements of the International Building Code for new buildings. 
Sec. 8-121. - Existing and historic buildings within fire districts. 
    The provisions of this division relating to the construction alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. The applicant must submit complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer or architect. 
Sec. 8-122. - Maintenance. 
    All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the International Building Code in a building when erected, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. 
Sec. 8-123. - Administrative organization. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the building official. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, shall not have a financial interest in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for the construction, alteration, demolition, repair or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 8-124. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Right of entry. 
(1)  The building official or his authorized representative may enter any building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to make an inspection or enforce any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  When entering a building, structure, or premises that is occupied, the building official shall first identify himself, present proper credentials and request entry. If the building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge of the building and demand entry. If entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(3)  No person, owner or occupant of any building or premises shall fail, after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry into any building or onto any property by the building official or his authorized agent for the purpose of inspections pursuant to this division. Any person violating this section shall be prosecuted within the limits of the law as established by the proper governing authority. 
(b)  Inspections. The building official, the fire official and other authorized representatives are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by this division, shall be determined by the building official. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the building standards commission, charged with the enforcement of this division, acting for the applicable governing body in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this division shall be defended by the legal department of the applicable governing body until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building official shall annually submit a report to the chief administrator of the decisions rendered by the city council during the preceding year. The report shall include a summary of the decisions of the city council during said year. 
Sec. 8-125. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this division, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local law. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for any violation of any of the provisions of this division, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state or local laws. 
Sec. 8-126. - Inspection and notice of noncompliance. 
(a)  Inspection. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected any building, structure or portion thereof which is or may be unsafe. After the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected a building, structure or portion thereof and has determined that such building, structure or portion thereof is unsafe, he shall initiate proceedings to cause the abatement of the unsafe condition by repair, vacation or demolition or combination thereof. 
(b)  Notice. The building official shall prepare and issue a notice of unsafe building directed to the owner of record of the building or structure. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the building, structure or premises. 
(2)  A statement indicating the building or structure has been declared unsafe by the building official, and a detailed report documenting the conditions determined to have rendered the building or structure unsafe under the provisions of this division. 
(3)  A statement advising that if the required action as determined by the building official is not commenced within 30 days, the building official shall request that the building standards commission call for a public hearing to determine whether or not conditions exist which render the building or structure unsafe under the provisions of this division. 
(4)  If the building or structure is to be repaired, the notice shall require that all necessary permits be secured and work commenced within 60 days after receipt of said notice and continued to completion within such time as the building official determines. 
(5)  If the building or structure is to be vacated, the notice shall indicate the time within which vacation is to be completed. 
(6)  If the building or structure is to be demolished, the building official shall require that the premises be vacated within 60 days, that all permits for demolition be secured and that the demolition be completed within such time as determined reasonable by the building official. 
(7)  A statement advising that if the required action as determined by the building official is not commenced within or completed, as required, the building official shall request that the building standards commission call for a public hearing to determine whether or not conditions exist which render the building or structure unsafe under the provisions of this division. 
(8)  All notices and all attachments thereto shall be served upon the owner of record and posted on the property in a conspicuous location. A copy of the notice and all attachments thereto shall also be served on any person determined from official public records to have a legal interest in the property. Failure of the building official to serve any person herein required to be served other than the owner of record shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder nor shall it relieve any other person served from any obligation imposed on him. 
(9)  All notices shall be served either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at the address as it appears on the official public records. If addresses are not available on any person required to be served the notice, the notice addressed to such person shall be mailed to the address of the building or structure involved in the proceedings. The failure of any person to receive notice, other than the owner of record, shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. Service by certified or registered mail as herein described shall be effective on the date the notice was received as indicated on the return receipt. Proof of service of the notice shall be by written declaration indicating the date, time and manner in which service was made and signed by the person served on by the return receipt. 
(c)  Standards for compliance. The following action shall be taken by the building official when ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of an unsafe building or structure: 
(1)  The building shall be ordered repaired in accordance with the International Building Code or demolished at the option of the owner. 
(2)  If the building or structure poses an immediate hazard to life or to the safety of the public, it shall be ordered vacated immediately. 
(d)  Posting of notice to vacate. Every notice to vacate, in addition to complying with subsection (b)(9) of this section, shall be posted at each exit and entrance to the building or structure and shall state: 
THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY 
THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. 
    Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their agents to remove such notice without written permission of the building official, or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing same. 
Sec. 8-127. - Rules of procedure for public hearing. 
(a)  After the receipt of a written request from the building official, the building standards commission shall, by ordinance, call a public hearing to determine whether or not conditions exist which render a building or structure unsafe under the provisions of this division such that said building or structure must be demolished in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Said ordinance shall state with specificity each violation which renders said building or structure unsafe. 
(b)  Reasonable dispatch. The building standards commission shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude said public hearing, with due regard to the convenience and necessity of the parties involved. The hearing notice shall be served as required by the Texas Local Government Code at least 15 days before the hearing date. 
(c)  Subpoenas. The building standards commission may obtain the issuance and service of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or the production of evidence at the hearings. The issuance and service of subpoenas shall be in accordance with established law. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  Hearings shall not be required to be conducted in accordance with the technical rules relating to evidence and testimony. 
(2)  The building standards commission may grant continuance for good cause. 
(3)  In any proceedings under this division, the chairman of the building standards commission shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts. In the chairman's absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(4)  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(5)  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence. The further use of hearsay evidence shall be limited to that which would be admissible in civil court. 
(6)  Relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil courts. 
(7)  The building standards commission may inspect any building, structure or premises during the course of the hearing, provided the following are complied with: 
a.  Notice of such inspection is given to the parties prior to making the inspection; 
b.  The parties are allowed to be present during the inspection; and 
c.  The inspector states for the record, upon completion of the inspection, the facts observed and any conclusions drawn therefrom. 
(e)  After completion of the public hearing, if the building standards commission finds that the building or structure is in violation of the provisions of this division, it may order the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to, within 30 days, secure the building from unauthorized entry or to repair, remove, or demolish the building, whichever is applicable, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. The city will furnish a copy of the order to any lienholders or mortgagees in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(f)  The building standards commission may allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building. If the building standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the building standards commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. The city will furnish a copy of the order to any lienholders or mortgagees in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(g)  If any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record is aggrieved by the decision of the building standards commission, nothing in this division shall be construed to deprive him of seeking redress in the civil or other applicable court. Said appeal must be filed within 30 days from the date a copy of the final decision of the building standards commission is delivered as required by the Texas Local Government Code. 
Sec. 8-128. - Compliance. 
(a)  Failure to respond. Any person who, after the order of the building official or the decision of the building standards commission becomes final, fails or refuses to respond to the direction of such order, shall be prosecuted to the extent provided for by law. 
(b)  Failure to commence work. 
(1)  Whenever the required repair, vacation or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after the effective date of any order, the building, structure or premises shall be posted as follows: 
UNSAFE BUILDING DO NOT OCCUPY 
It shall be punishable by law to occupy this building or remove or deface this notice 
(Specify the applicable local law and the penalty for violation thereof). 
Building Official 
City of Round Rock, Texas 
(2)  Subsequent to posting the building, structure or premises, the building official may cause the building to be repaired to the extent required to render it safe or if the notice required demolition, to cause the building, structure or premises to be demolished and all debris removed from the premises. The cost of repair or demolition shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be collected in a manner provided by law. 
(3)  Any monies received from the sale of a building or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost incurred, shall be paid to the owner of record or other persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(c)  Extension of time. The building official may approve one or more extensions of time as he may determine to be reasonable to complete the required repair or demolition. Such requests for extensions shall be made in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the requests for extensions of time, in total, exceed 60 days, they must also be approved by the building standards commission. 
(d)  Interference. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the final notice of the building official or the city council. Any person found interfering or obstructing such actions shall be prosecuted to the extent provided for by law. 
Sec. 8-129. - Recovery of cost of repair or demolition. 
    Whenever a building or structure is repaired or demolished in accordance with the provisions of this division and cost of such repair or demolition is borne by the city, the city may assess the expenses on the property on which the building is located. The assessment of the reasonable expenses incurred shall be determined by the building official, and a lien shall be placed on the property and recorded in the deed records of Williamson County, Texas. 
DIVISION 4. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 8-130. - Standard Housing Code adopted. 
    The Standard Housing Code, 1994 edition with amendments, one copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted by reference and all regulations, parts, notations, references and specifications therein are hereby adopted and made a part of this division except as deleted or amended hereafter. 
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 8-131. - International Plumbing Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code (including appendices A-G) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Round Rock, Texas. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Plumbing Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-132. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 106.6.2. Inserted: All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-39 of this Code. 
(3)  Section 106.6.3. Deleted. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Amended to read: Violations of any provision of this International Plumbing Code shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
(6)  Section 305.4.1. Inserted: Twelve inches. 
(7)  Section 903.1. Inserted: Twelve inches. 
Sec. 8-133. - Plumbing official. 
(a)  Position created; qualifications; compensation. There are hereby created the positions of plumbing official and plumbing inspectors, who shall be employed by the city. The plumbing official and inspectors shall have experience in plumbing to the extent that enables them to know when plumbing is installed correctly. The plumbing official and inspectors shall not be directly connected in any way with any person, firm, or corporation directly or indirectly engaged in the business of plumbing, or plumbing suppliers. The plumbing official and plumbing inspectors shall receive as full compensation for his or their services, a salary designated by the city. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing official to enforce all provisions of this division, and such official is hereby granted the authority to enter all buildings within or without the corporate limits of the city, when such buildings be connected to the municipal water and/or sewage system. 
(2)  The plumbing official shall prepare or cause to be prepared suitable forms of applications, permits, inspection reports and other such materials. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing official to inspect and test all plumbing work for compliance with this division and the plumbing code adopted herein, and to enforce changing of such installations that do not meet the requirements. It shall further be his duty to see that all persons installing or altering plumbing shall be qualified by state law. 
Sec. 8-134. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Plumbing permits; when required. Before beginning any work in the city, the person installing or altering same shall apply to the plumbing official or other designated official and obtain a permit to do such work. Only those persons legally authorized to do plumbing may be issued permits. A permit may be issued to a homeowner to install or alter plumbing in a single-family residence, providing the homeowner does all the work himself and that the building is owned and occupied by the owner as his home. All such work shall meet the plumbing code requirements and such persons shall be required to obtain the regular permit for that particular job. 
(b)  Application forms. All applications for permits shall be made to the plumbing official on suitable forms provided. 
Sec. 8-135. - Permit fees. 
    All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-106. 
Sec. 8-136. - When hazards to city water supply exist. 
(a)  The city water department and the city plumbing official are hereby authorized to discontinue or cause to be discontinued all water service or services to any and all premises, lands, buildings, or structures where it is found that an immediate hazard exists to the purity or potability of the city water supply. 
(b)  The city water department and the city plumbing official are hereby authorized and directed to take such steps as are necessary to determine all potential hazards to the purity or potability of the city water supply which exist. Upon determining said potential hazards, it shall be the duty of said department and said inspector to immediately cause notice to go to the owner or such other person responsible for said premises, specifying said hazards, and notifying said person that in the event that said hazard is not corrected within 30 days from the date of said notice, all water services shall be discontinued thereafter until the requirements of this Code have been complied with. 
DIVISION 6. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 8-137. - International Fuel Gas Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code (including appendices A-D) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Round Rock, Texas. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Fuel Gas Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-138. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 106.6.2. Inserted: All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-106 of this Code. 
(3)  Section 106.6.3. Deleted. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Amended to read: Violations of any provision of this Fuel Gas Code shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
DIVISION 7. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 8-139. - International Mechanical Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code (excluding only appendix B) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Mechanical Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-140. - Permit fees. 
    All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-106. 
Sec. 8-141. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 106.5.2. Inserted: All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-106 of this Code. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3. Deleted. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Amended to read: Violations of any provision of this Mechanical Code shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
DIVISION 8. - SWIMMING POOL CODE 

Sec. 8-142. - International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-143. - Amendments to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
(2)  Section 105.6.2. Inserted: All fees for permits are governed by Sec. 8-106 of this Code. 
(3)  Section 105.6.3. Deleted. 
(4)  Section 107.4. Amended to read: Violations of any provision of this International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be punished by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been given shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)  Section 107.5. Inserted: Not less than $1.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
DIVISION 9. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 8-144. - General. 
(a)  National Electrical Code, NFPA 70. The National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, 2017 edition (hereinafter referred to as "NEC"), as amended herein, is hereby adopted as part of this division to the same effect as if it were copied verbatim herein and shall be in effect except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of this Code or V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214. 
(b)  Scope. This code shall govern all installations of electrical conductors, raceway fittings, and/or equipment hereafter made, and all existing installations which are altered, or for which the use has changed. Repair and maintenance work shall be such that if any electrical conductor, raceway fittings, and/or equipment is removed and later replaced, same shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Responsibility for safe work. This code shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, or installing electrical conductor devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors or equipment, for damages to persons or buildings caused by any defect therein nor shall the city be held liable for any damages by reason of enforcement or non-enforcement of this division. 
(d)  Purpose. 
(1)  To safeguard persons and property from electrical hazards; and 
(2)  To establish licensing, permit and inspection procedures to ensure quality electrical work. To accomplish this, the requirements set forth herein are intended to be minimum standards for electrical work. 
(e)  Unlawful acts prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, agent, lessee, renter or otherwise to violate, disobey, refuse to comply with, resist or oppose the execution of this division. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or maintain any building or structure in which the electrical work, wiring or appliances are in violation of this division. 
(3)  Any person who commits any acts declared to be unlawful, or fails to perform an act required by this division, shall be subject to any and all penalties as provided herein. Any electrical installations erected or altered in violation of this Code shall be summarily condemned and removed at the expense of the person erecting or altering or allowing the same. 
(f)  Amendments to the National Electrical Code, 2017 edition. 
(1)  Article 300, National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, is hereby amended by adding Section 24 which shall read as follows: 
300-24. Special Safety Measures. 
(a)  Except upon written permission of the building official, no electrical conductor of any nature shall be installed nearer than three (3) inches to any metal pipe or duct which could operate at a temperature in excess of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  Thermostat, low voltage control wiring and communications cables in dwellings shall be protected from mechanical damage and shall maintain two (2) inches clearance from all other wiring and pipes. Thermostat, low voltage control wiring and communications cables shall be well strapped or supported with insulated staples or supports not to exceed four (4) feet spacing. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-145. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Chief electrical inspector. There is hereby created the office of chief electrical inspector, who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(1)  The chief electrical inspector shall have at least three years' experience as a master electrician, hold a valid master electrician's license, be of good moral character, and be well-versed in the approved methods of electrical construction for safety of life and property in accordance with the National Electrical Code, as amended. 
(2)  The chief electrical inspector is hereby designated as the person responsible for the administration and enforcement of this division, who shall discharge the duties and have the authority hereafter provided. Said authority may be delegated to inspectors and other employees of the building inspection department as may be required to carry out said duties. 
(3)  The chief electrical inspector shall be responsible to the building official and the city manager, each of whom are authorized to act in lieu of and with the same authority as the chief electrical inspector. 
(b)  Powers/duties of inspectors. The chief electrical inspector and inspectors shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce the provisions of this division, issue citations and file complaints in municipal court against persons who violate any of its provisions. 
(2)  To enter any house or premises during reasonable hours, (or at any time while electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment is being installed) for the purpose of examining any electrical wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment therein in the performance of his official duties. 
(3)  To order electrical service disconnected: 
a.  Where improper or defective wiring exists; 
b.  Where electrical construction or equipment has been installed without a permit as required by this division; 
c.  When electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department; or 
d.  In cases of emergency when necessary for the safety of persons or property. 
(4)  To order compliance with this division where a change of occupancy occurs in a building which requires electrical change or alteration to said building. 
(5)  To attach to electrical equipment or meters any official notice necessary to prevent the use of electricity. 
(6)  To order persons to cease performing any work being done without a requisite permit or otherwise in violation of this division. 
(7)  To make a thorough inspection of: 
a.  All electrical work from time to time as provided herein; 
b.  Electrical work which is in a dangerous or unsafe condition; 
c.  Electrical work deemed to be an interference with the work of the fire department; 
(8)  To notify a person responsible for violating the above subsection to place said work in compliance with this division within a reasonable amount of time. 
(9)  To require plans, specifications and a complete feeder layout of installations of electrical work. 
Sec. 8-146. - Electrical license examination. 
    All applicants for a building permit are required to be licensed by the State of Texas or the City of Round Rock. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-147. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, adopted Apr. 27, 2017, deleted § 8-147 entitled "License and examination fees." 
Sec. 8-148. - Licensing. 
(a)  Types of licenses. Electrical licenses shall be of the following types: 
(1)  Master electrician. Any person licensed as a master electrician in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, who employs journeyman electricians to perform electrician's work in accordance with this division or who performs electrical work himself in accordance with this division. 
(2)  Journeyman electrician. A person licensed as a journeyman electrician in compliance with the requirements of this section, who works for and under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician, performing electrical work contracted for by a master electrician. 
(b)  License required. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical work unless such person holds a master electrician's or journeyman's license under the provisions of this division. Any person holding a valid master's license or journeyman's license need not procure a lesser license. When two or more master electricians are working on the same job, the supervision, direction and control of the electrical work shall be the responsibility of the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(c)  Unrestricted and restricted licenses. 
(1)  A person holding a valid unrestricted license shall be authorized to perform all types of electrical work. 
(2)  A person holding a valid restricted license shall be authorized to perform only those categories of work on which he has taken and passed an examination. 
(3)  The categories of restricted licenses are as follows: 
a.  Signs. A sign license restricted to the installation, repair, or maintenance of: 
1.  Electrical signs; 
2.  Transformers for the operation of neon and similar tubing on or in buildings; and 
3.  High tension cables between tubing and transformers for the same. 
Such license shall not include connection of any electrical signs, transformers or other type of load to a source of electrical power, or the changing, extending, installing or repairing of any part of a wiring system. 
b.  Elevators. An elevator license restricted to the installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of only the control panel and control wiring of elevators and escalators. 
c.  Repair service. A repair service license restricted to the connecting or disconnecting of any electrical wiring regulated by this section, not including the changing, extending, installing or repairing of any part of a wiring system. 
d.  Maintenance. A maintenance license restricted to the maintenance, repair, relocation or replacement of any electrical conductor or equipment pertaining to branch circuits, including extension of or additions to branch circuits permitted under this section, by a person who is regularly employed by one employer upon a permanent basis for the performing of such work within the confines of the building or premises of such employer. 
e.  Residential. A residential license restricted to performing electrical work on residential buildings only while under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician. 
(d)  Supervision. Except as otherwise provided in this division, all electrical work shall be performed under the supervision, direction, and control of the master electrician who has secured the permit. When on-site work is performed by a journeyman electrician under the supervision of the permit holder, the ratio of workers to journeyman electricians shall not exceed three workers for each journeyman present on site; provided, however, for commercial or industrial work, the ratio shall be two workers for each journeyman present on site. 
(e)  License not required. The following may be performed by persons who are not licensed electricians: 
(1)  Electrical work on one's own homestead, as reflected by public records, performed only by the homestead owner; provided, that a permit as provided in section 8-149 shall have been obtained and all other requirements of this division have been complied with except the licensing provisions. 
(2)  The replacement of lamps, fuses and connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed. 
(3)  The installation, alteration or repairing of any wiring, devices, or equipment for the operation of a signal or the transmission of messages where such wiring, devices, appliances or equipment operates at a voltage not exceeding 50 volts between conductors and does not include generating or transforming equipment. 
(4)  The installation, alteration or repair of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed by or for an electric public service corporation operating under a franchise from the division when for the use of such a corporation in the operation for street railways, signals or the transmission of messages. 
(f)  Requirements for continued licensing; master electrician. In addition to other requirements of this division, all master electricians shall have their license number of company name on all company trucks. 
(g)  Certain acts prohibited. It shall be a violation of this division for any person: 
(1)  To display, permit to be displayed or to have in one's possession, any instrument purporting to be a license issued pursuant to this division, knowing such instrument to be fictitious, cancelled, suspended or altered. 
(2)  To knowingly lend, transfer or permit the use of any license for the purpose of performing or obtaining a permit for electrical work, to any person not entitled thereto under the provisions of this division. 
(3)  To fail or refuse to surrender to the chief electrical inspector, on demand, an electrician's license which has been suspended or cancelled as provided by law. 
(4)  To apply for, or have in one's possession, more than one current license of the same type provided for in this division. 
(5)  To use a false or fictitious name or address in any license application, renewal, or duplicate request, or knowingly make a false statement, conceal a material fact or otherwise commit fraud in making said application, renewal or duplicate request. 
(6)  To employ as a master or journeyman electrician any person not then licensed as provided in this division. 
(7)  To perform any electrical work requiring a license, without said license or while said license is suspended or cancelled. 
(8)  To perform electrical work in any manner in violation of any restrictions imposed on a licensee. 
(9)  To perform electrical work as a journeyman electrician on a job while not in the employ of the master electrician of record of said job. 
(10)  To fail to request a final inspection upon completion of all electrical wiring and installation requiring a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-149. - Permits. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed, or permit the installation of, or make any alterations, additions, changes or repairs to any electrical wiring fixtures or equipment within or on any building, structure, or premises, whether publicly or privately owned, without first obtaining a valid permit therefor. 
(b)  Permit not required. No permit shall be required for: 
(1)  The installation of electrical conductors or equipment within and on the premises which are under the control and supervision of the state highway department and where such installation will be operated, maintained or controlled or supervised by said state highway department. 
(2)  The installation of electrical conductors or equipment by or for a public utility corporation in the generation, transmission, sale or use of electrical energy as outlined in its franchise. 
(3)  The installation of low voltage HVAC control wiring in residential only. 
(4)  The replacement of: 
a.  A motor by another motor of the same horsepower and rating; 
b.  Solenoid valves; 
c.  Low pressure controls; 
when the electrical supply to the same is or has been properly installed by a licensed electrician. 
(c)  Permit application. 
(1)  Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the chief electrical inspector. The application shall contain the following information: 
a.  The date the application is submitted; 
b.  The applicant's name; 
c.  The exact address where electrical work is to be done; 
d.  A description of the electrical work to be done; 
e.  Other pertinent information as required by the chief electrical inspector. If a diagram or plan is required, it shall clearly show the following: 
1.  The character and kind of wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment work to be done; 
2.  The scale used and the manner in which the electrical installation is to be made; 
3.  The character of any repairs to any existing installation showing the point at which service connection is required; 
4.  The size of feeders and subfeeders; 
5.  The location of service switches and centers of distribution; 
6.  The arrangement of circuits and the number of outlets connected thereto; 
7.  Load calculations; 
8.  A profile view of the service entrance equipment including all gutter troughs, junction boxes, switches, disconnects, fuses, panel boards, current transformer enclosures and meter sockets, detailing how this equipment is to be arranged on the wall of the building; 
9.  The maximum available fault current at the service entrance shall be obtained from the local utility company; and 
10.  Fault current bracing information. 
(2)  Applications for permits shall only be issued to the following persons: 
a.  A master electrician licensed under this Code; 
b.  A property owner who shall certify that the proposed electrical work shall be performed by the applicant personally, in a residence presently occupied by the applicant as his homestead. 
(d)  Permit issuance. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued to licensed master electricians, or their duly authorized agents. 
(2)  The city operates under a "one permit" system on new construction whereby a general contractor or owner may secure a single permit covering all of the building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and air conditioning requirements. However, where only electrical work is being performed, a master electrician, as defined herein, must secure a permit covering the work to be done. There shall not be more than one permit issued or outstanding at the same time for any one installation of electrical equipment, except for renewal, additions or finish-out or when requested by the city building official. 
(3)  The chief building inspector may require an inspection prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(4)  A permit issued under this division shall continue until revoked or for the period of time designated on the permit. 
(e)  Revocation and suspension of permits. 
(1)  The chief electrical inspector has the authority to revoke or suspend a permit or approval issued if any violation of this division is found upon inspection or in the case there have been any false statements or representations submitted in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Revocation will be deemed to occur on the date that the permittee is duly notified of the violation. 
(f)  Reissued permit. A permit may be reissued changing the electrician of record upon written application by the person to whom the original permit was issued. However, before the permit is issued, the chief building inspector shall mail a written notice to the electrician of record with a copy to the owner, notifying them of the application for a reissued permit. The notice to the electrician of record shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall not be reissued until the expiration of ten days after the notice was mailed. The application for a reissued permit shall be accompanied by a permit reissuance fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. The applicant shall be responsible for all electrical work on the project site, including all work performed prior to reissuance. 
(g)  Duplicate. In the event that a permit is lost or destroyed, the permit holder may obtain a duplicate thereof: 
(1)  By furnishing satisfactory proof to the chief electrical inspector that the permit was lost or destroyed; and 
(2)  Upon payment of a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(h)  Certain acts prohibited. 
(1)  Any attempt to defraud or otherwise deliberately or knowingly design, install, service, maintain, operate, sell, represent, represent for sale, falsify records, reports, or applications, or other related activity in violation of this division. 
(2)  Any violation of this division will provide cause for immediate suspension or revocation of any related licenses, certificates, or permits issued by this jurisdiction. All violations are additionally subject to any other civil or criminal penalties that may apply. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-150. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required. Unless and until it has been inspected and approved by the building inspection division, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, device or equipment on an installation for which a permit is required by this Code; 
(2)  Make connections from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring device or equipment which has been disconnected by order of the chief electrical inspector; or 
(3)  Conceal in any manner from access or sight, any part of a wiring installation. 
(b)  Rough inspection. 
(1)  When the rough wiring or installation work is completed on a commercial job, the electrician responsible shall notify the building inspection division that the job is ready for inspection. 
(2)  Residential wiring will be called for by the building superintendent during the top-out inspection. 
(c)  Faulty work. 
(1)  If the wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty or incorrectly or defectively installed, the chief electrical inspector shall notify, in writing, the permittee who installed said work of all changes necessary in order for the work to conform to this Code. 
(2)  The permittee shall, within 48 hours of written notification, commence the changes ordered and shall proceed with the work until the same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the reinspection fee, he shall request an inspection by the building inspection division. If the chief electrical inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, he shall notify the permittee of the necessary changes, and the permittee shall pay an additional reinspection fee. If the permittee fails to correct the faulty work within 72 hours, the chief electrical inspector shall refuse to issue to said person any further permits until said work in question is corrected and approved. 
(d)  Final inspection. Upon the completion of all electrical wiring and installations requiring a permit, the permittee shall notify the building inspection division that the work is ready for final inspection. If faulty or defective wiring or equipment is found, the permittee shall be notified of the necessary changes in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. If such work is found to be correctly installed, replaced or repaired, the inspector shall endorse the inspection certificate, stating that the wiring and installation work has been installed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Inspection after fire. An inspection shall be conducted by the chief electrical inspector on any and all buildings or structures that have been damaged by fire. 
(f)  Inspector's removal request. It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector to cause all abandoned dead wire, unused poles or electrical apparatus remaining on or near the job site to be removed at the expense of the owners thereof, by giving said owners written notice. 
(g)  Interference. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If electrical conductors or equipment have previously been installed in such a position as to interfere with the erection or completion of a structure, notice shall be immediately given to the person using said conductors or equipment, requiring conformance with this Code. 
(h)  Emergency reconnects. No service entrance equipment will be connected by the electric utility company to its electric distribution system without an approved inspection unless it is a re-connection of service which was disconnected for emergency repair work. The electric utility company shall notify the chief electrical inspector on the next working day following the emergency re-connect by requesting a follow-up inspection. The inspector shall check code requirements and verify that a permit has been secured by the electrician doing the repair work. 
(i)  Commercial/industrial buildings. A new tenant who occupies previously occupied commercial/industrial buildings or lease spaces must obtain electrical re-inspection and approval in order for the power company to release service to said building or lease space. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-151. - Standards and specifications. 
(a)  Materials, equipment, safety standards. Conformity of electrical equipment with the applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., ANSI or NEC, shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and properties. 
(b)  Installations creating hazards to fire protection and prevention. No wires shall be installed, operated or maintained over any street, alley, sidewalk or building: 
(1)  Which may foreseeably interfere with the work of the fire department in the use of ladders or other apparatus; or 
(2)  Which shall obstruct or render hazardous the use of fire escapes. 
On complaint of the city fire marshal, said wires shall be removed or properly rearranged. 
(c)  Special electrical circuit requirements. The following additional requirements shall be met for all new construction: 
(1)  All circuits shall have conductors sized in accordance with article 310 of the National Electrical Code. No conductor smaller than No. 12 copper American wire gauge size, shall be used in any electrical work as covered by this Code, except the following as approved by the National Electrical Code: 
a.  Pendant and portable cords; 
b.  No. 14 for control circuits, operating contractors, relays, etc.; 
c.  Wiring within display cases; 
d.  Wiring for system covered by chapter 7 of the National Electrical Code; 
(2)  All panels must be large enough to accommodate the present load requirements and have at least two spaces for future use. 
(3)  All 125 volt, single phase 15 or 20 ampere rated devices installed in commercial and industrial installations shall be of the nonresidential type or shall be 20 ampere rated only. 
(4)  Temporary service for construction sites are required to have a driven ground rod. 
(5)  Flexible metal conduit smaller than one-half-inch electrical trade size shall not be permitted. 
(6)  Kerneys or split bolt connectors shall not be allowed for taps in electrical services and gutters. Only blocks and couple taps are permitted. 
(7)  All building services shall have a UFER grounded and be grounded by Art. 250 of NEC. 
(8)  All closets and storage areas that are over 48 inches deep or more shall have a light switch. 
(d)  Construction, rodent proof. All exterior wall openings around electrical cables and conduits shall be closed with cement mortar, concrete masonry, or other approved material to prevent the passage of rodents. 
(e)  Commercial buildings. 
(1)  All commercial buildings shall be wired in raceways. However, this provision shall not apply to pre-existing wiring in buildings which were originally constructed and used as residential-use buildings and thereafter converted to commercial usage. 
(2)  For each panel in commercial construction, a minimum of one spare one-inch raceway shall be installed from the panel to an accessible location in the attic or crawlspace for recessed panels only. 
(3)  All thermostat wire, doorbell wire, fire alarm wire and other wire 50 volts or less must be run in conduit, with the exception of plenum cable. 
(f)  Special safety measures. 
(1)  Aluminum conductors will be authorized from the panel to panel and to the service disconnect only, for commercial and industrial construction. 
(2)  All feeder conductors to branch circuit panel boards and all subpanels in residential construction shall be copper conductors. 
(3)  Color coding of conductors. 
a.  Single phase 120/240 Volt System. 
Phase   A Black B Red Neutral White  
b.  Three phase 120/240 volt center tap Delta System. 
Phase   A Black B Red C Orange (high leg) Neutral White  
c.  Three phase 480 volt Delta System. 
Phase   A Brown B Yellow C Purple  
d.  Three phase 120/208 volt WYE System. 
Phase   A Black B Red C Blue Neutral White  
e.  Three phase 277/480 volt WYE System. 
Phase   A Brown B Yellow C Purple Neutral Natural Gray  
(4)  Except upon written permission of the chief electrical inspector, no electrical conductor of any nature shall be installed nearer than three inches to any metal pipe or duct which could operate in excess of 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)  Doorbell transformers must be mounted in an attic, heater closet, bedroom closet or other space where air can flow freely around the transformer. The transformer shall not be covered after it has been mounted. 
(6)  It will not be acceptable to use flexible metal conduit outside. Liquid-tight flexible conduit or liquid-tight flexible nonmetallic conduit are considered acceptable. 
(g)  Smoke detector systems. 
(1)  Every dwelling and every dwelling unit within an apartment house, condominium or town house, and every guest or sleeping room in a child care facility, motel, hotel or dormitory, shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector in accordance with V.T.C.A., Property Code § 92.251 et seq. 
(2)  Detectors shall be listed and meet the installation requirements of NFPA 74 and NFPA 72E and be hard wired with battery pack in series where all alarms will be activated. 
(h)  Engineer seal required. In accordance with the Texas Engineering Practice Act, all drawings pertaining to non-dwelling construction projects of 5,000 square feet or more shall bear the seal of an engineer registered in the state. The chief electrical inspector is hereby authorized to require, at his discretion, said seal to be placed upon drawings for non-dwelling construction projects of lesser square footage. 
(i)  Use of unapproved appliance prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to install electrical equipment or appliances which have not been: 
(1)  Endorsed by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or other nationally recognized standards association; or 
(2)  Approved by the chief electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-5866, § IX, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-152. - Violations. 
(a)  Violation. In addition to other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover, deface, or otherwise injure any official notice or seal posted by an electrical inspector pursuant to Sec. 8-145; 
(2)  Interfere with enforcement officials or their duly authorized agents in the discharge of their duties, including but not limited to carrying out the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to make necessary changes or repairs within a reasonable amount of time pursuant to Sec. 8-145, or Sec. 8-150(c); or 
(4)  Perform electrical installations without supplying the requisite plans, specifications or layouts or without initial approval of said installation pursuant to Sec. 8-145 or Sec. 8-149(c). 
(b)  Injunction. In addition to the penal remedies herein, the city may seek injunctive relief regarding any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4343, § I, 4-27-2017) 
DIVISION 10. - PERFORMANCE CODE FOR BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 8-153. - International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities (2012 edition) adopted. 
    The 2012 edition of the International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Performance Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Performance Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
DIVISION 11. - GREEN CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 8-154. - International Green Construction Code (2015 edition) adopted. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Green Construction Code (including all appendices) as published by the International Code Council, one copy of which shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted as the Green Construction Code of the City of Round Rock. Penalties, conditions and terms of said International Green Construction Code are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this division, except as amended hereafter. 
Sec. 8-155. - Amendments to the International Green Construction Code (2015 edition). 
(a)  The International Green Construction Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Inserted: City of Round Rock, Texas. 
DIVISION 12. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 8-156. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
Sec. 8-157. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
Sec. 8-158. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
Sec. 8-159. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
(a)  In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
Sec. 8-160. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which these provisions apply. This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Williamson County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, and the "Flood Insurance Study for Travis County, Texas, and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another section conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Sec. 8-161. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The city engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(1)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
b.  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
c.  Review, approve or deny all applications from development permits required by adoption of this article. 
d.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344) from which prior approval is required. 
e.  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
f.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
g.  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
h.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Sec. 8-160(b), obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Sec. 8-162. 
i.  Must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones Al-30 and AE on the community's FIRM when a regulatory floodway has not been designated, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(2)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones Al-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by 44 CFR 65.12. 
(c)  Permit procedures. 
(1)  An application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Sec. 8-162(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse of natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this section and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  A variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this division when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by the aforementioned division. For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations 
(2)  The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(3)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(4)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(7)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(8)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(9)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(10)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(11)  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(12)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
Sec. 8-162. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Secs. 8-160(b), 8-161(b)(1)h. and subsection (c)(5) of this section, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in Sec. 8-161(c)(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones Al-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites that are: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood; be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones Al-30, AH and A on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones Al-30, AH, and A on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Are on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Are fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of Sec. 8-161(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (d) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with this article. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Secs. 8-160(c), 8-161(c) and this section. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Secs. 8-160(b) or 8-161(b)(1)h. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Sec. 8-160(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Sec. 8-161(c)(1)a., are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Sec. 8-160(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (e)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by 44 CFR 65.12. 
(f)  Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
DIVISION 13. - BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION (BSC) 

Sec. 8-163. - Building standards commission established. 
(a)  Creation. The city hereby implements Chapter 4, subchapter C of the Texas Local Government Code (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.031 et seq.). Pursuant to such subchapter, the city council shall provide for the appointment of a BSC, and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a BSC under state law. 
(b)  Membership, terms and compensation. 
(1)  Number, appointment. The BSC shall consist of five members. Appointment of members shall be made by the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council in August. All members shall reside within the corporate city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city during the time in which they serve on the BSC. To the extent possible, the city council shall appoint members to the BSC who have experience or expertise in the building trade. 
(2)  Terms. Terms for members shall be for two years, and shall expire on August 31; provided, however, that the members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall not serve on the BSC for more than eight consecutive years. 
(3)  Initial appointments. The initial appointments to the BSC shall have staggered terms so that two members are appointed for one-year terms and three members are appointed for two-year terms. 
(4)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired terms of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(5)  Removal. A BSC member may be removed by the city council for cause on a written charge and after a public hearing if so requested by the building standards commission member subject to the removal action. 
(6)  Compensation. Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from available funds approved in advance. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0137, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 8-164. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The building standards commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in Chapter 4, subchapter C of the Local Government Code (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.031 et seq.) to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of ordinances. 
(b)  The building standards commission has the power to hear appeals and render decisions upon rulings and refusals of ruling by the building official when requests for a modification or a variation from the provisions of this division have been made. Whenever the building official rejects or refuses to approve the mode or manner of work proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the proposed construction, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Code do not apply, or that any equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of the building official to the building standards commission. Notice of the appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 days after the decision is rendered by the building official. 
(c)  The building standards commission shall have the power and duty to act as the fire code board of appeals as set forth in Sec. 16-57 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 8-165. - Procedures. 
(a)  Officers. The chairperson of the Building Standards Commission shall be elected from the membership of the building standards commission by a majority of the members. A vice-chair to serve in the chairperson's absence shall be likewise elected. 
(b)  Meetings. Meetings may be called upon request of the chairperson of the building standards commission, or upon written request of three members, or upon notice from the building official that a matter requires consideration of the building standards commission. 
(c)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the building standards commission and any issue to be to be voted on shall be resolved by a majority of those present. 
(d)  Notice of meetings. Public notice of all meetings of the building standards commission shall be posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(e)  Rules of proceeding. The building standards commission shall adopt its rules of procedure by majority vote of the entire building standards commission, provided that such rules not be in conflict with laws applicable to the building standards commission or any provisions of the city Charter. 
(f)  Minutes. The building standards commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The building standards commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the building standards commission as public records. 
(g)  Record of proceedings. The building official or his duly appointed agent is the secretary of the building standards commission and shall keep a full record of all proceedings of the building standards commission and such other records as the building standards commission may direct; provided, however, that in no event shall any city employee vote on any matter pending before the building standards commission. 
Sec. 8-166. - Variance of provisions. 
    The building standards commission, after hearing an appeal, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case, when it has determined that the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or public interest. 
Sec. 8-167. - Decision to be final. 
    Every decision of the building standards commission shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
Sec. 8-168. - Building official ruling effective pending appeal. 
    During the pendency of an appeal to the building standards commission, the ruling or refusal of the building official shall be in full force and effect. 
Chapter 10 - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND BODIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Filing of applications. 
    For all applications filed under this code, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Application forms and fees. The following regulations shall apply to all applications: 
(1)  Forms. Applications required under this code shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the city and as specified in the development packets for platting, zoning, and site development permits. 
(2)  Development packets. The development packets for platting, zoning and site development permits shall mean the set of application procedures maintained and on file at the planning and development services department pertaining to, among other things, the platting, zoning, and site development of land. The PDS director shall maintain the authority to add, remove, or otherwise alter specific requirements of each application contained within a development packet. 
(b)  Pre-submittal meeting. 
(1)  The applicant shall request a pre-submittal meeting with the zoning administrator to discuss procedures, standards, and regulations required by this code for the following: 
a.  General plan amendment; 
b.  Application for original zoning; 
c.  Map amendment (rezoning); 
d.  Planned unit development (PUD); 
e.  Site plan; 
f.  Variance; 
g.  Special exception; 
h.  Historic (H) overlay designation; 
i.  Certificate of appropriateness; and 
j.  Subdivision platting. 
(c)  Application filed. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, the rights to which an applicant is entitled shall accrue on the filing of an application that gives the city fair notice of the project and the nature of the permit sought. An application is considered filed on the date the applicant mails by certified mail or delivers the application to the following address: 
City of Round Rock 
Department of Planning and Development Services 
Attn: PDS director 
301 West Bagdad, Suite 210 
Round Rock, TX 78664 
(d)  Application completeness. An application shall be considered complete if it is submitted in the required form, includes all mandatory information, including all exhibits, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of application completeness shall be made by the zoning administrator within five days of application filing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the zoning administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. 
(e)  Expiration of application. 
(1)  An application shall expire 45 days after the date the application is filed if: 
a.  The applicant fails to provide the documents or other information necessary to comply with the city's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the application; 
b.  The city provides the applicant, no later than ten business days after the date the application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
c.  The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the aforesaid 45-day period. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided for in this code, an application shall expire 180 days after the date the application was filed; provided, however, the zoning administrator may grant a one-time, 180-day extension for good cause demonstrated by the applicant. A delay solely caused by a governmental agency shall be considered good cause. For an extension to be granted the applicant shall provide a written request ten working days prior to expiration stating the reason for the extension. 
Sec. 10-2. - Review procedures. 
(a)  Conformity with development code. Every official and employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue a permit or license shall not issue a permit or license for any use, building, improvement, or purpose that conflicts with any provision of this code. Any permit or license or certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be null and void. 
(b)  Public notice requirements. The purpose of this section is to establish the minimum requirements for notice where required in this chapter. Unless otherwise specified, when notice is required in this chapter pursuant to Sec. 10-2, the notice required is as set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Published notice-General. 
a.  A distinctive public hearing notice shall be placed by the zoning administrator at least once in a local official newspaper of general circulation within the city, as designated by the city council, prior to the meeting, for the purpose of notifying the public of the time and place of such public hearing and the substance of the public hearing agenda items that may be considered or reviewed. 
b.  The public hearing notice shall be placed according to the following deadlines: 
1.  Planning and zoning commission - zoning: Ten days prior to public hearing. 
2.  Planning and zoning commission - replat: Fifteen days prior to public hearing. 
3.  City council: Fifteen days prior to public hearing. 
c.  Published notices shall contain at least the following specific information: 
1.  The general location of land that is the subject of the application and/or a location map; 
2.  The legal description or street address; 
3.  The substance of the application, including the magnitude of proposed development and the current zoning district; 
4.  The time, date and location of the public hearing; 
5.  A phone number to contact the city; and 
6.  A statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing. 
(2)  Mailed notice. 
a.  Mailed notices shall be mailed according to the following deadlines: 
1.  Zoning board of adjustment: Ten days prior to public hearing. 
2.  Planning and zoning commission - zoning: Ten days prior to public hearing. 
3.  Planning and zoning commission - replat: Fifteen days prior to public hearing. 
4.  City council: Fifteen days prior to public hearing. 
b.  Mailed notices shall contain at least the following specific information: 
1.  The general location of land that is the subject of the application and/or a location map; 
2.  The legal description or street address; 
3.  The substance of the application, including the magnitude of proposed development and the current zoning district; 
4.  The time, date and location of the public hearing; 
5.  A phone number to contact the city; and 
6.  A statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing. 
c.  For proposed changes to zoning classifications or boundaries, excluding applications for original zoning, in addition to published notice as set forth in subsection (e)(1) of this section, written notice shall be mailed to each owner within the corporate limits within the city, as indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, of real property within 300 feet of the property on which a change in zoning classification or boundary is proposed before the tenth day before the hearing date. Notice may be served by its deposit in the U.S. Mail in the city, properly addressed with postage paid. 
(3)  On-site public hearing notification sign. 
a.  Property owner initiated proceedings. For all proceedings initiated by or on behalf of the property owner, at least one on-site public hearing notification sign shall be provided by the city and placed by the property owner on each property requiring a public hearing prior to the public hearing date, in accordance with the public notice requirements in Subsection (b)(1) above. At least one sign shall be posted per 500 linear feet of all property located along a public right-of-way, with a minimum of one sign per frontage, placed parallel to and visible from, the roadway. In the event of unique circumstances affecting a property, the location of the sign(s) may be determined by city staff. The property owner shall provide an affidavit, including photographs, attesting to the date of installation and the number of signs installed. This affidavit shall be provided to the city at least five days prior to the required public hearing. If the proceeding requires a public hearing before both the planning and zoning commission and the city council, separate photographs and affidavits shall be required for each public hearing. 
b.  City initiated proceedings. For proceedings initiated by the city, it may not be possible or practical to place a sign on the private property subject to the proposed proceedings. In addition, in some situations, city initiated proceedings may involve multiple tracts of land that make it impractical to place a sign on every tract. Therefore, in city initiated proceedings, the zoning administrator shall determine in his sole discretion the most effective and practical manner in which to provide reasonable on-site notification of public hearings. 
(4)  Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice or if an on-site public hearing notification sign is damaged or removed shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Defects in notice provisions which exceed the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 shall not invalidate any action or proceedings pursuant thereto. 
(5)  Summary of notice required. Published, mailed, or signed notice shall be required for development review as shown in the following table: 
Procedure Published Mailed On-site public
hearing notification
signs placed Planning Policy General Plan text amendment X General Plan map amendment X X Code amendment (other than zoning) Annexation Voluntary X X Involuntary X X X Zoning Zoning text amendment X Application for original zoning X X X Zoning map amendment X X X PUD development plan/rezoning X X X Platting Concept plan X X X Preliminary plat Final plat Replat - single-family or two-family (1) X X X Replat - all other X X X Amending or minor plat Exceptions and Variances Variance X X Special exception X X Sign exception Compatibility buffer exception X Historic Preservation Certificate of appropriateness Historic overlay designation X X X Partial historic tax exemption X  
(1) See Sec. 10-30(e) 
(c)  Expiration of approvals and permits. 
(1)  Approvals and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire according to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, as amended, and the following table if no progress has been made toward the completion of the project as described in subsection (f)(3) of this section. 
Procedure Expiration Certificate of zoning compliance 12 months Written interpretation 12 months Administrative adjustment 12 months Temporary use permits 60 days Site plan review 2 years Certificate of appropriateness 12 months General plan amendment No expiration Original zoning No expiration Text amendment No expiration Zoning map amendment (rezoning) No expiration Designation of historic district or landmark No expiration Concept plan 2 years Preliminary plat 2 years Final plat 2 years Minor subdivision final plat 2 years Replat 2 years Amended plat 2 years Subdivision development permit 2 years  
(2)  A certificate of zoning compliance or written interpretation stays in effect indefinitely where no change of use or development has occurred or is proposed. Upon modification of use or modified development, the certificate of zoning compliance or written interpretation shall expire according to the table in subsection (f)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Progress toward completion of the project shall include any of the following, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, as amended: 
a.  An application for a final plat is submitted; 
b.  A good-faith attempt is made to file with the city an application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
c.  Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition), in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
d.  Fiscal security is posted; 
e.  Utility connection fees or impact fees have been paid for the project; 
f.  A complete building permit application has been submitted or, if no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued; or 
g.  In the case of projects where more than one building or phase is to be built, the applicant may submit a series of building permit applications. The first application must be submitted within 12 months from the date site plan approval is granted. Each subsequent application must be submitted within 12 months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the previous development. 
(4)  Preliminary plat approval . The approval of a preliminary plat shall expire two years from the date of approval unless a final plat for a portion of the preliminary plat has been approved and recorded, in which case the preliminary plat is extended three additional years from the date each additional final plat is recorded. The developer may request an administrative extension of two (2) years prior to the two-year expiration date where the city has approved the subdivision improvement permit as provided for in Sec. 4-95. 
(5)  Final plat, replat, and amending plat approval . The approval of a final plat, replat and amending plat shall expire two years from the date of approval if the respective plat has not been recorded. The developer may request an administrative extension of two (2) years prior to the two-year expiration date where the city has accepted the subdivision improvement construction plans as provided for in Sec. 4-96(a). 
(6)  Subdivision development permit . 
a.  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, as amended, a subdivision development permit shall be issued by the PDS director after the recording of the final plat. For the purposes of this subsection, the development of each lot shall constitute a separate project. The subdivision development permit authorizes the developer to proceed with the next step in the development process of the lots within the recorded final plat as follows: 
1.  For lots zoned single-family residential, the next step in the development process is an application for a building permit; or 
2.  For lots zoned for uses other than single-family residential, the next step in the development process is an application for site plan approval. 
b.  The subdivision development permit shall expire two years from the date the final plat is recorded. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, as amended, upon the expiration of the subdivision development permit, the development project for each undeveloped lot contained within the recorded final plat shall be considered dormant. 
c.  After a development project has become dormant, the developer of the dormant development project whose subdivision development permit has expired may proceed with said development project provided the developer makes an application for a building permit or site plan approval, as appropriate, but such application shall be governed by the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of said application. 
(7)  Reinstatement of a lapsed approval shall require the same submittal and approval as an original application. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0084, § I, 2-14-2019) 
Sec. 10-3. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  A certificate of zoning compliance shall represent a determination by the zoning administrator that a proposed development or use does, in all respects, conform to the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for all development, except for residential uses in the SF-R, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-D, and TF districts, prior to beginning development. It shall be unlawful to begin development until the zoning administrator has issued a certificate of zoning compliance for such work. 
(3)  The following use-related changes are prohibited until the zoning administrator has issued a certificate of zoning compliance for the intended use: 
a.  Changes in the type of land use. 
b.  Changes in the type of use or type of occupancy of any building. 
c.  The expansion of a building or the associated structures of a business. 
(b)  Timing of application. An application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made concurrently with an application for a site development permit or in cases where a site development permit is not required, concurrently with the application for a building permit. 
(c)  Application filing. Certificate of zoning compliance applications shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator on forms provided for that purpose and available in the planning department. The zoning administrator shall keep a record of all such applications on file. 
(d)  Zoning administrator's review and action. 
(1)  If the proposed development, as set forth in an application for a certificate of zoning compliance, is in conformity with the provisions of this Code, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance, provided that all of the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  Issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this Code. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall not grant any exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, standards, or regulation contained in this Code to any person making application to excavate, construct, move, alter or use buildings, structures or land. 
c.  The zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance when the imposed conditions of this Code are complied with by the applicant regardless of whether the use of the certificate would violate contractual or other arrangements (including, but not by way of limitation, restrictive covenants) among private parties. 
d.  The certificate of zoning compliance shall include a determination that plans, specifications and the intended use of such structure and land do, in all respects, conform to the provisions of this Code. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance, the zoning administrator shall consult with all applicable city departments. 
(2)  If the proposed development, as set forth in an application for a certificate of zoning compliance, is not in conformity with the provisions of this Code, the zoning administrator shall not issue a certificate of zoning compliance. If an application for a certificate of zoning compliance is disapproved, the zoning administrator shall state in writing the cause of such disapproval and provide written notice to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-4. - Written interpretation. 
(a)  Applicability. The zoning administrator shall have authority to make all written interpretations concerning the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Request for interpretation. A request for interpretation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on a form established by the zoning administrator and made available to the public. 
(c)  Interpretation by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this Code, the official zoning map, the general plan and any other relevant information; 
(2)  Consult with other staff, as necessary; 
(3)  Render an opinion; and 
(4)  Provide the interpretation to the applicant in writing by mail. 
(d)  Official record. The zoning administrator shall maintain an official record of interpretation. The record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection during normal city business hours. 
Secs. 10-5-10-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 10-10. - General plan amendments. 
(a)  Applicability. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the general plan or portion thereof, after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Procedure before the planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider all proposed amendments to the general plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 10-1(e). 
(2)  Upon such hearing, all interested parties shall have the opportunity to give testimony or make inquiries regarding any proposed amendment. 
(3)  After such hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation regarding any proposed amendment. 
(4)  Recommendations made by the planning and zoning commission shall be reported to the city council in writing. 
(c)  Procedure before the council. 
(1)  After receiving the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on same. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 10-1(e). 
(2)  The city council shall be at liberty to accept, reject, or take other action on the recommendation it receives from the planning and zoning commission, provided that such action furthers the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
Secs. 10-11-10-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE 

Sec. 10-15. - Amendments to the zoning and development code. 
(a)  Purpose. For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the city, the text of this code shall not be amended except to acknowledge changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the city generally, or to change the regulations and restrictions of this code. All amendments shall be in accordance with the general plan. 
(b)  Initiation of amendments. An amendment to the text of this code may be initiated by: 
(1)  City council on its own motion; or 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Approval process. 
(1)  Review and report by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the proposed amendment in light of the general plan and give a report to the planning and zoning commission on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
(2)  Public hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall publish notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e), hold a public hearing and recommend to the council such action as the commission deems proper. 
(3)  City council action. 
a.  Notice. The city council shall publish notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e) and hold a public hearing before rendering decisions on a petition to amend this Code. 
b.  Public hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the amendment application. 
(d)  Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove amendments to this code, the city council shall consider and make findings on the following matters regarding the proposed amendment: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the general plan; 
(2)  Whether the proposed amendment advances the stated scope and purpose of this code as stated in Sec. 1-3; and 
(3)  Whether the proposed amendment advances the stated purpose of any zoning district it may affect. 
Secs. 10-16-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 10-20. - Original zoning. 
(a)  Applicability. All land annexed to the city shall be accompanied by a proposal to zone the affected property to a base zoning district as identified in Sec. 2-1. It is the intent of the city to zone property when it is annexed. To achieve the city's intent, a property owner may submit a proposal to zone the land being annexed to a base zoning district as identified in Sec. 2-1 along with the annexation petition. Such zoning district shall be appropriate for the intended use of the property and in accordance with the general plan. When the intended use of the land being annexed has not been determined and a proposal to zone the land has not been provided by the property owner, the land annexed may be zoned by the city council at its sole discretion. 
(b)  Process. The original zoning decision shall be made after annexation occurs, although decisions for both may occur at the same public meetings. In all meetings, annexation votes shall occur prior to voting on the application for original zoning. 
(c)  Map amendment procedures. An application for original zoning shall follow the procedures set forth in Sec. 10-21, map amendment (rezoning). 
Sec. 10-21. - Map amendment (rezoning). 
(a)  Purpose. For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the city, the official zoning map shall not be amended except to confirm or acknowledge changed or changing conditions in a particular area, or to extend the boundary of an existing zoning district. All amendments shall be in accordance with the general plan. 
(b)  Initiation of amendments. An amendment to the official zoning map may be initiated by: 
(1)  City council on its own motion; 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission; or 
(3)  Application by property owner. 
(c)  Approval process. 
(1)  Review and report by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the proposed amendment to the official zoning map in light of the general plan, subject to the criteria enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and give a report to the planning and zoning commission on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
(2)  Referral to planning and zoning commission. The zoning administrator, upon receipt of application to amend the official zoning map, shall refer the same to the planning and zoning commission for study, hearing, and report. The city council may not enact the proposed amendment until the commission makes its report to the city council. 
(3)  Public hearing and recommendation by planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall publish and mail public notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e), shall hold a public hearing and recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval to the council. 
(4)  City council action. 
a.  Notice. The city council shall publish and mail public notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e), and hold a public hearing before rendering a decision on an amendment to the official zoning map. 
b.  Public hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the application to amend the official zoning map. 
c.  Effect of planning and zoning commission recommendation for disapproval. If the planning and zoning commission has recommended that the city council disapprove a potential zoning map amendment, the amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council. 
d.  Effect of protest to proposed amendment. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006, if a written protest that meets the conditions in this subsection is presented to the city secretary prior to the public hearing for the map amendment, the amendment shall become effective only with the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city council. The valid protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of either: 
1.  The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or 
2.  The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area. 
In computing the percentage of land area under this subsection, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(d)  Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with modifications or conditions or disapprove amendments to the official zoning map, the city council shall consider and make findings on the following matters regarding the proposed amendment: 
(1)  Consistency (or lack thereof) with the general plan; 
(2)  Compatibility with the present zoning and conforming uses of nearby property and with the character of the neighborhood; 
(3)  Suitability of the property affected by the amendment for uses permitted by the district that would be made applicable by the proposed amendment; 
(4)  Suitability of the property affected by the amendment for uses permitted by the district applicable to the property at the time of the proposed amendment; and 
(5)  Availability of water, wastewater and stormwater facilities suitable and adequate for the proposed use. 
(e)  Limitation on reapplication. If an application for rezoning is disapproved by the city council, another application for reclassification of the same property or any portion thereof to the same zoning district shall not be filed within a period of 12 months from the date of final disapproval, unless upon initiation by the planning and zoning commission or city council. 
Sec. 10-22. - Planned unit development (PUD). 
(a)  Applicability. A PUD may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization, master-planned communities, or mixed-use developments that other zoning districts do not easily accommodate. A PUD also provides site-specific compatibility standards. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility. PUDs are appropriate in areas where the general plan reflects either the specific uses proposed in the PUD or where the general plan reflects mixed-use as a land use category. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Initiation of PUD. A PUD application shall consist of a request for original zoning or a zoning change and a development plan. 
(2)  Pre-submittal meeting. The purpose of the mandatory pre-submittal meeting is to afford the applicant an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the city staff before submitting the PUD application. 
(3)  Review and recommendation by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the original zoning or zoning change and the development plan application and forward its recommendation to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the application to the zoning administrator, who shall in turn forward his/her recommendations to the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Review and recommendation by planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall review the request for either original zoning or a zoning change, along with the development plan application, and recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval of the same. 
(5)  Review and action by city council. 
a.  If the PUD zoning application is favorably reviewed by the planning and zoning commission, it shall be sent forward to the city council with a recommendation for approval under the condition that the development plan with all related information shall be presented to the city council. Otherwise it shall be forwarded with an unfavorable recommendation. 
b.  The chapter granting a PUD district shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the planned development granted therein. All specific conditions of approval that are imposed by the city council shall be listed in the PUD chapter and development plans shall be referenced as attachments. 
(c)  Development plan requirements. The development requirements for each separate PUD district shall be included as a part of the development plan for each PUD district and shall include, but may not be limited to: uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, parking, driveways and access, streets and circulation, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, project phasing or scheduling, management associations, and other requirements as the city council may deem appropriate. 
(d)  Development plan approval criteria. The form and content of the development plan shall be in sufficient detail to enable the city council to evaluate the proposal and ascertain that it meets the following: 
(1)  The proposal will constitute an environment of sustained stability and shall be in harmony with the character of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The proposal is in conformity with the policies, goals and objectives of the general plan including all its elements and shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Code. 
(3)  The proposal ensures the provision of adequate public improvements, including but not limited to, transportation, drainage, parks, and other public facilities. 
(4)  The proposal ensures minimal development-related off-site impacts. 
(e)  Minimum requirements. Unless otherwise specified in the approved development plan, the minimum requirements for each development shall be those stated in this code and shall be the requirements of the most restrictive standard zoning district in which designated uses are permitted. Meritorious modification of these standards may be considered. 
(f)  Density requirements. Overall density in any planned unit development shall generally equal that shown on the general plan for the particular location. Lower density may be required to ensure compatibility with surrounding existing neighborhood densities. Higher densities may be approved at the discretion of the city council. 
(g)  Compliance with applicable city ordinances. The granting of a PUD designation shall not relieve the developer from responsibility for complying with all other applicable sections of this code, and other codes and chapters of the city unless such relief is specified in the approved development plan. 
(h)  Deviations from established standards . Each PUD application shall describe and justify each aspect of the proposed development that is not already accommodated by the standards established in this code, and thus contributes to the necessity of the PUD request. 
(i)  Minor amendment to development plan. All changes of use from those approved in the original PUD shall require city council approval. Minor additions and modifications to the approved development plans meeting the criteria below may be approved by the zoning administrator: 
(1)  Minor additions to structures, with a floor area no larger than ten percent of the existing floor area of the main floor, not to exceed 5,000 square feet, provided that overall density of the project does not increase. 
(2)  Minor new accessory structures if the location does not interfere with existing site layout (e.g., circulation, parking, loading, stormwater management facilities, open space, landscaping or buffering). 
(3)  Minor additions to parking lots comprising no more than ten percent of the original number of parking spaces required, not to exceed 25 spaces. 
(4)  Clearing or grading that does not exceed 5,000 square feet in area or ten percent of the site. 
(j)  Development plan is a subdivision concept plan. Approval of a development plan shall also constitute approval of a concept plan for subdivision purposes. 
Secs. 10-23, 10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 10-25. - In general. 
(a)  Application procedure. An application for approval of a concept plan or a plat shall be filed with the PDS director by the developer and in accordance with the official filing date schedule. An application for approval of a final plat, minor subdivision final plat or replat not submitted in accordance with the official filing date schedule may be subject to disapproval. 
(b)  Review for application completeness. The PDS director shall determine if the application for approval of a concept plan or a plat meets all the content requirements of this chapter. An incomplete application will not be accepted. The PDS director shall notify the developer in writing of the noted deficiencies. Upon correction of the deficiencies, the application may be resubmitted on a subsequent official filing date. 
(c)  Withdrawal of an application . A developer may withdraw an application for approval of a concept plan or any plat prior to the review of the respective concept plan or plat by the planning and zoning commission, by notifying the PDS director in writing. 
(d)  Filing fees . Fees shall be charged for all concept plans, plats, or vacation applications. The fees and charges shall be paid upon the submittal of an application and the application shall not be considered complete until such fee has been paid. 
Sec. 10-26. - Concept plan. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the concept plan is to present a layout of a proposed subdivision or addition. The intent of the concept plan is to facilitate the review of the proposed subdivision or addition in accordance with the general plan policies and, where applicable, the concurrent review by the planning and zoning commission for original zoning recommendation for the proposed subdivision. In addition, the purpose is to determine the availability of city utilities, streets and drainage. 
(b)  Platting of parent tract. In order to ensure the orderly planning of streets, utilities, drainage and other public facilities, the parent tract must be included in a concept plan. 
(c)  Pre-submittal meeting. The developer must attend a pre-submittal meeting prior to the filing of an application for approval of a concept plan. 
(d)  Required. The developer shall submit a concept plan of the proposed subdivision or addition prior to the submission of a preliminary plat application for approval by the planning and zoning commission, when the proposed subdivision or addition includes any of the following: 
(1)  Contains more than twenty acres or is contained within a parent tract which contains more than twenty acres; or 
(2)  Proposes to create a new street connection to a freeway, highway, or designated arterial roadway in the regional transportation network. 
Where a concept plan is not required, a preliminary plat or minor final plat may still be required. 
(e)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a concept plan application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(f)  Notice requirement for concept plan. The planning department will mail a notice of public hearing to the owner of each property located within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision or addition, as recorded by the appropriate tax appraisal district. The notice shall state in effect that a concept plan is pending before the planning and zoning commission, and shall include a disclaimer stating that the notice is for information purposes only and that the planning and zoning commission will not take into consideration the use of the property when approving the concept plan. The notice for public hearing shall be mailed not less than ten days prior to the date of the planning and zoning commission meeting and shall provide the date, place and time of the meeting. Additionally, one or more on-site public hearing notification signs shall be placed in accordance with Subsection 10-2(3). 
(g)  Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice or if an on-site public hearing notification sign is damaged or removed shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Defects in notice provisions which exceed the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, shall not invalidate any action or proceedings pursuant thereto. 
(h)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies of the concept plan specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing complete with all required information. 
(i)  Revisions to approved concept plans. A request for a major revision to a preliminary plat shall trigger the submittal of a new concept plan in conjunction with the major revision requested and trigger notice requirements provided for in subsection (f) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0085, § I, 2-14-2019) 
Sec. 10-27. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to present a detailed layout of the proposed subdivision in order to facilitate a review by the planning and zoning commission of the proposed subdivision's street and drainage system, easements, utilities, building lots, and other lots including parkland. 
(b)  Pre-submittal meeting. The developer must attend a pre-submittal meeting prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, unless waived by the PDS director. 
(c)  Required. The developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission for approval a preliminary plat of the subdivision. The preliminary plat shall conform to the concept plan, where one was required. If the PDS director determines the preliminary plat does not conform to the approved concept plan, a new concept plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the preliminary plat and the notice requirements provided for in Sec. 10-26(f) shall be followed. 
(d)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a preliminary plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(e)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies of the preliminary plat as specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing with all required information and an electronic plat in the format described in the development packet. A phase II environmental assessment may be required if the phase I environmental assessment indicates that a potential environmental hazard may exist. 
(f)  Revisions to approved preliminary plats. 
(1)  Minor revisions to approved preliminary plats. The PDS director may administratively approve minor revisions to approved preliminary plats. The developer shall submit a preliminary plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. A minor revision is one that: 
a.  Changes the lot size or configuration provided that the total number of lots does not increase; 
b.  Changes a local street width or alignment; or 
c.  Changes a utility or access easement. 
(2)  Major revisions to approved preliminary plats. The planning and zoning commission may approve major revisions to approved preliminary plats. Proposed major revisions to an approved preliminary plat shall trigger the submittal of a new concept plan in conjunction with the major revision requested and trigger notice requirements provided for in Sec. 10-10(f), with the exception that concept plans contained within a Planned Unit Development are not required to be re-submitted. The developer shall submit a preliminary plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. A major revision may include, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  An increase in the number of lots; 
b.  A change to the collector or arterial street layout; or 
c.  A modification of the parkland. 
Sec. 10-28. - Final plat. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the final plat is to allow for a review by the planning and zoning commission of the proposed subdivision's street and drainage system, easements, utilities, building lots, and other lots including parkland, and to establish an approved, legally recordable plat of the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Corresponding final plat. If a final plat does not include the entire parcel of land included in the preliminary plat, the final plat must correspond to the phasing approved in the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Required. The developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission for approval a final plat of the subdivision in conformance with the approved preliminary plat. 
(d)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a final plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(e)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies of the final plat as specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing with all required information in a format specified in the development packet. A phase II environmental assessment may be required if the phase I environmental assessment indicates that a potential environmental hazard may exist. 
Sec. 10-29. - Minor subdivision final plat. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the minor subdivision final plat is to allow for a review by city staff and to establish an approved, legally recordable plat of the proposed subdivision. The minor subdivision final plat is intended to expedite the platting process for qualifying subdivisions by not requiring the submission of a concept plan and preliminary plat. 
(b)  Pre-submittal meeting. The developer must attend a pre-submittal meeting prior to the filing of an application for approval of a minor subdivision final plat. At the pre-submittal meeting, the developer must meet the following criteria in order to file a minor subdivision final plat application: 
(1)  The number of proposed lots does not exceed four; 
(2)  There are no requirements for additional off-site or on-site public improvements; 
(3)  There is no requirement for a TIA; and 
(4)  At the conclusion of the pre-submittal meeting, obtain the signatures of the PDS director, confirming the tract of land meets the criteria provided in subsections (1) through (3) above on the certification form provided in the development packet. 
(c)  When permitted. The developer shall submit a minor subdivision final plat to the PDS director for approval without the submission of a concept plan or a preliminary plat. If the PDS director denies the minor subdivision final plat application, the application shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(d)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a minor subdivision final plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(e)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies of the minor subdivision final plat as specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing with all required information in a format specified in the development packet. A phase II environmental assessment may be required if the phase I environmental assessment indicates that a potential environmental hazard may exist. 
Sec. 10-30. - Replat. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of a replat is to resubdivide all or part of a recorded plat, without the vacation of the preceding plat, and to allow for a review by the planning and zoning commission. A replat is not required when the city or other governmental entity acquires part of a developed property for right-of-way expansion. 
(b)  Pre-submittal meeting. The developer must attend a pre-submittal meeting prior to the filing of an application for approval of a replat. 
(c)  When permitted. The developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission for approval of a replat in compliance with the Texas Local Government Code as amended. 
(d)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a replat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(e)  Notice requirement for replats. Pursuant to V.T.C.A Local Government Code ch. 212.015, a public hearing is required for replats containing lots which during the preceding five (5) years were limited by zoning or deed restriction to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. A public hearing is not required for replats containing only lots zoned or restricted for all other uses. Notice of a replat public hearing shall be given, not less than 15 days before the date set for the hearing, by publication and by written notice forwarded by the PDS director to the owners of property lying outside of the replat boundaries and within 300 feet of those boundaries as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or, in the case of a subdivision within the ETJ regulated by the city, the most recently approved county tax roll of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the municipal boundaries. Additionally, one on-site public hearing notification sign shall be placed by city staff on each property requiring a public hearing not less than ten days prior to the planning and zoning commission public hearing date. The sign shall be placed perpendicular to and no further than 15 feet from the roadway, or as deemed suitable by staff. 
(f)  Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice or if an on-site public hearing notification sign is damaged or removed shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Defects in notice provisions which exceed the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, shall not invalidate any action or proceedings pursuant thereto. 
(g)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing with all required information in a format specified in the development packet. 
Sec. 10-31. - Amending plat. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of an amending plat is to replace a recorded plat without vacation of that plat, and to allow for a review by city staff. The amending plat is intended to be used as a limited means to correct minor errors or make minor adjustments to a recorded plat as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016, as amended. 
(b)  Pre-submittal meeting. The developer must attend a pre-submittal meeting prior to the filing of an application for approval of an amending plat. 
(c)  When permitted. The developer shall submit to the PDS director for approval an amending plat application in lieu of a preliminary and final plat when the proposed amending plat is filed for one or more of the purposes listed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016. If the PDS director denies the amending plat application, the application shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(d)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit an amending plat application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
(e)  City staff review. After the city staff review and comment period, the developer shall submit to the planning department the number of corrected copies specified in the development packet, along with one reproducible drawing with all required information in a format described in the development packet. 
Sec. 10-32. - Plat vacation. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of a plat vacation is to nullify all or part of a previously recorded plat. 
(b)  When permitted. The developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission for approval a plat vacation as permitted under and in compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.013: 
(1)  No lots sold. The owner of the land covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. After approval by the planning and zoning commission, the plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(2)  Lots sold. If one or more lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. After approval by the planning and zoning commission, the plat is vacated when all owners record a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated. 
(c)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a plat vacation application that contains all the materials listed in the development packet. 
Sec. 10-33. - Release of easement. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of a release of easement is to nullify a portion or the entire easement established by a previously recorded plat or by separate instrument. A release of easement may be initiated by the respective lot owners or by the city. 
(b)  When permitted. The developer shall submit a release of easement application containing a metes and bounds description and sketch of the proposed area to be released, and signed by the owner of the land requesting the city to vacate the easement, in order to release all or a portion of an easement, including but not limited to, a public utility easement, drainage easement, conservation easement, public access easement or combination public easement. The easement shall be released when all owners and entities authorized to use the easement sign and acknowledge a release form, approval is granted by the city manager and the release of easement instrument declaring the easement released is recorded. 
(c)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a release of easement application that contains the following: 
(1)  A copy of the deeds identifying the owners of the property; 
(2)  A letter signed by the owners of the lot to the PDS director containing the following: 
a.  A metes and bounds description and survey sketch including a description of the easement or portion of the easement to be released including the lot description and orientation to the nearest lot line; 
b.  An explanation of the purpose of the release request; and 
c.  Signatures by the entities authorized to use the easement agreeing to the requested release of easement, in the form provided in the development packet. 
(3)  Payment of applicable fees. 
Sec. 10-34. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  Distribution and review. The PDS director shall distribute a copy of each application to the reviewing agencies and the reviewing agencies shall review the application in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code and this code. The PDS director shall prepare a report for each application and shall distribute the report to the planning and zoning commission, except for those applications approved administratively. 
(b)  Director approval. After a review by the reviewing agencies, the PDS director may approve easement vacations. Upon a determination by the PDS director that all of the public utilities authorized to use the easement proposed for vacation approve of the vacation request, the PDS director shall then approve the respective easement vacation. 
(c)  Planning and zoning commission action. The planning and zoning commission shall review the reports of the PDS director and shall either approve, approve with minor conditions, or disapprove concept plans or plats within 30 days after the filing of a completed application. The planning and zoning commission may approve a written request submitted by the developer to table a concept plan or plat application to a specific future planning and zoning commission meeting when it is requested on a form provided by the city where the developer waives its right to having the plat acted upon within the required 30 days as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.009(a). The planning and zoning commission may not table action on a plat without the consent of the developer and a waiver of rights. 
(d)  Notification of action taken for plats. Within ten working days after action taken by the planning and zoning commission, the PDS director shall issue to the developer a certificate as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115, stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
Sec. 10-35. - Recordation procedure. 
(a)  In order for the approved plat to be recorded, the following are required: 
(1)  The plat is subject to the recordation requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004(b); 
(2)  The plat is subject to the filing and recording provisions of Texas Property Code § 12.002; and 
(3)  The developer must submit to the PDS director all other application requirements specified in the development packet. 
(4)  Recorded copies of any required off-site easements. 
(b)  The PDS director shall obtain the required city signatures on each reproducible copy of the plat. After all signatures required for recordation have been affixed to the plat, the PDS director shall present the prescribed county recording fee and the plat to the office of the county clerk for recording. 
(c)  The official copy of the recorded plat shall be maintained at the office of the county clerk. A copy of the recorded plat shall be maintained in the files of the planning department. 
Sec. 10-36. - License agreements. 
(a)  In general . 
(1)  A license agreement permits a private party to encroach upon or construct site improvements within public property or the right-of-way. The agreement is granted to an entity to construct landscape improvements, such as subdivision entry features. 
(2)  Private construction on public property or right-of-way is prohibited without an executed license agreement in place. Structures and planting shall be located outside of all easements and shall be set back from public utilities as required by the transportation director and city engineer. 
(3)  Design and construction of improvements covered under a license agreement shall be in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards, specifically the provision for obstruction-free sight triangles at intersections. 
(4)  A building permit shall be required for the irrigation tap and meter. 
(5)  If the proposed work covered under the license agreement is zoned as a Planned Unit Development (PUD), then the PUD requirements shall be incorporated. 
(6)  Landscaping that is not in compliance with City of Round Rock criteria or has been planted without an approved License Agreement from the City shall be removed by the sponsoring organization or individual at their cost. 
(7)  In addition to landscaping and subdivision entry treatments, the following items to be constructed by the applicant within the public right-of-way shall be covered by a license agreement that states the applicant is responsible for maintenance: 
a.  Illumination; 
b.  Signs; 
c.  Walls and fences; 
d.  Aesthetic treatments such as surface finishes, concrete stain, or brick pavers; 
e.  Non-standard pavement such as stamped concrete or pavers in crosswalks; and 
f.  Private utilities. 
(b)  License agreement process. 
(1)  The applicant shall request a pre-submittal meeting with the planning and development services department in order to present the initial request and discuss review procedures, applicable codes, and potential problems with the request. 
(2)  The applicant shall obtain and review the license agreement application packet from the planning and development services department. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit a site development plan for the proposed site improvements. After the site development plans and construction documents have been approved, and a site development permit issued, the applicant shall then submit the license agreement application to the planning and development services department. 
(4)  The applicant shall submit construction plans, the completed application, and application fee to the planning and development services department. The City will review, and when ready for signatures, contact the applicant. Once the applicant has returned the signed license agreement to the planning and development services office, it will be forwarded to the city manager for execution. 
(5)  The materials to be submitted with the completed license agreement application shall be listed in the development packet. 
(c)  Maintenance considerations . 
(1)  The applicant shall be required to maintain the landscaping and other improvements covered under a license agreement. The applicant shall also be responsible for trimming tree limbs from trees located on private property which cause an obstruction of the right-of-way. 
(2)  The City reserves the right to prune or remove any vegetation, at the cost of the applicant, as determined necessary for visibility and ease of maintenance. 
Sec. 10-37. - Right-of-way abandonment procedures. 
(a)  In general . 
(1)  Rights-of-way shall only be abandoned if they do not contain City facilities or facilities of a franchised utility company, and if the right-of-way is not currently being utilized or is determined to no longer be needed for public use. 
(2)  Rights-of-way are dedicated to the City for public use. Action by the City Council shall be required to abandon a public right-of-way. City rights-of-way are also utilized by various privately owned utility companies through contractual franchise agreements with the City. Therefore, the franchised utility companies must agree with the abandonment of rights-of-way. 
(3)  If all requirements set forth in this procedure are met, abandonment shall be considered by the City Council by adoption of an ordinance abandoning the affected right-of-way. Once adopted by the City council, the ordinance will be filed in the deed records of the county where the abandoned property is located. No deed or title conveyance shall be made by the City to the property abandoned. 
(b)  Procedure . 
(1)  A pre-application meeting with the transportation director, city engineer, or designated representatives is required to look at the site and receive initial guidance through the process. The applicant requesting the abandonment must obtain the following information and forward this information to the City as a complete packet: 
a.  A letter of request from the applicant and all adjoining property owners requesting abandonment of the subject right-of-way and the specific reason for the proposed abandonment. Include the following information: street or location address, legal description, and assessor parcel number. Where the underlying title to the right-of-way is in more than one owner, all owners must agree to the abandonment. The City shall not be responsible for determinations of ownership and division of property. 
b.  An agreement in writing to relocate, construct or reconstruct fences, sidewalk, utilities, curbs and gutters, and such other improvements as required. 
c.  The appropriate fee in the form of a check made out to the City of Round Rock for the administrative processing for abandonment of right-of-way. 
d.  A copy of the original right-of-way dedication instrument (usually this is a plat or a separate dedication instrument). The applicant shall obtain certified copies of the documents that were used to dedicate the easements. The applicant shall be responsible for retaining assistance, if necessary, of a surveyor or title company. 
e.  The applicant shall have a survey and field notes prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor (RPLS) in the State of Texas for the right-of-way (or portion) to be abandoned. The sketch and field notes shall reflect only the portions to be abandoned. 
f.  A copy of a deed or title insurance policy showing the names of the owners, dated within the last 90 days. 
g.  Actual field locations of all City utilities shall be recorded. 
h.  Letters from all franchised utility companies indicating they have no objections to the right-of-way abandonment shall be required. If the right-of-way contains facilities of the franchised utilities, these facilities shall be shown on the sketch. The applicant shall be responsible for verifying and displaying the location of utilities. 
i.  In cases where right-of-way abandonment will involve the purchase of property or interest therein from the City, the applicant shall obtain an appraisal completed by a MAI certified appraiser who is pre-approved by the City. 
j.  Corporate or partnership owners shall furnish a copy of a corporate resolution or other proof of authority to sign on behalf of the corporation, partnership, or joint venture. 
(2)  When the above information has been received by the City, the applicant shall be notified that the file is complete and ready for City Council action. The city engineer or transportation director shall place the abandonment on the City Council agenda, prepare a recommendation, and inform the applicant of the date and time of the council meeting. 
(3)  The City Council may at its sole right and option, elect to sell or abandon right-of-way for a sum equal to the present market value or elect not to sell and/or abandon the ROW. 
(4)  The City shall request preparation of an abandonment ordinance from the City Attorney's office and forward the applicable sketch, field notes, and recommendation for the abandonment. 
(5)  Upon City Council approval of the abandonment ordinance the applicant shall be required to pay to the City the value of the abandonment as determined by the appraisal (if applicable). Once the settlement is received the City shall finalize the abandonment ordinance and forward a copy of the ordinance to the applicant. 
(6)  The applicant is responsible for filing a quit claim deed or an approved plat with the county clerk's office in order to legally claim the appropriate portion of property. 
(c)  Alternate procedure . 
(1)  In instances in which a right-of-way was dedicated by plat, they may be abandoned through a replat. See Sec. 10-30 for information on the replat procedure. 
Sec. 10-38. - Driveway permits. 
    The city shall have the sole responsibility and authority to issue driveway permits for connections to roads owned by the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) within the jurisdiction of the city, including the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Secs. 10-39-10-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 10-45. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Applicability. Prior to any development other than single-family (attached or detached) an applicant must obtain site plan approval under this section. No such development shall be lawful or permitted to proceed without final site plan approval. All improvements reflected on approved site plans must be constructed at the time of development. All terms and conditions of site plan approval must be met at the time of development. 
(b)  Approval process. Site plan applications shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Pre-submittal meeting. Prior to the submission of an application for site plan approval, all potential applicants are strongly encouraged to request a pre-submittal meeting with the zoning administrator. The purpose of the meeting is to respond to any questions that the applicant may have regarding any application procedures, standards, or regulations required by this Code. Upon receipt of such request, the zoning administrator shall afford the potential applicant an opportunity for such a pre-submittal meeting at the earliest reasonable time. 
(2)  Review and action by the zoning administrator. All site plans shall be submitted to the DSO for review and approval, approval with conditions or disapproval. If the proposed site plan is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this section and all other provisions of the Code, the zoning administrator shall approve the site plan and so advise the applicant in writing. A determination that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan and notice of such disapproval shall be given to the applicant in writing. 
(c)  Approval criteria. In order to be approved, a site plan must provide for all of the development requirements of this Code, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Safe and convenient traffic control and handling; 
(2)  Assured pedestrian safety which may include the provision of sidewalks along the perimeter of the property meeting the specifications for same as outlined in Chapter 6, relative to width and placement; 
(3)  Efficient and economic public utility and sanitation access; 
(4)  Public road or street access; 
(5)  Satisfactory internal access; public, private or emergency; 
(6)  Adequate parking and maneuvering areas; 
(7)  Noise and emission control or dispersion; 
(8)  Screening compatibility requirements in accordance with the provisions of this Code; 
(9)  Runoff, drainage and flood control; 
(10)  Sign location requirements in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8, article VIII, of this Code; 
(11)  Location and density of buildings or dwellings where topography or characteristics of the site compel a lower density than would otherwise be allowed, or require location consistent with accepted engineering practices and principles; 
(12)  Landscape plans depicting the landscaping requirements in accordance with Sec. 8-10; 
(13)  Legal description or metes and bounds survey that legally describes the building plot and street address; and 
(14)  Compliance with any additional site plan approval criteria required for overlay districts or any site plan approval criteria adopted as part of a neighborhood plan or special area plan. 
Secs. 10-46-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VARIANCES, ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 10-50. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The zoning board of adjustment shall have jurisdiction to hear requests for a variance from the terms of this code. The ZBA shall be authorized to grant a variance from the terms hereof if, and only if, they find that the strict enforcement of this code would create a substantial hardship to the applicant, by virtue of unique special conditions not generally found within the city, and that the granting of the variance would preserve the spirit and intent of the code, and would serve the general interests of the public and the applicant. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this code so that public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
(b)  Approval process. 
(1)  Review and report by zoning administrator. Once the application is complete, the zoning administrator shall review the variance application, subject to the review criteria enumerated in subsection (c) below, and give a report to the zoning board of adjustment on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
(2)  Action by the zoning board of adjustment. 
a.  Notice. The zoning board of adjustment shall mail notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e). 
b.  Variance review and public hearing. 
1.  In conjunction with review of the variance application, subject to the criteria listed in subsection (c) of this section, the zoning board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing and shall make a written finding and give its approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval. 
2.  It shall take a concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the ZBA to approve or approve with modifications or corrections an application for a variance from this Code. 
(c)  Criteria for approval of variances. 
(1)  Required findings. The zoning board of adjustment shall authorize a variance from the requirements of this Code when an unnecessary hardship would result from the strict enforcement of this Code. In granting a variance, the ZBA shall prescribe only conditions that it deems not prejudicial to the public interest. In making the required findings, the ZBA shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development, the possibility that a nuisance shall be created, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon public health, convenience, and welfare of the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the ZBA finds all of the following: 
a.  Extraordinary conditions. There are extraordinary or special conditions affecting the land involved such that strict application of the provisions of this Code will deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of their land. For example, a variance might be justified because of topographic or other special conditions unique to the property and development involved, while it would not be justified due to inconvenience or financial disadvantage. 
b.  Application of a substantial property right. The variance is necessary for the preservation and application of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
c.  Substantial detriment. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, or to the city in administering this Code. 
d.  Other property. These conditions do not generally apply to other property in the vicinity. 
e.  Applicant's actions. The conditions are not the result of the applicant's own actions. 
f.  General plan. The granting of the variance would not substantially conflict with the general plan and the purposes of this Code. 
g.  Utilization. Because of these conditions, the application of this Code to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property. 
(2)  Insufficient findings. The following types of possible findings do not constitute sufficient grounds for granting a variance: 
a.  The property cannot be used for its highest and best use. 
b.  There is a financial or economic hardship. 
c.  There is a self-created hardship by the property owner or his agent. 
d.  The development objectives of the property owner are or shall be frustrated. 
(3)  Limitations. The zoning board of adjustment may not grant a variance when the effect of which would be any of the following: 
a.  To allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
b.  To increase the density of a use above that permitted by the applicable district. 
c.  To expand a nonconforming land use. 
d.  To change the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map. 
(4)  Profitability not to be considered. The fact that property may be utilized more profitably should a variance be granted may not be considered grounds for a variance. 
(d)  Appeal. Appeals of the zoning board of adjustment's decision must be made within ten days to the district court, county court, or county court at law in accordance with Texas Local Government Code. 
Sec. 10-51. - Administrative adjustments. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to provide a method by which human error may be corrected, administrative adjustments are permitted. Administrative adjustments are specified deviations from otherwise applicable development standards where development is proposed that would be: 
(1)  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(2)  Harmonious with the public interest; and 
(3)  Consistent with the purposes of this Code. 
(b)  Applicability. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to authorize an administrative adjustment of up to 10 percent of any numerical standard set forth in Chapter 2, Zoning, or Chapter 8, Development Standards, of this Code. No administrative adjustment shall increase the overall density or intensity of the development. 
(c)  Review and action by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the application and approve or disapprove the application based upon the criteria below. A written decision including affirmative findings on the criteria set forth below shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(d)  Administrative adjustment criteria. To approve an application for an administrative adjustment, the zoning administrator shall make an affirmative finding that the following criteria are met: 
(1)  That granting the administrative adjustment serves a conspicuously obvious and needed purpose; 
(2)  That granting the administrative adjustment will ensure an equal or better level of land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards; 
(3)  That granting the administrative adjustment will not materially and adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering, screening, setbacks and other land use considerations; 
(4)  That granting the administrative adjustment will not adversely affect property values in any material way; and 
(5)  That granting the administrative adjustment shall be generally consistent with the purposes and intent of this Code. 
Sec. 10-52. - Property subject to condemnation; administrative adjustment. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Condemnation administrative adjustment under this section means adjustment(s) to this Code in the special circumstance where governmental condemnation results in zoning law noncompliance. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, condemnation includes a purchase or donation of property under the threat of condemnation, but excludes a dedication of property as a condition of zoning, subdivision, site plan or building permit approval. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  Prior to the acquisition of a right-of-way, the landowner or condemning authority may make an application to the zoning administrator, to modify any of the zoning regulations listed in subsection (b)(2) below, that will be violated as a result of the governmental condemnation. 
(2)  Under this section, the following categories subject to this Code may be considered by the zoning administrator for adjustment: Access to public roads, architectural designs, landscaping, lot area, lot depth, lot width, parking, setbacks and signage. 
(c)  Review and action by zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the application, and approve or disapprove it based upon the criteria enumerated in subsection (d) below. A written decision including applicable affirmative findings on the criteria set forth in subsection (d) below shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(d)  Condemnation administrative adjustment criteria. The zoning administrator may approve an application for a condemnation administrative adjustment under this section if, and only if, the proposed adjustment is not detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. The zoning administrator shall consider the following criteria when applicable: 
(1)  Consistent with this Code zoning regulations. The proposed adjustment is in harmony with the general plan and purpose and intent of this Code. 
(2)  Harmonious with character and scale of surrounding area. The proposed adjustment to schematic architectural, signage and landscaping designs shall be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area. 
(3)  General impacts. The likely future impact that the proposed adjustment may have on the following systems and public services: Public infrastructure such as roads, parking facilities, water and wastewater systems, police and fire protection, solid waste collection, and the ability of existing infrastructure and existing services to adequately service the property in question. 
(4)  Traffic related impacts. The proposed adjustment does not interfere with the free flow of traffic or create a public safety hazard. 
(5)  Condemning authority impact. The likely cost to the condemning authority if the application is disapproved. 
Sec. 10-53. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Special exceptions include uses that are generally compatible with the other uses permitted in a zoning district, but require individual review of their location, design, configuration, density and intensity of use or structures, and may require the imposition of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. 
(2)  Uses that may be considered for special exception are identified in the permitted uses table of each zoning category in Chapter 2, Zoning. 
(3)  An application for a special exception may not be made unless the use is identified as one that may be considered for special exceptions in the relevant district, as listed in the permitted uses table of each zoning category in Chapter 2, Zoning. 
(b)  Requirement for concurrent site plan submittal. 
(1)  Application for a special exception must occur in conjunction with the submittal of a site plan. The zoning board of adjustment may not render a decision on the special exception application until after the site plan has been favorably reviewed by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Any modification to an approved site plan that was filed in conjunction with a special exception shall cause the special exception to become void, regardless of its current status, including already obtained approval by the ZBA. Such special exceptions must be resubmitted to the ZBA for consideration using the modified site plan. If the modified site plan requires zoning administrator approval, no decision may be rendered on the special exception until after the site plan has been favorably reviewed by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  Approval process. 
(1)  Review and report by zoning administrator. Once the application is complete, the zoning administrator shall review the proposed development in light of the general plan, subject to the criteria enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and give a report to the zoning board of adjustment on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
(2)  Zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) action. 
a.  Notice. The zoning board of adjustment shall mail notice in accordance with Sec. 10-1(e). 
b.  Public hearing. 
1.  In conjunction with review of the special exception application, subject to the criteria enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, the zoning board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the special exception application. 
2.  It shall take a concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the ZBA to approve or approve with modifications or corrections a special exception application. 
c.  Recordation of action. One copy of an approved special exception permit shall be given to the owner of the property, and one copy shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Special exception review criteria. The zoning board of adjustment may approve an application for a special exception where it reasonably determines that there shall be no significant negative impact upon residents of surrounding property or upon the general public. The ZBA shall consider the following criteria in its review: 
(1)  Consistent with zoning ordinance. The proposed exception shall be specifically listed as permitted by special exception in the zoning district under consideration. The proposed exception shall meet the purpose and intent of this Code and the use shall meet all the minimum standards established in this Code for this type of use. 
(2)  Consistent with general plan. The proposed exception shall be consistent with the development policies and goals and objectives as embodied in the general plan. 
(3)  Compatible with surrounding area. The required site plan shall ensure compatibility with existing land uses in the surrounding area. The proposed use shall not be detrimental to the health, welfare, and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property. 
(4)  Harmonious with character and scale of surrounding area. The proposed site plan, circulation plan, and schematic architectural, signage, and landscaping designs shall be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area. 
(5)  Impacts minimized. The likely impact on public infrastructure such as roads, parking facilities, water and wastewater systems, and on public services such as police and fire protection and solid waste collection, and the ability of existing infrastructure and services to adequately service the proposed use shall be minimized without negatively impacting existing uses in the area and in the city. 
(6)  Effect on natural environment. The potential creation of noise, glare, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, fire hazard, or other injurious or obnoxious impacts shall be minimized. 
(e)  Additional conditions. The zoning board of adjustment may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this Code and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, additional landscaping, and additional improvements such as curbing, sidewalks and screening. 
(f)  Appeal. Appeals of the zoning board of adjustment's decision must be made within ten days to the district court, county court, or county court at law in accordance with Texas Local Government Code. 
Sec. 10-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 10-55. - H (Historic Overlay) designations. 
(a)  Applicability. This section allows for the designation of areas or properties that are architecturally, archaeologically, culturally or historically significant to the city. 
(b)  Approval process. 
(1)  Proposal. 
a.  The historic preservation commission, the city council, the planning and zoning commission, the zoning administrator, or owners of one or more parcels of land within an area may propose the designation of an H (Historic Overlay) district. If initiated by the property owner, the application shall be made upon forms or pursuant to standards set by the historic preservation commission for this purpose. 
b.  The initial proposal shall include a rationale for the designation of the proposed district, related to the approval criteria and findings provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
c.  Where practicable, the proposal itself shall include prospective regulations for the historic district or landmark and draft findings to be used by the historic preservation commission, the planning and zoning commission and the city council in approving the designation of the district. Where such regulations or findings are missing or incomplete in the proposal, they shall be added by the historic preservation commission, in consultation with the zoning administrator, and the proposal shall not be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission by the historic preservation commission until they have been added. 
d.  The proposal for the designation of the historic district shall also include an accurate map or legal description of the area proposed for inclusion in the historic district. 
(2)  Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the city for alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any property or structure within an area proposed for designation to the H (Historic Overlay) district from the date of the meeting of the historic preservation commission at which an application form is first presented until its final disposition by the city council unless such alterations, removal or demolition is authorized by formal action of the city council as necessary for preservation of the public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay be for more than 120 days. 
(3)  Process. 
a.  The procedure for designating an historic district or landmark and applying the H (Historic Overlay) district regulations to an area of the city shall be the same as for any other zoning map amendment, provided that if the proposal for application of the historic overlay district regulations did not originate with the historic preservation commission, the planning and zoning commission shall forward the proposal to the historic preservation commission for its review and comment prior to acting on it. 
b.  The historic preservation commission shall conduct a public hearing and recommend to the planning and zoning commission one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the proposal to apply the H (Historic Overlay) district regulations to the proposed area; 
2.  Disapprove the proposal; or 
3.  Approve the proposal subject to specified conditions. 
c.  The planning and zoning commission shall consider the proposal at its next regular meeting and forward its recommendation to the city council. 
d.  In considering whether to apply the historic overlay district regulations to an area of the city, the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall give careful consideration to the recommendation of the historic preservation commission. 
e.  The process outlined in subsections a. through d. above shall not apply for Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks and National Register Listed properties. Any Recorded Texas Historic Landmark or property Listed in the National Register of Historic Places annexed into the City shall be zoned with the H (Historic Overlay) district at original zoning. 
(c)  Approval criteria. The following criteria shall be considered in determining whether the historic district should be applied to a structure, site or area of the city: 
(1)  Character, interest or value of the structure, site or area because of its unique role in the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation or other society. 
(2)  Occurrence of a notable historical event at the structure, site or area. 
(3)  Identification of the structure, site or area with a person or persons who contributed notably to the culture and development of the city, state, nation or society. 
(4)  Embodiment of distinctive elements of architectural design, detail material or craftsmanship related to uniqueness to the area or the distinctiveness of a craftsman, master builder or architect, or a style or innovation. 
(5)  Archaeological value in the sense that the structure, site or area has produced or can be expected to yield, based on physical evidence, information affecting knowledge of history or prehistory. 
(6)  Other unique historical value. 
(d)  H (Historic Overlay) district findings. 
(1)  In recommending the application of the historic overlay district to an area of the city, the historic preservation commission shall recommend express findings to the city council regarding the specific structures, landscapes or other physical aspects of the district on which it bases the determination required by the criteria in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Where the designation is made based on the general character of the district or landmark, these findings may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to: 
a.  Scale of buildings and structures typical of the area. 
b.  Architectural style typical of the area. 
c.  Architectural period typical of the area. 
d.  Building materials typical of the area. 
e.  Colors used in buildings typical of the area. 
f.  Signage and street furniture typical of the area. 
g.  Landscapes typical of the area. 
h.  Typical relationships of buildings to the landscapes in the area. 
i.  Typical relationships of buildings in the area to the street. 
j.  Setbacks and other physical patterns of buildings in the area. 
k.  Typical patterns of rooflines of buildings in the area. 
l.  Typical patterns of porch and entrance treatments of buildings in the area. 
(3)  Where the designation is made based on the character of a limited number of specific buildings in the area, the findings may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to: 
a.  Architectural style of the buildings. 
b.  Architectural period of the buildings. 
c.  Textures of materials used in the buildings. 
d.  Colors of the materials used in the buildings. 
e.  Rooflines of the buildings. 
f.  Porch and entrance treatments of the buildings. 
g.  Height and mass of the buildings. 
h.  Relative proportions of the buildings (width to height, width to depth). 
Sec. 10-56. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  Certificate of appropriateness for building permit, exterior modification or demolition . 
(1)  Applicability. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required in the following circumstances before the commencement of development within or work upon any building or structure located within an H (Historic Overlay) district, or a building or structure that has been relocated pursuant to subsection (b). 
a.  Whenever such work or development requires a building permit or certificate of zoning compliance issued by the city; or 
b.  Whenever such work includes the erection, demolition, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of the exterior of any structure or site, except when such work satisfies all the requirements of ordinary maintenance and repair as defined in Sec. 1-50, Definitions. 
(2)  Certificate of appropriateness required. No building permit shall be issued by the building official for any structure or site located within an H (Historic Overlay) district until the application for such permit has been reviewed by either the zoning administrator or the historic preservation commission (HPC), as appropriate, and a certificate of appropriateness has been approved. 
(3)  Procedures . 
a.  After an application for a certificate of appropriateness is submitted, the zoning administrator shall determine whether the application is eligible for administrative review or must be reviewed by the historic preservation commission. 
b.  The zoning administrator may determine that the application is eligible for administrative review if it involves the following: 
1.  Paint colors for the exterior of a structure including siding, trim, doors, steps, porches, railings, and window frames. This shall not include painting or otherwise coating previously unpainted masonry; 
2.  The placement, screening, and impact of installation of roof-mounted, ground-mounted and other mechanical equipment of various types; 
3.  The placement and design of screening treatments for trash and recycling receptacles; 
4.  Fences to be installed in the rear and/or side yard; 
5.  Ground lighting; 
6.  Elements attached to a facade of any building, garage or carriage house including, but not limited to, door hardware, hinges, mailboxes, light fixtures, sign brackets, street address signage and historic interpretive signage; 
7.  Replacing roofing materials or color on a flat roof that will not be visible from the ground or from immediately adjacent taller buildings; 
8.  Gutters and downspouts; 
9.  Installation or removal of landscaping, including trees; 
10.  Accessibility ramps; 
11.  Changes to awning fabric color for an existing awning; 
12.  Landscape elements, including but not limited to, walks, paving, benches, outdoor furniture, planters, pools, trellises, arbors and gazebos; 
13.  Installation of any elements required by other codes such as emergency lighting; 
14.  Modifications that are considered nonpermanent such as, but not limited to, window films and temporary features to weatherize or stabilize a historic resource; 
15.  Minor modifications to an existing certificate of appropriateness that still meets the intent of the original approval; 
16.  Alterations to a building to secure it or prevent further damage after it sustains damage due to a natural cause such as storms or floods; or 
17.  Renewal of an expired certificate of appropriateness. 
c.  The zoning administrator shall endeavor to either deny or approve the application, with or without conditions, within ten business days of receipt of the completed application. 
d.  If the zoning administrator: 
1.  Denies the application; 
2.  Approves the application with conditions; or 
3.  Fails to act within ten business days; and 
4.  The applicant submits a written notice of appeal; 
the application shall be considered by the historic preservation commission. The notice of appeal must be submitted no later than 30 business days after the filing of the competed application. 
e.  If the zoning administrator determines that the application is not eligible for administrative review, the application shall be reviewed by the historic preservation commission. In that event, the secretary to the historic preservation commission shall inform the applicant of the meeting date at which the application shall be considered. The applicant shall have the right to be heard and may be accompanied or represented by counsel and/or one or more construction or design professionals at the meeting. 
f.  The zoning administrator shall review the application and make a recommendation to the historic preservation commission during the meeting at which the application shall be considered. 
g.  After hearing the applicant and any other interested parties, and considering the recommendation from the zoning administrator, the historic preservation commission shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the proposed work or development and issue a certificate of appropriateness. 
2.  Approve the proposed work or development with conditions and issue a conditional certificate of appropriateness. 
3.  Disapprove the certificate of appropriateness. 
h.  In the case of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission, the HPC shall state in writing the reasons for such disapproval and may include suggestions in regards to actions the applicant might take to secure the approval of the HPC concerning future issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(4)  Certificate . 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to issue the actual certificate of appropriateness following approval by the zoning administrator or the HPC, with any designated conditions, and to maintain a copy of the certificate of appropriateness, together with the proposed plans. These shall be public documents for all purposes. 
b.  Work performed pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect from time to time any work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness to assure such compliance. In the event that such work is not in compliance, the building official shall issue a stop work order and/or citation as prescribed by ordinance. The zoning administrator or the historic preservation commission, as appropriate, may request that the building official inspect the work and issue a stop work order. 
(5)  Criteria. The zoning administrator or historic preservation commission shall determine whether to grant a certificate of appropriateness based on the following criteria: 
a.  The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic, cultural and architectural nature of the site, landmark or district; 
b.  The appropriateness of exterior architectural features, including parking and loading spaces, which can be seen from a public street, alley or walkway; and 
c.  The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar features of buildings or structures in the district, contrast or other relation of such factors to other landmarks built at or during the same period, as well as the uniqueness of such features, considering the remaining examples of architectural, historical and cultural values. 
d.  Any and all applicable guidelines referenced below. 
(6)  Guidelines. In all of its determinations of architectural appropriateness and historical integrity in the design and construction of buildings or signs in historic districts, the zoning administrator or historic preservation commission shall use the book entitled, "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties: With Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitation, Restoring and Reconditioning", and the following criteria as guidelines: 
a.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. 
b.  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
c.  All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historic basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
d.  Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
e.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
f.  Weakened architectural features that are found in kind are to be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
g.  The surface clearing of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building material shall not be undertaken without approval from the historic preservation commission. 
h.  Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project. 
i.  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historic, architectural, or cultural material and when such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, a character of the property, neighborhood or environment. Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to a structure shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
(7)  Supplemental guidelines. The historic preservation commission may develop and the city council may approve such supplemental guidelines as it may find necessary to implement the regulations of a particular H (Historic Overlay) district or the findings applicable to the designation of a particular H (Historic Overlay) district. Such guidelines may include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Charts or samples of acceptable materials for siding, foundations, roofs or other parts of buildings; 
b.  Illustrations of appropriate architectural details; 
c.  Specifications of appropriate relationships to streets, sidewalks, other structures and buildings; 
d.  Illustrations of appropriate porch treatments or entrances; or 
e.  Illustrations of appropriate signage or street furniture. 
(8)  Certificate of appropriateness for demolition . 
a.  Certificate required. No building or structure within any H (Historic Overlay) district shall be demolished or removed unless such demolition shall be approved by the historic preservation commission and a certificate of appropriateness for such demolition shall be granted. 
b.  Procedure . 
1.  The procedure for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall be the same as for the issuance of other certificates of appropriateness with the following modification. 
2.  After the hearing, the historic preservation commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness, thereby authorizing the demolition, or the historic preservation commission may disapprove the certificate of appropriateness and postpone the demolition or removal for a period not to exceed 120 days. The purpose of such a postponement would be to allow the commission and any interested parties to explore alternatives to demolition. 
c.  Supplemental demolition criteria. In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, the historic preservation commission, and, on appeal, the city council, shall consider the following criteria, in addition to the criteria specified in this section: 
1.  The uniqueness of the structure as a representative type or style of architecture, historic association or other element of the original designation criteria applicable to such structure or tract. 
2.  The condition of the structure from the standpoint of structural integrity and the extent of work necessary to stabilize the structure. 
3.  The economically viable alternatives available to the demolition applicant, including: 
i.  Donation of a part of the value of the subject structure or site to a public or nonprofit agency, including the conveyance of development rights and facade easement. 
ii.  The possibility of sale of the structure or site, or any part thereof, to a prospective purchaser capable of preserving such structure or site. 
iii.  The potential of such structure or site for renovation and its potential for continuing use. 
iv.  The potential of the subject structure or site for rezoning in an effort to render such property more compatible with the physical potential of the structure. The ability of the subject structure or site to produce a reasonable economic return on investment for its owner; provided, however, that this factor shall not have exclusive control and effect, but shall be considered along with all other criteria contained in this section. 
v.  Relocation of such structure in accordance with the procedures in subsection (b) below. 
(9)  Appeals. Appeals of certificate of appropriateness decisions made by the historic preservation commission shall be made within 15 days to the city council. 
(b)  Certificate of appropriateness for relocating historic buildings or structures . 
(1)  Applicability. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whenever any building or structure located within an H (Historic Overlay) district is proposed to be relocated. 
(2)  Certificate of appropriateness required. No building permit shall be issued by the building official for the relocation of any historic building or structure until an application for such permit has been reviewed by the HPC, and a certificate of appropriateness has been approved. 
(3)  Procedure. The procedure for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for relocation shall be the same as set out above in subsection (a) for the issuance of other certificates of appropriateness with the following additions: 
a.  If the historic building or structure is a recorded Texas historical landmark or listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the applicant shall be required to notify the appropriate party at the Texas Historical Commission and receive a response in writing, prior to submitting an application for the certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  Documentation shall be provided to the HPC at the time of application for a certificate of appropriateness that provides the following information: 
1.  Overview of the proposed relocation of the historic building or structure, including: 
i.  Reasons for relocating the historic building or structure; and 
ii.  Reasons for selection of destination site. 
2.  Photographs, which document all aspects of the historic building or structure. Requirements for photographs shall be provided by the HPC. At a minimum, photographs provided by the applicant shall include the following: 
i.  Each elevation of the building; 
ii.  Street view; 
iii.  All prominent architectural features; and 
iv.  Any additional accessory buildings that have H (Historic Overlay) district zoning, showing how they relate to the principal structure. 
3.  Site plan of historic building or structure in current location. 
4.  Site plan of historic building or structure in new location. 
5.  Within ten days of receipt of an application for a permit for relocation, the city shall post a sign showing notice of the application on the originating location and on the proposed destination location, for the purpose of notifying the public of the proposed relocation. 
c.  Relocation criteria. In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness for relocation, the HPC, and, if necessary, on appeal, the city council, shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  The historic building or structure is imminently threatened by demolition. 
2.  Reasonable alternatives to the proposed relocation have been examined. Alternatives may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Modification of the proposed project affecting the historic building or structure to avoid its impact on the historic building or structure. 
ii.  Incorporation of the historic building or structure, in its entirety, into the proposed project. 
3.  When relocated, the historic building or structure shall remain in the city. 
4.  The structural condition of the historic building or structure has been examined so that it has been determined that the historic building or structure may be moved and that damage will be minimized. Stabilization of the historic building or structure prior to and/or during the move may be required. 
5.  The new location for the historic building or structure has been determined to be compatible with the architectural aspects of the historic resource. Consideration shall include the review of all of the following: 
i.  Size of the historic building or structure and the destination lot; 
ii.  Massing; 
iii.  Architectural style; and 
iv.  Review of all adopted design guidelines by the HPC in determining compatibility. 
6.  Other historic buildings or structures, which are not the principal structure on the site, but are historically associated with the principal structure, also should be relocated, if possible, and may be considered for relocation with the principal structure on the same certificate of appropriateness. 
7.  Any historic building or structure relocated pursuant to this section shall be deemed a legal, nonconforming structure pursuant to Sec. 2-98 of this Code, and shall not be required to conform to any siting conditions at the new location. These siting conditions shall include, but are not limited to, setback requirements, structural alteration requirements such as enclosed parking requirements, and architectural requirements such as exterior finishes and orientation. The legal, nonconforming status shall apply only to the relocated structure and shall not apply to any zoning use restrictions applicable to the lot on which the historic building or structure is located. 
d.  Additional requirements . 
1.  The historic building or structure shall be secured from vandalism and other damage for the time that it remains vacant as a result of the relocation process. 
2.  The applicant shall be required to display a plaque provided and paid for by the city which documents the historic building's original location, date of relocation, and reason for relocation. 
3.  The city may apply the H (Historic Overlay) district zoning to the destination lot(s), by following the procedures for applying H (Historic Overlay) district zoning in Sec. 10-55 of this Code. If the historic building or structure is being moved into an already designated historic district, the H (Historic Overlay) district zoning shall remain and apply to the destination lot or lot(s). 
4.  The applicant shall provide photographs of the relocated historic building or structure to the zoning administrator once relocation is complete. 
5.  Information regarding the relocation shall be filed in the appropriate city and county records. 
e.  Fee waivers. If a certificate of appropriateness for relocation has been approved by the HPC, all applicable moving and building permit fees shall be waived. 
(4)  Appeals. Appeals of certificate of appropriateness decisions made by the historic preservation commission shall be made within 15 days to the city council. 
Sec. 10-57. - Partial tax exemptions for historically significant sites. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "historic site" means any historically significant site within the city limits in need of tax relief to encourage its preservation. 
(b)  Granting of exemptions. The city council shall, by ordinance, concurrent with the levy of taxes for each year, approve for partial exemption from ad valorem taxes certain historically significant sites in need of tax relief to encourage their preservation. 
(c)  Partial exemptions. Historic sites approved for exemption by ordinance pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall have an exemption of 75 percent of the assessed value of the structure and the land. These exemptions may be applied to both residential and commercial property. 
(d)  Application. For each assessment year for which the owner of property designated a historic site desires such property to be partially tax exempt pursuant to provisions of this subsection, the owner shall file with the county tax appraisal district a sworn application, not later than April 1, setting forth the fact that the requirements of subsections (e), (f) and (g) of this section concerning the preservation and maintenance of the subject structure were being fully satisfied as of January 1 of the year for which application for exemption is being sought. Application forms are to be available at the city planning and development services department and at the county tax appraisal office. The application shall affirmatively set forth the owner's authorization for members of the historic preservation commission to visit and inspect the historic property, as well as examine the books and records as necessary, to certify whether or not the property qualified based upon the criteria of this section. 
(e)  Eligibility. Only properties containing at least one manmade structure are eligible to apply. 
(f)  Historic significance. Determinations of historic significance shall be made in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Any structure designated as historic by the National Park Service (National Register of Historic Places), the Texas Historical Commission (recorded Texas Historic Landmark), or the city H (Historic Overlay) district shall be considered as having met the historic significance criteria. 
(2)  Any property that has participated in the tax exemption program in any year prior to the adoption of this Code under the historic significance criteria previously included herein. 
(g)  Preservation and maintenance. The following items shall be used in determining whether a historic site has been maintained in accordance with minimum property, structural and health standards: 
(1)  Any well, cesspool or cistern shall be securely covered or closed; 
(2)  Dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person shall be removed; 
(3)  Any structure or portion of a structure which is vacant shall be securely closed so as to prevent unauthorized entry; 
(4)  Paint or other coatings shall be applied at reasonable intervals so as to protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay; 
(5)  The exterior grounds shall be maintained free of excessive rubbish, garbage, junk or refuse; 
(6)  Screens and shutters existing at the time of historic designation or added subsequent thereto shall be maintained in good repair; 
(7)  Broken windows shall be replaced or re-glazed; 
(8)  Exterior doors and doorways shall be maintained in good repair and operable condition; 
(9)  Skirting around the structure, if any, shall be maintained in good repair; 
(10)  Porch flooring and supports shall be maintained in a sound condition, capable of bearing an imposed load safely; 
(11)  Railings and handrails of exterior stairs, steps, balconies, porches and other exterior features shall be maintained in a sound condition so as to afford safety; 
(12)  Rotted exterior wood shall be replaced and repainted; 
(13)  Broken or partially missing gutters or downspouts shall be replaced or repaired; 
(14)  Loose bricks or stones in the exterior of a structure shall be re-established or replaced and all joints weatherproofed by proper maintenance of appropriate materials; 
(15)  Fences and the exteriors of accessory buildings shall be maintained in reasonable repair, including painting if applicable; and 
(16)  The property shall be kept in conformance with all city codes. 
(h)  Tax assessment of historic sites and determination of the land reasonably necessary for access and use thereof. The city's historic preservation officer shall recommend that portion of land which is reasonably necessary for access to and use of those historic structures for which applications for exemptions are pending. All land in excess of that needed for access and use shall be taxed in the same equal and uniform manner as all other taxable properties in the city. The recommendation of the historic preservation officer shall be forwarded to the chief appraiser of the county tax appraisal district for review. The determination of the chief appraiser shall be final. The city's historic preservation commission shall take delivery from the county tax appraisal district office not later than May 1 of each year and prior to the levy of taxes for the current year all pending historic tax exemption applications. Applications received after that date will receive no further consideration. The applications shall have indicated thereon the assessed values of the historic structure and land necessary for access to and use thereof and the assessed value of the land determined to be in excess of that necessary for access to and use thereof. 
(i)  Procedure before the historic preservation commission. Upon receipt of the sworn application, the historic preservation commission shall cause an inspection of the historic property to be made and may review the books and records as to whether or not the property is historically significant and is being preserved and maintained in accordance with this section as of that year and shall certify the facts to the city council not later than June 1, along with the commission's recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application for exemption. The historic preservation commission shall note on the application form any new construction or modification which has been accomplished in accordance with the restrictions placed on the structure by this division. 
(j)  Procedure before the city council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the historic preservation commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing concerning same, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days' prior notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be afforded the applicants by regular mail. The city council shall be at liberty to either: accept, reject, or take other action upon the recommendation of the historic preservation commission. The city council shall enact an ordinance no later than July 15th which names the properties approved for tax abatement. 
(k)  Rendition and assessment of historic sites for ad valorem taxation. The provisions of this section pertaining to partial exemption of historic properties do not change the provisions of any other ordinance or section of the Code pertaining to taxation, and the applicant's properties shall be rendered and assessed in the same manner as any other property in the event the city council elects to disapprove the application for exemption. 
(l)  Recapture of partial tax exemption . 
(1)  This subsection does not apply to partial tax exemptions granted for 2015 and earlier. 
(2)  In the event that the owner of an historic site demolishes an historic structure for which a partial tax emption has been granted during the previous five (5) calendar years, the owner shall pay to the city an amount of money equal to the value of all tax exemptions granted for the historic site during said previous five (5) calendar years. 
(3)  The owner shall pay to the city the amount due under subsection (2) above within 30 days after the city makes demand for same. Amounts remaining unpaid after 30 days shall include interest thereon to be charged at the statutory rate for delinquent taxes as determined by V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 33.01. 
(4)  The city shall have all remedies for the collection of the amounts due herein as provided generally in the Tax Code for the collection of delinquent taxes. 
Secs. 10-58-10-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BODIES 

Sec. 10-65. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The city manager shall designate the zoning administrator for the city. Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator may delegate that responsibility, power or duty to any other agent or employee of the city whom the zoning administrator may reasonably determine. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The zoning administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administration. 
a.  The zoning administrator shall administer the provisions of this Code. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall develop and maintain submittal and application requirements for all procedures contained in this Code. 
c.  The zoning administrator may delegate responsibilities, powers or duties to any other agent or employee of the city whom the zoning administrator reasonably determines. 
(2)  Initial administrative review. The zoning administrator shall review requests or proposals for the following: 
a.  Special exceptions. 
b.  Variances 
c.  Text amendments. 
d.  Official zoning map amendments. 
e.  Planned unit development (PUD) applications. 
(3)  Certificate of zoning compliance. The zoning administrator shall issue certificates of zoning compliance. 
(4)  Written interpretation. The zoning administrator shall make written interpretations of this Code. 
(5)  Temporary use permit. The zoning administrator shall render decisions on applications for temporary use permits. 
(6)  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this Code. 
(7)  Administrative adjustment. The zoning administrator shall render decision on applications for administrative adjustments. 
(c)  Other duties. The zoning administrator shall perform all other duties imposed under the provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 10-66. - Historic preservation commission (HPC). 
(a)  Creation. The city council shall provide for the appointment of a historic preservation commission (HPC) and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a historic preservation commission under state law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The HPC shall have the following powers and duties pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a historic preservation commission under state law: 
(1)  Certificate of appropriateness. The HPC shall render decisions on applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
(2)  Historic district or landmark designation. The HPC shall recommend designation of specified areas of the city as historic districts or landmarks. 
(3)  Partial tax exemption for historic sites. The HPC shall review applications and make recommendations for action to the city council regarding partial tax exemptions for historic sites. 
(4)  Certified local government requirements. Under the certified local government (CLG) agreement with the state historical commission, the HPC shall administer the requirements of the CLG program as promulgated by the national park service. 
(5)  Renaming city facilities in honor of an individual. In accordance with the city's naming and renaming policy for city facilities, park lands or streets, the HPC shall review, research, and report on requests to name or rename such facilities in honor of an individual. 
(6)  Honoring local citizens or groups. The HPC shall have the authority to adopt rules and procedures to create a "Local Legends Award" to honor local individuals, groups, businesses, locations and/or publications that have had a positive and lasting impact on the culture, development and history of the city. 
(c)  Membership, terms and compensation. 
(1)  Number, appointment. The HPC shall consist of seven regular members. Appointment of members shall be made by the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council in August. Members shall be residents of the city for the last 12 months and eligible voters. 
(2)  Terms. Terms of members of the HPC shall be for two years, and shall expire on August 31; provided, however, that members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall not serve on the HPC for more than eight consecutive years. 
(3)  Qualifications. In making appointments to the HPC, the council shall attempt to maintain a balance of interest and skills on the HPC by assessing the individual qualifications of the candidates, including but not limited to, their knowledge and demonstrated interest in preservation related fields such as architecture, history, archaeology, planning, or urban or community design. All members shall have a knowledge and demonstrated interest in historic preservation. 
(4)  Current members. Members of the HPC on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to serve until their respective terms expire. 
(5)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(6)  Removal. Any member who misses three consecutive meetings shall forfeit the position and a replacement shall be appointed by the city council to fill the unexpired term. An HPC member shall serve at the will of the city council. 
(7)  Compensation. Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from available funds approved in advance. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  Chairperson and vice chair. The chairperson of the HPC shall be elected from the membership of the HPC by a majority of the members of the HPC. A vice chair to serve in the chairperson's absence shall be likewise elected. 
(2)  Secretary. The zoning administrator shall designate a staff representative to act as secretary of the HPC and attend and keep minutes of all meetings. The secretary shall act only in an advisory capacity and shall participate in its discussions, but shall have no right to vote. The secretary of the HPC shall also serve as the local preservation officer and fulfill all the duties as may be required under the certified local government agreement with the Texas Historical Commission. 
(3)  Regular posted meetings. The HPC shall meet at regular intervals with advance notice posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 551. 
(4)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be called upon request of the chairperson of the HPC, or upon written request of three members, or upon notice from the zoning administrator that a matter requires the consideration of the HPC. 
(5)  Hearing for certificate of appropriateness. Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness in an historic district or historic landmark, the HPC shall hold a hearing to render a decision on the application. 
(6)  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for transactions of business and no decision shall be rendered without a concurring vote of at least four members. 
(7)  Robert's Rules of Order. The HPC shall follow Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0136, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 10-67. - Zoning board of adjustment (ZBA). 
(a)  Creation. The city council shall provide for the appointment of a zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a zoning board of adjustment under state law. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The ZBA shall have the following powers and duties pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a zoning board of adjustment under state law: 
(1)  Administrative appeals. The ZBA shall hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Code. 
(2)  Special exceptions. The ZBA shall hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Code. 
(3)  Variances. The ZBA shall authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of this Code if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Code would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Code is observed and substantial justice is done. 
(4)  Decisions. The ZBA shall hear and decide other matters, as authorized by this Code. 
(c)  Membership, terms and compensation. 
(1)  Number, appointment. The ZBA shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members. Appointment of members shall be made by the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council in August. Members shall be residents of the city for the last 12 months and eligible voters. 
(2)  Terms. Terms of the ZBA shall be for two years, and shall expire on August 31; provided, however, that members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall not serve on the ZBA for more than eight consecutive years. 
(3)  Current members. Members of the existing development review board on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to serve on the ZBA until their respective terms expire. 
(4)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(5)  Removal. A ZBA member may be removed by the city council for cause, on a written charge, after a public hearing. 
(6)  Compensation. Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from available funds approved in advance. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  Officers. The chairperson of the zoning board of adjustment shall be elected from the membership of the ZBA by a majority of the members. A vice chair to serve in the chairperson's absence shall be likewise elected. 
(2)  Meetings. Meetings may be called upon request of the chairperson of the ZBA, or upon written request of three members, or upon notice from the zoning administrator that a matter requires the consideration of the ZBA. The chairperson, or in his or her absence the vice chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public. 
(3)  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business and no decision shall be rendered without a concurring vote of at least four members. 
(4)  Notice of meetings. Public notice of all meetings of the ZBA shall be posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(5)  Rules of proceeding. The zoning board of adjustment shall adopt its own rules of procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with laws applicable to the ZBA or any provisions of the City Charter. 
(6)  Minutes. The ZBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0136, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 10-68. - Planning and zoning commission (PZ). 
(a)  Creation. The city, as a home rule city, has by city Charter all the powers authorized by Texas Local Government Code, which are hereby adopted, which authorize the appointment of a P&Z, and which set out certain authority and responsibilities for such a P&Z. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The P&Z shall have the following powers and duties pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements for a P&Z: 
(1)  General plan. The P&Z shall prepare and modify the general plan for the city, for approval and adoption by the city council. 
(2)  Text amendments. The P&Z shall review and make recommendations to the city council in regard to amendments to the text of this code. 
(3)  Application for original zoning. The P&Z shall review and make recommendations to the city council in regard to applications for original zoning. 
(4)  Zoning map amendments. The P&Z shall review and make recommendations to the city council in regard to amendments to the official zoning map. 
(5)  Planned unit development (PUD). The P&Z shall review and make recommendations to the city council in regard to applications for planned unit developments. 
(6)  Historic (H) overlay designation. The P&Z shall review and make recommendations to the city council in regard to applications for designation of Historic (H) overlay districts. 
(7)  Subdivision and plat review. The P&Z shall study plans and plats of proposed subdivisions, determine whether such subdivisions meet all the standards and requirements as required by Chapters 4 and 6 of this zoning and development code, and shall be responsible for rendering decisions on proposed subdivisions. 
(8)  Other duties as assigned by the city council. The P&Z shall perform such other functions as may be duly delegated to them from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  Membership, terms and compensation. 
(1)  Number, appointment. The P&Z shall consist of nine members. Appointment of members shall be made by the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council in August. Members shall be residents of the city for the last 12 months and eligible voters. 
(2)  Terms. Terms of members of the P&Z shall be for two years, and shall expire on August 31; provided, however, that members shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. Five members shall be appointed in even-numbered years and four members shall be appointed in odd-numbered years. Members shall not serve on the P&Z for more than eight consecutive years. 
(3)  Current members. Members of the P&Z on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to serve until their respective terms expire. 
(4)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(5)  Removal. Any member who misses three consecutive meetings shall forfeit the position and a replacement shall be appointed by the city council to fill the unexpired term. A P&Z member shall serve at the will of the city council. 
(6)  Compensation. Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties from available funds approved in advance. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  Officers. The chairperson of the P&Z shall be elected from the membership of the P&Z by a majority of the members. A vice chair to serve in the chairperson's absence shall be likewise elected. 
(2)  Meetings. Meetings of the P&Z shall adopt and publish an annual calendar with corresponding submittal dates. The chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the P&Z shall be open to the public. In addition to its regular meetings, meetings also may be called upon request of the chairperson of the P&Z, or upon written request of three members, or upon notice from the zoning administrator that a matter requires the consideration of the P&Z. 
(3)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the P&Z and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by a majority of those present. 
(4)  Notice of meetings. Public notice of all meetings of the P&Z shall be posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(5)  Rules of proceeding. The P&Z shall adopt its own rules of procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with laws applicable to the P&Z or any provisions of the city Charter. 
(6)  Minutes. The P&Z shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-0136, § I, 3-14-2019) 
Sec. 10-69. - City council, powers and duties. 
(a)  The city council shall have the following powers and duties as set forth in this code: 
(1)  Appointments. The city council shall be responsible for appointing and removing members of the planning and zoning commission, zoning board of adjustment and historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Certificate of appropriateness appeals. The city council shall hear and render decisions on appeals of the decision of the historic preservation commission on certificate of appropriateness applications. 
(3)  General plan amendments. The city council shall hear and render decisions on proposed amendments to the general plan. 
(4)  Text amendments. The city council shall hear and render decisions on proposed text amendments to this Code. 
(5)  Application for original zoning. The city council shall hear and render decisions on applications for original zoning. 
(6)  Zoning map amendments. The city council shall hear and render decisions on proposed amendments to the official zoning map. 
(7)  Planned unit development (PUD) zoning adoption. The city council shall review, hear and render decisions on applications for planned unit development zoning. 
(8)  Historic (H) overlay designation. The city council shall hear and render decisions on designations of historic (H) overlay districts. 
(9)  Partial tax exemption for historic sites. The city council shall hear and render decisions on applications for partial tax exemptions for historically significant sites. 
Sec. 10-70. - Summary of review authority. 
(a)  The following table summarizes the city procedural review structure by review body: 
Procedure Zoning
Administrator Historic
Preservation
Commission Zoning
Board of
Adjustment Planning
and Zoning
Commission City
Council Planning Policy General Plan adoption and amendments Review Review* Decision* Code amendment (other than zoning) Review Decision Annexation Voluntary Review Decision Involuntary Review Decision* Zoning Certificate of zoningcompliance Decision Written interpretation Decision Administrative adjustment Decision Temporary use permit Decision Code amendment (zoning) Review Review* Decision* Application for original zoning Review Review* Decision* Zoning map amendment Review Review* Decision* PUD development plan/zoning Review Review* Decision* Platting Concept plan Review Decision* Preliminary plat Review Decision Final plat Review Decision Replat Review Decision* Amending and minor plats Decision Exceptions and Variances Variance Review Decision* Special exception Review Decision* Sign exception Review Decision Compatibility buffer exception Review Decision* Historic Preservation Certificate of appropriateness (administrative) Decision Certificate of appropriateness (non-administrative) Review Decision Historic overlay designation Review Review* Decision* Partial historic tax exemption Review Decision*  
Key 
Public hearing, with the exception of certain replats as described in Sec. 10-30(e). 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1995 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, see the table immediately following this table. 
1995 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.002.1 2-78 1.100 1-1 1.200 1-3 1.300 1-2 1.400 1-4 1.500 1-7 1.601-1.604 1-9 1.701, 1.702 38-19, 38-20 1.704 38-22 1.801-1.805 4-1-4-5 1.901 2-116 1.901.1 2-57 1.902-1.907 2-117-2-122 1.1001 2-19 1.1001.1 2-77 1.1002, 1.1003 2-20, 2-21 1.1003.1 2-79 1.1004 2-22 1.1004.1 2-80 1.1005 2-23 1.1005.1 2-81 1.1006 2-24 1.1006.1 2-82 1.1007 2-25 1.1007.1 2-83 1.1008 2-26 1.1008.1 2-84 1.1009.1 2-85 1.1010.1 2-86 1.1101-1.1105 2-323-2-327 1.1201-1.1204 38-48-38-51 1.1301-1.1304 24-1 1.1401, 1.1402 24-2 1.1701 26-19 1.1701.1 26-56 1.1702 26-20 1.1703-1.1707 26-21 1.1708-1.1711 26-22-26-25 1.1801-1.1803 38-76-38-78 1.1803.1 38-79 1.1804-1.1811 38-80-38-87 1.1902, 1.1903 20-1, 20-2 1.2001, 1.2002 12-1, 12-2 1.2003 12-4 1.2004 12-3 1.2005-1.2012 12-5-12-12 1.2201-1.2206 22-1-22-6 1.2401 38-118 1.2701-1.2705 24-25-24-29 1.2900 24-3 1.3001-1.3010 2-229-2-238 1.3101-1.3113 2-358-2-370 1.3201-1.3205 2-270-2-274 1.3401-1.3428 34-19-34-46 1.3501-1.3509 34-66-34-74 1.3601-1.3620 34-92-34-111 2.200 8-1 2.300 8-2 2.400 8-3 2.500 8-4 2.601 8-5 2.701-2.704 8-31-8-34 2.801 8-6 2.901, 2.902 8-57, 8-58 2.1001-2.1005 8-90-8-94 2.1101-2.1103 8-117-8-119 2.1201-2.1203 8-137-8-139 2.1301-2.1312 8-162-8-173 2.1401-2.1410 8-200-8-209 2.1501-2.1504 8-227-8-230 2.1601-2.1608 8-254-8-261 2.1701-2.1703 8-286-8-288 2.1800 8-310 2.1901 8-311 2.1901.1 8-318 2.1902 8-312 2.1902.1 8-319 2.1903-2.1907 8-313-8-317 2.2001, 2.2002 8-342, 8-343 2.2101-2.2105 8-344-8-348 2.2200 8-349 3.100.1A 10-40 3.100.1B 10-41 3.101-3.103 10-42-10-44 3.103.1 10-45 3.104-3.114 10-46-10-56 3.201, 3.202 10-86, 10-87 3.301-3.313 10-118-10-130 3.401 10-159 3.501-3.506 10-187-10-192 3.601, 3.602 10-223, 10-224 3.701-3.703 10-242-10-244 3.800 10-267 3.901-3.910 10-298-10-307 3.1001-3.1008 10-333-10-340 3.1102-3.1116 14-19-14-33 3.1200-3.1207 14-113-14-120 3.1401-3.1414 30-1-30-14 3.1501-3.1506 2-297-2-302 4.101-4.107 6-19-6-25 4.202-4.215 28-19-28-32 4.301-4.324 42-470-42-493 4.501-4.515 6-54-6-68 4.601-4.607 6-95-6-101 4.701-4.705 40-19-40-23 5.101, 5.102 16-51, 16-52 5.103-5.105 16-54-16-56 5.201-5.219 16-140-16-158 5.301-5.311 16-21-16-31 5.400 16-1 5.501, 5.502 16-88, 16-89 5.601-5.607 16-107-16-113 6.100 14-174 6.102-6.104 14-175-14-177 6.105-6.107 14-180-14-182 6.108 14-185 6.301-6.309 14-55-14-63 6.401-6.406 14-241-14-246 6.501-6.512 18-1-18-12 6.601-6.615 32-19-32-33 6.701-6.707 42-437-42-443 7.100 2-56 7.200 2-58 7.301-7.311 2-143-2-153 7.400 2-59 7.501-7.512 2-175-2-186 8.101-8.109 36-1-36-9 8.111-8.114 36-10-36-13 8.114.1 36-14 8.115, 8.116 36-15, 36-16 8.201-8.214 36-36-36-49 8.301-8.309 36-72-36-80 8.401-8.422 36-104-36-125 8.501-8.503 36-153-36-155 8.601-8.604 36-179-36-182 8.701-8.706 36-203-36-208 9.100 42-19 9.201-9.205 42-42-42-46 9.301-9.303 42-66-42-68 9.308, 9.309 42-69, 42-70 9.401, 9.402 42-101, 42-102 9.405-9.407 42-103-42-105 9.501-9.504 42-126-42-129 9.601-9.605 42-157-42-161 9.701, 9.702 42-191, 42-192 9.800 42-223 9.900 42-224 9.1000 42-225 9.1100 42-226 9.1300 42-227 9.1400 42-228 9.1500 42-229 9.1602, 
9.1603 42-252, 42-253 9.1700 42-285 9.1801-9.1812 42-304-42-315 9.1814-9.1819 42-316-42-321 9.1901-9.1909 42-350-42-358 9.2101-9.2103 14-301-14-303 9.2201-9.2206 28-53-28-58 9.2301-9.2304 42-390-42-393 10.101-10.105 44-1-44-5 10.201-10.205 44-29-44-33 10.301-10.306 44-55-44-60 10.400-10.411 44-79-44-90 10.413 44-91, 44-92 10.414, 10.415 44-93, 44-94 10.500 44-117 10.600-10.604 44-148-44-152 10.701-10.719 44-173-44-191 10.801-10.818 44-221-44-238 10.1001- 
10.1009 44-306-44-314 11.101-11.104 46-1-46-4 11.105-11.107 46-6-46-8 11.109-11.111 46-9-46-11 11.113, 11.114 46-12, 46-13 11.201-11.207 46-68-46-74 11.301-11.304 46-92-46-95 11.304.1 46-96 11.305-11.317 46-97-46-109 11.401-11.405 46-132-46-136 11.405-1 46-137 11.406-11.409 46-138-46-141 11.409.1 46-142 11.410-11.414 46-143-46-147 11.414.1 46-148 11.415 46-149 11.415.1, 
11.415.2 46-150, 46-151 11.416-11.418 46-152-46-154 11.418.1 46-155 11.419-11.426 46-156-46-163 11.501-11.505 46-195-46-199 11.601-11.603 46-222-46-224 11.701-11.703 46-45-46-47 11.801, 11.802 46-5  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 229  5-13-1958 16-31 200  6-11-1963 16-1 243 10- 8-1973 2-59 244 10- 8-1973 2-59 305 12-19-1974 44-56 44-59 257  3-13-1975 44-2 306  3-13-1975 44-60 307  4-10-1975 44-59 260  5- 8-1975 10-48 269  1- 8-1976 44-3 271  1-15-1976 44-3 274  6-22-1976 10-190 10-192 276  6-22-1976 10-46 290 10-18-1976 10-46 505  9- 9-1977 2-19 506  9- 9-1977 2-324 519  1-12-1978 24-2 522  1-26-1978 32-33 44-29 523  2- 9-1978 24-1 524  2- 9-1978 14-303 544  6-22-1978 6-25 550  8-10-1978 16-142, 16-143 16-145, 16-146 16-152 16-158 559  9-14-1978 14-185 560  9-14-1978 2-323 568 10-12-1978 2-153 570 10-26-1978 2-26 579  1-11-1979 26-25 585  2-22-1979 10-224 16-52 42-105 587  3-22-1979 38-49 592  4-12-1979 4-5 709  8-23-1979 32-29 32-31 716  9-27-1979 30-13 736  1-24-1980 44-29 754  8-14-1980 14-62 755  8-14-1980 14-303 42-104 42-127 42-158 42-192 42-223, 42-224 42-252 42-309 42-313 42-316-42-319 42-358 762  9-11-1980 32-32 763  9-11-1980 42-127 771 11-13-1980 2-20 777 12-23-1980 42-127 778 12-23-1980 42-159 796  4- 9-1981 38-19 921  8-27-1981 16-112 929 12-22-1981 12-12 931 12-22-1981 20-1, 20-2 934  1-14-1982 30-3 30-6 939  2-11-1982 42-314 941  2-25-1982 10-191 10-243 951  4- 8-1982 14-114 14-120 957  5-13-1982 42-126 959  5-27-1982 42-192 964  8-26-1982 44-31 967  8-26-1982 14-114 970  9-23-1982 42-318 974 10-28-1982 44-29, 44-30 992  3-10-1983 44-30 2004  5-26-1983 42-127 2072 11-10-1983 1-9 2073 11-10-1983 4-3, 4-4 2074 11-10-1983 42-310 2075 11-10-1983 42-285 2076 11-10-1983 42-127 2078 11-22-1983 44-117 2085 12-22-1983 20-2 2090  1-26-1984 10-52 2094  2- 9-1984 22-1 2101  2-23-1984 14-246 2116  5-24-1984 42-127 2121  6-14-1984 42-285 2126  7-12-1984 26-20 2127  7-26-1984 42-159 1100  9-13-1984 30-7 2132  9-13-1984 10-50, 10-51 2140 11-20-1984 2-59 2142 12-27-1984 10-50 10-52 2148  2-14-1985 20-1 2149  2-14-1985 42-127 2152  2-14-1985 2-59 2173  4-25-1985 44-29, 44-30 2187  8- 8-1985 30-8 2188  8-22-1985 1-9 2197  9-26-1985 42-127 42-285 2203 10-24-1985 14-114 2204 10-24-1985 42-285 2207 11-26-1985 32-33 2211 12-12-1985 42-127 2215  2-13-1986 42-127 2216  2-27-1986 42-285 1193  4-24-1986 42-358 2228  4-24-1986 42-127 2229  4-24-1986 2-326 2234  5-22-1986 42-127 2239  6-26-1986 18-12 2241  7-10-1986 42-127 2243  8-14-1986 42-318 2248  9-11-1986 42-192 2251  9-25-1986 42-127 2256 11-13-1986 42-127 2257 11-13-1986 44-1 2267  1- 8-1987 26-24 2275  3-12-1987 44-29 2281  4-23-1987 42-318 2282  4-23-1987 2-56 2-58 2285  5-14-1987 42-192 2294  8-27-1987 22-2 2296  9-10-1987 42-317 2297  9-10-1987 1-9 2306 11-12-1987 42-127 2308 11-12-1987 10-49 2309 11-24-1987 42-127 2316  1-14-1988 42-127 2317  1-28-1988 42-127 2320  2-11-1988 42-127 2330  3-24-1988 16-142 16-146 16-152 2331  3-24-1988 44-4 2333  4-14-1988 42-127 2334  4-14-1988 42-127 2335  4-28-1988 10-43 2347  8-11-1988 42-318 2354  8-25-1988 42-253 2357  9-22-1988 30-6 30-9 30-13 2364 10-27-1988 16-143 16-146 2370 11-22-1988 42-127 2372 11-22-1988 42-127 2374 11-22-1988 42-192 2375 11-22-1988 42-285 2377 11-22-1988 42-285 2382 12-22-1988 42-192 2383 12-22-1988 18-4 2384 12-22-1988 10-119 10-130 2392  2- 9-1989 42-192 2396  2-23-1989 30-3 2399  3-23-1989 44-57 2422  7-27-1989 42-127 2423  7-27-1989 42-192 2440 12-28-1989 44-29, 44-30 2444 12-28-1989 42-127 2445 12-28-1989 2-59 2446 12-28-1989 2-59 2447 12-28-1989 2-59 2449  1-11-1990 2-59 2457  2- 8-1990 42-127 2461  2-22-1990 2-25 2462  2-22-1990 16-21 2463  3- 8-1990 44-94 2464  3- 8-1990 42-127 2469  4-26-1990 2-122 2470  4-26-1990 42-318 2471  5-10-1990 30-14 2474  6-14-1990 24-2 2476  6-14-1990 44-29, 44-30 2491  7-26-1990 10-53 2492  7-26-1990 4-3 2494  7-26-1990 4-5 2503  9-27-1990 42-127 2511 10-23-1990 20-1 2518 11- 8-1990 2-122 2534  5-23-1991 42-127 2536  6-13-1991 10-42 10-44 10-159 10-187 10-223 10-242 10-267 16-51 2540  7-25-1991 42-192 2543  8- 8-1991 42-127 2551  9-12-1991 38-51 2549  9-26-1991 32-33 2554 11-14-1991 30-9 2562  1-23-1992 42-127 2567  2-27-1992 32-29 2571  4-23-1992 42-318 2573  6-11-1992 10-302 2591  9-24-1992 20-1 2592  9-24-1992 44-29 2593  9-24-1992 26-21 2595  9-24-1992 44-29 2601 11-12-1992 32-25 2603 11-24-1992 6-68 2616 12-22-1992 24-2 G-93-03-11-8A  3-11-1993 2-25 G-93-03-11-8D  3-11-1993 30-3 G-93-04-22-8B  4-22-1993 44-29, 44-30 G-93-05-13-11D  5-13-1993 10-298 10-302, 10-303 G-93-06-10-8G  6-10-1993 32-33 44-29, 44-30 G-93-07-08-8A  7- 8-1993 14-246 G-93-07-08-8B  7- 8-1993 6-101 G-93-09-23-9D  9-23-1993 42-318 G-93-09-23-9E  9-23-1993 44-29 G-93-10-14-8A 10-14-1993 10-54 G-93-10-28-8B 10-28-1993 18-4 G-93-12-09-9A 12- 9-1993 32-33 G-93-12-09-9B 12- 9-1993 2-56 G-94-01-13-8A  1-13-1994 42-319 G-94-01-13-8B  1-13-1994 42-318 G-94-01-13-8C  1-13-1994 42-318 G-94-02-10-8G  2-10-1994 10-50 G-94-05-26-9A  5-26-1994 24-29 G-94-05-26-9B  5-26-1994 44-94 G-94-06-23-8A  6-23-1994 38-19 G-94-06-23-8B  6-23-1994 42-127 G-94-08-25-9D  8-25-1994 10-42 10-159 10-187 10-223 10-242 10-267 16-51 G-94-09-22-9C  9-22-1994 32-33 G-94-10-13-9A 10-13-1994 42-285 G-94-10-27-9A 10-27-1994 16-51 G-94-12-22-9C 12-22-1994 24-3 G-95-01-26-9B  1-26-1995 44-29, 44-30 G-95-03-09-9D  3- 9-1995 6-101 24-3 24-29 42-318 G-95-04-13-10A  4-13-1995 42-319 G-95-07-27-10B  7-27-1995 42-320 G-95-08-10-12E  8-10-1995 6-55 6-57 G-95-10-12-12A 10-12-1995 20-1 G-95-12-14-12C 12-14-1995 2-326 G-95-12-21-10B 12-21-1995 30-1-30-9 30-11 G-96-02-08-9A  2- 8-1996 10-298, 10-299 10-301, 10-302 10-304 10-306 G-96-02-08-9B  2- 8-1996 10-44 G-96-03-28-12G  3-28-1996 14-301 22-1, 22-2 42-67 42-318 G-96-04-11-12B  4-11-1996 42-127 G-96-04-11-12C  4-11-1996 42-319 G-96-04-11-12D  4-11-1996 42-159 G-96-04-11-12E  4-11-1996 22-3 G-96-04-25-9A  4-25-1996 26-21 G-96-04-25-9B  4-25-1996 42-310 G-96-05-23-13A  5-23-1996 20-1 G-96-05-23-13C  5-23-1996 14-303 G-96-07-25-9A  7-25-1996 42-320 G-96-07-25-9B  7-25-1996 42-318 G-96-08-08-9C  8- 8-1996 42-318 G-96-10-24-9A 10-24-1996 42-317 G-96-12-12-9A 12-12-1996 42-318 G-97-02-13-9A  2-13-1997 32-33 G-97-03-13-9A  3-13-1997 42-127 G-97-03-27-10A  3-27-1997 44-151, 44-152 G-97-03-27-10B  3-27-1997 42-318 G-97-02-27-9C  4-10-1997 30-12 G-97-04-10-13B  4-10-1997 42-318 G-97-05-22-10A  5-22-1997 26-21 G-97-06-12-10B  6-12-1997 30-3, 30-4 G-97-06-26-9A  6-26-1997 42-318 G-97-09-25-12C  9-25-1997 42-127 G-97-10-09-9D 10- 9-1997 42-127 42-285 42-318 42-320 G-97-11-13-9D 11-13-1997 42-319 G-98-02-12-12C  2-12-1998 42-127 G-98-02-12-12D  2-12-1998 42-127 G-98-02-26-9A  2-26-1998 26-21 G-98-03-12-9B1  3-12-1998 44-191 G-98-05-14-9A2  5-14-1998 42-127 G-98-09-24-9B1  9-24-1998 2-26 G-98-11-24-13B1 11-24-1998 26-21 G-99-03-11-13B1  3-11-1999 42-318 G-99-04-08-10B1  4- 8-1999 42-285 G-99-04-22-9B1  4-22-1999 42-318 G-99-05-13-12B4  5-13-1999 2-238 G-99-08-26-9A1  8-26-1999 20-1 G-99-09-23-9A3  9-23-1999 44-29 G-99-11-09-9B1 11- 9-1999 10-42 G-00-01-27-12A1  1-27-2000 26-21 G-00-01-27-12B1  1-27-2000 32-33 G-00-01-27-12D1  1-27-2000 42-127 G-00-01-27-12D2  1-27-2000 42-127 G-00-01-27-12D3  1-27-2000 42-127 G-00-02-24-10B1  2-24-2000 2-324 G-00-04-27-11B1  4-27-2000 22-4, 22-5 G-00-04-27-11E3  4-27-2000 42-127 G-00-06-08-10B1  6- 8-2000 26-21 G-00-07-25-12B1  7-25-2000 2-26 G-00-11-09-9B1 11- 9-2000 2-56 G-00-11-21-9B1 11-21-2000 44-314 G-01-01-11-12A1  1-11-2001 44-309 G-01-03-22-11A1  3-22-2001 2-21-2-23 2-26 G-01-03-22-11D1  3-22-2001 42-318 G-01-04-12-3A1  4-12-2001 26-21 G-01-04-12-13D1  4-12-2001 10-298 10-302-10-304 10-306 G-01-04-12-13D2  4-12-2001 10-44 G-01-08-09-12D4  8- 9-2001 42-319 G-01-08-23-13B1  8-23-2001 24-29 G-01-09-13-14A1  9-13-2001 2-19 G-01-09-13-14F3  9-13-2001 42-127 G-01-09-27-14B1  9-27-2001 42-318 G-01-09-27-14B2  9-27-2001 14-301 14-303 G-01-12-20-9B2 12-20-2001 42-319 G-02-01-24-8C1  1-24-2002 42-318 G-02-01-24-8C2  1-24-2002 10-42, 10-43 G-02-01-24-8C3  1-24-2002 10-86, 10-87 10-187, 10-188 10-223, 10-224 10-242-10-244 16-51, 16-52 G-02-02-28-11C1  2-28-2002 24-2 G-02-03-14-12A1  3-14-2002 44-29, 44-30 G-02-03-26-8A3  3-26-2002 42-127 G-02-04-11-15A1  4-11-2002 44-238 G-02-05-09-15A1  5- 9-2002 2-370 G-02-06-13-13A1  6-13-2002 2-185 G-02-06-27-8A1  6-27-2002 2-302 10-119 10-130 30-11 G-02-07-11-9A1  7-11-2002 10-298, 10-299 10-301 10-303 G-02-08-22-12B2  8-22-2002 2-57 G-02-09-12-12A1  9-12-2002 2-122 G-02-09-26-10C1  9-26-2002 42-127 G-02-09-26-10C2  9-26-2002 42-127 G-02-11-26-9C1 11-26-2002 14-246 G-02-12-19-8A1 12-19-2002 18-4 G-03-02-13-12A1  2-13-2003 42-318 G-03-03-06-8A1  3- 6-2003 26-21 G-03-04-24-13D1  4-24-2003 16-55 G-03-04-24-13D2  4-24-2003 16-54 G-03-04-24-13F1  4-24-2003 14-62 G-03-05-22-10B1  5-22-2003 20-1 G-03-06-12-9A2  6-12-2003 2-86 G-03-06-12-9B1  6-12-2003 2-185 G-03-06-12-9C2  6-12-2003 42-318 G-03-06-12-9C3  6-12-2003 42-127 G-03-06-26-10A1  6-26-2003 18-12 G-03-06-26-10B1  6-26-2003 46-5 46-98 46-146, 46-147 46-149 46-160 46-195 G-03-07-24-10C1  7-24-2003 10-339 G-02-08-08-10A1  8- 8-2003 24-29 G-03-08-28-9A1  8-28-2003 42-493 G-03-08-28-9B1  8-28-2003 44-94 44-151 G-03-09-11-9C2  9-11-2003 42-127 G-03-09-25-13A1  9-25-2003 28-58 G-03-10-09-12B1 10- 9-2003 42-127 G-03-10-23-10C1 10-23-2003 10-338 G-03-11-13-10B2 11-13-2003 46-8 G-03-11-25-11E1 11-25-2003 14-58 14-61-14-63 G-03-12-04-7B1 12- 4-2003 8-349 G-03-12-04-7D1 12- 4-2003 44-151 Z-04-02-12-13A3  2-12-2004 46-5 46-146 46-224 G-04-02-12-13A4  2-12-2004 30-8 G-04-04-08-9A1  4- 8-2004 22-6 Z-04-04-22-13E2  4-22-2004 46-5 46-132 46-134-46-138 Z-04-06-10-12C1  6-10-2004 46-5 46-70 46-141 46-160 46-195 46-199 46-224 G-04-06-24-16E1  6-24-2004 2-25 G-04-06-24-16E2  6-24-2004 2-327 G-04-06-24-16E3  6-24-2004 2-324 G-04-06-24-16E4  6-24-2004 2-326 G-04-07-08-8D2  7- 8-2004 42-129 S-04-07-22-12C2  7-22-2004 36-208 G-04-08-12-12A1  8-12-2004 28-32 Z-04-08-12-12C1  8-12-2004 46-5 46-149-46-151 46-160 46-224 G-04-10-26-14A1 10-26-2004 44-32 G-04-11-09-9B1 11- 9-2004 32-33 G-094-11-23-8A1 11-23-2004 24-29 G-05-01-13-9B1  1-13-2005 14-33 Z-05-01-13-9C7  1-13-2005 36-112 36-118, 36-119 36-155 36-204 46-5 46-139 G-05-02-10-11A1  2-10-2005 42-127 G-05-02-10-11A2  2-10-2005 42-318 G-05-02-10-11B1  2-10-2005 16-107 S-05-02-10-11C8  2-10-2005 36-6 36-16 36-39 36-42 36-44 36-46 36-48 36-73 36-77 36-125 G-05-02-24-8B1  2-24-2005 34-46 G-05-03-10-13B3  3-10-2005 42-319 G-05-03-10-13C1  3-10-2005 30-12 G-05-03-24-11C3  3-24-2005 42-127 G-05-03-24-11C4  3-24-2005 42-127 G-05-04-14-13A2  4-14-2005 42-127 G-05-04-28-9A1  4-28-2005 42-285 G-05-05-26-11A1  5-26-2005 2-25 G-05-05-26-11C1  5-26-2005 20-1 Z-05-06-23-13C3  6-13-2005 46-141 G-05-06-23-13A1  6-23-2005 16-107 16-109 16-113 G-05-06-23-13B1  6-23-2005 2-78 Z-05-06-23-13C1  6-23-2005 46-97 46-162 46-199 Z-05-06-23-13C2  6-23-2005 46-132 46-160 46-199 Z-05-06-23-13C3  6-23-2005 46-5 46-134-46-136 46-139, 46-140 46-143-46-147 46-149-46-152 46-154 46-163 46-196 46-224 G-05-06-23-13C4  6-23-2005 40-23 S-05-06-23-13C5  6-23-2005 36-12 G-05-06-23-13D1  6-23-2005 42-318 G-05-07-28-10B1  7-28-2005 2-78 G-05-07-28-10D2  7-28-2005 42-127 G-05-08-11-10B2  8-11-2005 44-191 G-05-08-11-10C1  8-11-2005 22-5 Z-05-08-11-10D4  8-11-2005 46-5 46-140 46-151 46-160 46-196 G-05-09-08-10A1  9- 8-2005 44-5 44-29-44-31 44-33 S-05-09-08-10C1  9- 8-2005 36-16 36-39 36-41-36-44 Z-05-09-08-10C4  9- 8-2005 46-5 G-05-09-22-13C2  9-22-2005 10-55 36-6 36-14 36-36, 36-37 36-41 46-13 G-05-10-13-9B1 10-13-2005 44-30 G-05-10-27-12A1 10-27-2005 8-173 8-317 Z-05-11-10-12E1 11-10-2005 46-5 46-155 46-160 46-195, 46-196 46-199 46-224 Z-05-11-10-13E1 11-10-2005 46-93 46-132 G-05-11-22-8B2 11-22-2005 42-285 Z-05-12-01-8B5 12- 1-2005 46-132 46-142 46-160 46-224 G-06-01-26-9A1  1-26-2006 30-12 G-06-01-26-9B1  1-26-2006 42-127 46-5 Z-06-02-09-9A5  2- 9-2006 46-5 46-92 46-143, 46-144 46-160 46-163 46-196 46-199 G-06-04-13-9A1  4-13-2006 2-26 G-06-04-13-9C1  4-13-2006 26-21, 26-22 G-06-05-11-12A1  5-11-2006 2-78 Z-06-06-08-9B5  6- 8-2006 8-6 8-31 46-5 46-104 46-109 46-132 46-134 46-148 46-224 G-06-06-08-9C1  6- 8-2006 44-238 S-06-06-22-9C2  6-22-2006 36-6 36-107 36-118 G-06-06-22-9D1  6-22-2006 42-319 S-06-07-13-13D7  7-13-2006 36-10 G-06-07-27-10B1  7-27-2006 10-56 G-06-08-10-9C2  8-10-2006 42-127 G-06-08-24-13D1  8-24-2006 8-319 G-06-09-28-13D1  9-28-2006 16-56 G-06-10-12-10A1 10-12-2006 42-127 42-285 G-06-11-09-10B2 11- 9-2006 44-29 G-06-12-07-10B2 12- 7-2006 2-78 G-06-12-07-10C1 12- 7-2006 10-40-10-45 10-86, 10-87 10-187, 10-188 10-223 10-242 10-244 16-51, 16-52 G-07-02-08-10A1  2- 8-2007 42-321 G-07-04-26-11A1  4-26-2007 20-1 G-07-04-26-11B1  4-26-2007 42-127 42-285 G-07-04-26-11C2  4-26-2007 42-127 G-07-05-10-7A1  5-10-2007 2-78 G-07-06-28-10C9  6-28-2007 42-127 42-285 G-07-07-12-9A1  7-12-2007 I 30-10 G-07-07-12-10B1  7-12-2007 I 32-29 G-07-12-26-9A1  7-26-2007 1701.1 26-56 1703.1 26-57 1704.1 26-58 1705.1 26-59 1706.1 26-60 1707.1 26-61 1708.1 26-62 1709.1 26-63 1710.1 26-64 1711.1 26-65 1712.1 26-66 1713.1 26-67 1714.1 26-68 1715.1 26-69 1716.1 26-70 1717.1 26-71 1718.1 26-72 1719.1 26-73 1720.1 26-74 1721.1 26-75 G-07-09-12-10E1  8- 9-2007 I(10.901)-I(10.917) 44-270-44-286 G-07-09-13-10E1  9-13-2007 I 2-77 III, IV 2-84, 2-85 G-07-09-13-10F1  9-13-2007 I(9.2401)-I(9.2403) 42-415-42-417 I(9.2405), I(9.2406) 42-418, 42-419 G-07-07-27-14B4  9-27-2007 I 42-322 II(b)-II(d) 46-196 G-07-07-27-14F2  9-27-2007 I 42-128 G-07-09-27-14A3  9-27-2007 I, II 44-29, 44-30 G-07-09-27-14E1  9-27-2007 I 10-47 G-07-10-11-12A2 10-11-2007 I 2-24 G-07-10-25-10B1 10-25-2007 1.2701-1.2705 24-25-24-29 G-07-10-25-10D1 10-25-2007 I 2-325 G-07-10-25-10D2 10-25-2007 I 38-21 G-07-11-08-0E1 11- 8-2007 I(6.201)-I(6.208) 14-209-14-216 G-07-11-08-GC1 11- 8-2007 I 38-20 G-07-11-20-10A1 11- 8-2007 I 42-127, 42-128 G-07-11-20-10C1 11-20-2007 I 8-200 Z-07-11-20-10D3 11-20-2007 I, II 46-141, 46-142 III, IV 46-160 G-08-02-14-8B1  2-14-2008 I 42-285 G-08-02-28-10A1  2-28-2008 I 38-22 G-08-02-28-10D1  2-28-2008 I 2-78 G-08-03-06-8C1  3- 6-2008 I 10-47 G-08-03-06-8C2  3- 6-2008 I 16-89 II 16-110 III 36-153 G-08-03-27-7B1  3-27-2008 I(6.801)-I(6.806) 14-271-14-276 G-08-03-27-74A  3-27-2008 I, II 20-1 G-08-04-10-10A1  4-10-2008 I 42-285 G-08-04-10-10B1  4-10-2008 I 2-78 G-08-05-08-9B1  5- 8-2008 I 30-3 II 30-8 G-08-05-08-9B3  5- 8-2008 I 46-13 G-08-05-08-9B4  5- 8-2008 VII 46-224 G-08-08-05-9B4  5- 8-2008 I-IV 46-141-46-144 V 46-160 VI 46-5 G-08-06-12-9C1  6-12-2008 I 32-33 G-08-06-9D2  6-26-2008 I, II 36-6 III 36-16 IV 36-39 V 36-76 VI 36-79 VII 36-107 VIII 36-118 IX 36-121 X(8.423) 36-126 XI(8.424) 36-127 XII 36-179 G-08-06-26-9A1  6-26-2008 I 42-318 G-08-06-26-9A2  6-26-2008 I 42-318 G-08-06-26-9B1  6-26-2008 I, II 2-297, 2-298 G-08-06-26-9D2  6-26-2008 XIII 36-204 G-08-07-10-9D4  7-10-2008 I 42-128 G-08-07-10-9D5  7-10-2008 I 42-128 G-08-07-10-9D6  7-10-2008 I 42-128 G-08-07-24-9A1  7-24-2008 I 42-128 G-08-07-24-9A2  7-24-2008 I, II 42-128 G-08-07-24-9A3  7-24-2008 I 42-128 G-08-07-24-9A4  7-24-2008 I 42-128 G-08-08-14-7A1  8-14-2008 I(9.2401)-I(9.2405) 42-415-42-419 G-08-09-11-10A1  9-11-2008 I 42-127 G-08-09-11-10B1  9-11-2008 I(3.1001)-I(3.1008) 10-333-10-340 G-08-09-25-13A1  9-25-2008 I-IV 44-32 G-08-09-25-13C3  9-25-2008 I, II 44-29, 44-30 G-08-10-09-7B1 10- 9-2008 I 42-393 G-08-11-13-11C1 11-13-2008 I 46-143 46-196 II 46-144 III 46-160 IV, V 46-196 G-08-12-18-6A1 12-18-2008 I(5.102.1) 16-53 G-08-12-18-6B1 12-18-2008 I, II 46-195, 46-196 III 46-224 IV 46-5 G-08-12-18-12A1 12-18-2008 I 44-29 G-09-08-27-8A3 12-18-2008 I, II 44-29, 44-30 G-09-01-22-8B1  1-22-2009 I 36-16 II 46-92 G-09-01-22-8B2  1-22-2009 I 46-133 II-IV 46-145-46-147 V 46-151 VI 46-160 VII-IX 46-5 G-09-02-12-9A1  2-12-2009 I 42-128 G-09-02-12-9A2  2-12-2009 I 42-128 G-09-03-26-9B1  3-26-2009 I 42-318 II(9.1821) 42-323 G-09-03-26-9B2  3-26-2009 I 42-127 G-09-04-09-10C2  4- 2-2009 I 42-127 G-09-04-09-10B1  4- 9-2009 I 44-1 G-09-04-09-10C1  4- 9-2009 I, II 42-127 G-09-04-09-10C3  4- 9-2009 I 42-128 G-09-04-09-10C4  4- 9-2009 I 42-318 G-09-04-23-9A1  4-23-2009 I, II 46-151 IV 46-154 V 46-5 G-09-04-23-9B2  4-23-2009 I 44-233 G-09-05-14-8A1  5-14-2009 I(3.105) 10-47 I(3.1601)-I(3.1608) 14-85-14-92 G-09-05-14-8E1  5-14-2009 I 2-298 II 16-52 III(5.106) 16-57 IV 16-147 V 16-28 G-09-05-28-11B1  5-28-2009 I(5.701)-I(5.707) 16-185-16-191 G-09-05-28-11C1  5-28-2009 I 42-285 G-09-05-28-11E1  5-28-2009 I(1.1712) 26-26 II 8-204 G-09-05-28-11E2  5-28-2009 I-IV 42-318 G-09-06-11-9A1  6-11-2009 I(6.101)-I(6.113) 14-173-14-185 G-09-06-11-9B1  6-11-2009 I, II 44-150, 44-151 G-09-07-09-8A1  7- 9-2009 I 46-196 G-09-07-23-9A1  7-23-2009 I 18-2 G-09-08-13-9B1  8-13-2009 I 46-151 II 46-5 G-09-08-27-8C1  8-27-2009 I 44-233 G-09-09-24-10A1  9-24-2009 42-128, 42-129 G-09-09-24-10B1  9-24-2009 32-33 G-09-09-24-10D4  9-24-2009 44-29, 44-30 G-09-10-22-10D1 10-22-2009 42-106 G-09-11-24-7A1 11-12-2009 I 42-129 G-10-01-14-7A1  1-14-2010 I 2-78 G-10-01-28-9A1  1-28-2010 I, II 46-141, 46-142 III 46-142, 46-143 IV, V 46-146, 46-147 VI, VII 46-160 VIII-XI 46-5 G-10-01-28-9A2  1-28-2010 I, II 46-141, 46-142 III 46-160 IV 46-5 G-10-02-25-9A1  2-25-2010 I 42-129 G-10-03-11-9A1  3-11-2010 I(10.1101)-I(10.1114) 14-139-14-152 G-10-03-11-9C2  3-11-2010 I 38-22 G-10-03-25-9A1  3-25-2010 I-III 30-3 IV 30-4 V 30-6 G-10-03-25-9B1  3-25-2010 I(9.310) 42-71 G-10-04-08-9A2  4- 8-2010 46-195 G-10-04-22-9A1  4-22-2010 I 46-224 G-10-04-22-9D1  4-22-2010 I, II 26-21 G-10-05-13-10B1 5-13-2010 I       Added 24-51-24-54 G-10-06-10-8B1 6-10-2010 I 44-272 II 44-273(a)(2) III 44-275(6)-(15) IV 44-277(e)(2), (e)(4) 44-277(h) V 44-285 G-10-07-22-9A4 7-22-2010 I 46-8 G-10-08-26-9A1 8-26-2010 I 32-19 II       Rpld 32-21 III, IV 32-22, 32-23 V 32-33(a)(2) VI       Added 32-34 G-10-08-26-9A2 8-26-2010 I 42-128 G-10-08-26-9A3 8-26-2010 I 42-128 G-10-08-26-9A4 8-26-2010 I 42-127(5) G-10-08-26-9A5 8-26-2010 I 42-128 G-10-08-26-9A6 8-26-2010 I 42-128 G-10-08-26-9A7 8-26-2010 I 42-128 G-10-08-26-9B1 8-26-2010 I 30-3(a) II       Added 30-3(d)(2) G-10-08-26-9C2 8-26-2010 arts. 1, 2 46-68, 46-69 art. 3 46-71(d)(2), (d)(6) art. 4 46-74 art. 5 46-92(b)-(d) arts. 6, 7 46-95, 46-96 art. 8 46-98(b) art. 9 46-100(b)(1), (b)(2)a. art. 10 46-101(b) art. 11 46-106(b) art. 12 46-139(c)(4) art. 13 46-139(f) art. 14 46-140(c)(5) arts. 15, 16 46-140(d), (d)(7) arts. 17, 18 46-141(c)(8), (d) arts. 19, 20 46-142(c)(8), (d) art. 21 46-142(d)(7) art. 22 46-143(c)(7) arts. 23, 24 46-143(d), (d)(6) art. 25 46-144(c)(7) arts. 26, 27 46-144(d), (d)(6) art. 28 46-145(c)(7) art. 29 46-145(d)(1) art. 30 46-146(c)(6) art. 31 46-146(d)(1) art. 32 46-147(c)(6) arts. 33, 34 46-149(c)(8), (d) arts. 35, 36 46-150(c)(8), (d) arts. 37, 38 46-151(c)(8), (d) arts. 39, 40 46-152(c)(7), (d) art. 41 46-152(d)(7) art. 42 46-154(d)(1) arts. 43-45 46-155(c)(2), (c)(4), (c)(5) art. 46 46-155(d) arts. 47-49 46-155(d)(4), (d)(6), (d)(8) art. 50 46-155(i)(1) art. 51 46-158(d) art. 52 46-159(c)(1)e. art. 53 46-159(c)(2)c. art. 54 46-159(c)(4)e. arts. 55, 56 46-160(y)(8), (hh) art. 57 46-162(b), (e) art. 58 46-46-163(c) art. 59 46-195(a)(2), (c)(2), (c)(3) art. 60 46-195(b)(5)d. art. 61 46-195(c)(2)b. arts. 62, 63 46-195(d)(2)a., f. art. 64 46-195(e) art. 65 46-196(b)(1) arts. 66, 67 46-196(c), (e) arts. 68, 69 46-196(f)(5), (g) arts. 70, 71 46-196(j), (l) art. 72 46-198(b), (c) art. 73 46-45 art. 74 46-5 G-10-08-26-9C3 8-26-2010 art. 1 10-50(3)c.1. art. 2 10-52(5)c.1. art. 3 10-53 art. 4 10-55(1) art. 5 10-56(b)(1) art. 6 10-56(c)(1)e. art. 7 10-56(c)(2)m. G-10-08-26-9C4 8-26-2010 arts. 1, 2 14-20, 14-21 arts. 3, 4 14-25(b), (c) art. 5 14-26(a)(5) art. 6 14-26(b)(3) art. 7 14-26(c)(5) art. 8 14-27(c) arts. 9, 10 14-28, 14-29 art. 11 14-32 G-10-08-26-9C5 8-26-2010 art. 1 14-114(d) art. 2 14-114(d)(4)b., c. art. 3 14-118(a) art. 4 14-120(b) G-10-08-26-9C6 8-26-2010 art. 1 30-3(b) art. 2 30-3(d)(1)f. art. 3 30-9 art. 4 30-10(a) G-10-08-26-9C7 8-26-2010 art. 1 36-3 art. 2 36-14(1) art. 3 36-16 arts. 4, 5 36-42(b)(4), (d)(6) art. 6 36-44(d)(4) art. 7 36-45(c)(4) art. 8 36-48(a)(9), (10), (14) art. 9 36-76(b) art. 10 36-108(b)-(d) art. 11 36-109(a) art. 12 36-115(b) art. 13 36-116(b)(1), (2) art. 14 36-118(a) arts. 15, 16 36-126(e)(2), (g)(1) art. 17 36-127(e)(2) art. 18 36-155(c), (d) arts. 19, 20 36-180(a), (b)(1) art. 21 36-181(a) art. 22 36-203(a), (c), (e), (f) art. 23 36-204(c)(2) art. 24 36-204(d) art. 25 36-206(1) arts. 26, 27 36-207, 36-208 G-10-10-28-9A1 10-28-2010 I-IV prelim pg. xi R-10-10-28-10B1 10-28-2010 exh. A       Added app. A G-10-11-09-9B1 11-9-2010 I 24-25-24-29 G-10-11-23-10B1 11-23-2010 I 42-223 G-10-11-23-10B2 11-23-2010 I 42-223 G-10-11-23-10B3 11-23-2010 I       Added 44-330-44-343 G-10-11-23-10B4 11-23-2010 I       Added 44-344 R-10-11-23-11B1 11-23-2010 46-92(c)(3) app. A G-10-12-02-9A1 12-2-2010 I       Added 22-7 G-11-01-13-9C1 1-13-2011 I 42-127(9) II       Rnbd 42-127(10), (11)       as 42-127(11), (12) III       Added 42-127(10) G-11-01-13-9C2 1-13-2011 I 42-319 G-11-01-27-13A1 1-27-2011 I 42-128 G-11-01-27-13A2 1-27-2011 I       Added 42-318(37) G-11-01-27-13A3 1-27-2011 I 42-320(a) G-11-01-27-13B1 1-27-2011 I, II 46-140(c)(1), (5) III       Added 46-140(e)(4) IV, V 46-141(c)(1), (8) VI       Added 46-141(e)(5) VII, VIII 46-142(c)(1), (8) IX       Added 46-142(e)(5) X 46-143(c)(1) XI       Dltd 46-143(c)(7)       Rnbd 46-143(c)(8)       as 46-143(c)(7) XII       Added 46-143(e)(5) XIII 46-144(c)(1) XIV       Dltd 46-144(c)(7) XV       Added 46-144(e)(5) XVI, XVII 46-145(c)(1), (7) XVIII       Added 46-145(e)(5) XIX 46-146(c)(1) XX       Dltd 46-146(c)(6)       Rnbd 46-146(c)(7)       as 46-146(c)(6) XXI       Added 46-146(e)(4) XXII, XXIII 46-147(c)(1), (6) XXIV       Added 46-147(e)(5) XXV, XXVI 46-149(c)(1), (8) XXVII       Added 46-149(e)(5) XXVIII, XXIX 46-150(c)(1), (8) XXX       Added 46-150(e)(5) XXXI, XXXII 46-151(c)(1), (8) XXXIII       Added 46-151(e)(5) XXXIV 46-152(c)(1) XXXV 46-152(c)(2)a. XXXVI 46-152(c)(7) XXXVII 46-195(d) XXXVIII       Added 46-200 XXXIX 32-23(a) G-11-02-24-10A1 2-24-2011 I 44-29(n) G-11-03-10-9A2 3-10-2011 I 46-138(b)(2) II 46-141(b)(2) III 46-142(b)(2) IV 46-155(b)(2) V 46-160(dd) G-11-04-14-9A1 4-14-2011 I 46-5 II 46-160(s) G-11-04-28-11A1 4-28-2011 I 42-223 G-11-05-12-11A2 5-12-2011 I 46-5 II       Added 46-160(p-1) III, IV       Added 46-160(ee-1), (ee-2) V, VI       Added 46-160(ii-1), (ii-2) VII 46-141(b)(1), (2) VIII 46-142(b)(1), (2) IX 46-143(b)(2) X 46-144(b)(2) XI 46-146(b)(1), (2) G-11-06-09-9A1 6-9-2011 I       Added 42-500 G-11-06-09-9C1 6-9-2011 I       Added 34-130-34-142 G-11-06-09-9C2 6-9-2011 I 2-118 G-11-06-23-9A2 6-23-2011 I 46-5 II 46-141(b)(1) III 46-142(b)(1) IV       Added 46-146(b)(3) G-11-06-23-9A3 6-23-2011 I, II 46-5 III 46-135 IV, V 46-136(c)(1), (8) VI 46-137(d)(1) VII 46-138(c)(1) VIII 46-139(c)(1) IX 46-140(c)(1) G-11-06-23-9B1 6-23-2011 I 44-30 G-11-07-14-10C1 7-14-2011 I 2-79-2-87 II 36-6 III 36-106(c) IV 36-126(e)(2), (5) V 40-21(i)(1) VI 40-22(e)(1), (7) VII 46-13(1) VIII 46-108(d) G-11-07-14-10C2 7-14-2011 I 34-19-34-46 G-11-07-14-10C3 7-14-2011 I 34-92-34-111 G-11-07-14-10C4 7-14-2011 I 30-6 G-11-07-14-10C5 7-14-2011 I 14-210 II 14-214(a)(6) G-11-07-14-10C6 7-14-2011 I       Dltd 6-19-6-25 G-11-07-28-11A1 7-28-2011 I 42-127(5) G-11-07-28-11C1 7-28-2011 I 2-326(b) G-11-08-25-8A3 8-25-2011 art. 1 10-50(3)c.1. art. 2 10-52(5)c.1. art. 3 10-53 art. 4 10-55(1) art. 5 10-56(b)(1) arts. 6, 7 10-56(c)(1)e., (c)(2)m. G-11-08-25-8A4 8-25-2011 art. 1 14-114(d) art. 2 14-114(d)(4)b., c. art. 3 14-118(a) art. 4 14-120(b) G-11-08-25-8A5 8-25-2011 arts. 1, 2 14-20, 14-21 arts. 3, 4 14-25(b), (c) art. 5 14-26(a)(5) arts. 6, 7 14-26(b)(3), (c)(5) art. 8 14-27(c) arts. 9, 10 14-28, 14-28 art. 11 14-32 G-11-08-25-8A6 8-25-2011 art. 1 30-3(b) art. 2 30-3(d)(1)f. art. 3 30-9 art. 4 30-10(a) G-11-08-25-8A7 8-25-2011 art. 1 36-6 art. 2 36-14(1) art. 3 36-16 arts. 4, 5 36-42(b)(4), (d)(6) art. 6 36-44(d)(6) art. 7 36-45(c)(4) art. 8 36-48(a)(9), (10), (14) art. 9 36-76(b) art. 10 36-108(b)-(d) art. 11 36-109(a) art. 12 36-115(b) art. 13 36-116(b)(1), (2) art. 14 36-118(a) arts. 15, 16 36-126(e)(2), (g) art. 17 36-127(e)(2) art. 18 36-155(c), (d) arts. 19, 20 36-180(a), (b)(1) art. 21 36-181(a) art. 22 36-203(a), (c), (e), (f) arts. 23, 24 36-204(c)(2), (d) art. 25 36-206(1) arts. 26, 27 36-207, 36-208 G-11-08-25-8A8 8-25-2011 art. 1 46-5 art. 2 46-45 art. 3 46-68 art. 4       Rpld 46-69 art. 5 46-71(d)(2), (6) art. 6 46-74 art. 7 46-92(b)-(d) arts. 8, 9 46-95, 46-96 art. 10 46-98(b) art. 11 46-100(b) art. 12 46-101(b) art. 13 46-106(b) art. 14 46-139(f), (f)(7) art. 15 46-140(d), (d)(7) art. 16 46-141(d) art. 17 46-142(d), (d)(7) art. 18 46-143(d), (d)(6) art. 19 46-144(d), (d)(6) art. 20 46-145(d)(1) art. 21 46-146(d)(1) art. 22 46-149(d) art. 23 46-150(d) art. 24 46-151(d) art. 25 46-152(d), (d)(7) art. 26 46-154(d)(1) art. 27 46-155(c)(2), (4), (5) art. 28 46-155(d), (d)(4), (6), (8) art. 29 46-155(i)(1) art. 30 46-158(d) art. 31 46-159(c)(1)e., (c)(2)c., (c)(4)e. arts. 32, 33 46-160(y)(8), (hh) art. 34 46-162(b)(2), (e)(2), (3) art. 35 46-163(c)(3) arts. 36, 37 46-195(a)(2), (b)(5) art. 38 46-195(c)(2)b., (c)(3)d. art. 39 46-195(d)(1)a., f. art. 40 46-195(e) arts. 41, 42 46-196(b)(1), (c) art. 43 46-196(e)(2) arts. 44, 45 46-196(f)(5), (g) arts. 46, 47 46-196(j)(1), (l)(2) art. 48 46-198(b)(3) art. 49 46-198(c)(2), (4) art. 50 46-200(e) G-11-10-06-10A1 10-6-2011 I 32-33(a)(2) G-11-10-06-10B1 10-6-2011 I       Added 30-3(d)(1)g. II       Dltd 30-3(d)(2) III       Added 30-3(e) IV, V       Rnbd 30-3(e), (f)       as 30-3(f), (g) G-11-10-06-10C7 10-6-2011 I       Added 44-400 G-11-10-27-9B1 10-27-2011 I 2-78(e) G-11-10-27-9B2 10-27-2011 I 2-78(d)(2) G-11-11-10-9B1 11-10-2011 I       Dltd 44-221-44-238       Added 44-221-44-238 G-11-11-10-9D1 11-10-2011 I 42-127(7) G-11-11-10-9D2 11-10-2011 I, II 42-127(5), (7) G-11-11-10-9D3 11-10-2011 I, II       Added 42-318(38), (39) G-12-01-12-9A1 1-12-2012 I       Added 42-318(a)-(c) II       Added 42-318(c)(30) III       Added 42-318(c)(40) G-12-01-26-8A1 1-26-2012 I       Rnbd ch. 38, art. V       as ch. 38, art. VI 38-118 II       Added 38-100-38-111 G-12-02-09-9A1 2-9-2012 I       Dltd 38-76-38-87       Added 38-76-38-87 G-12-03-08-8B3 3-8-2012 I 46-5 II 46-195 III 46-199(d) IV 10-56(d) G-12-03-08-8B4 3-8-2012 I       Rpld 14-19-14-33 II App. A III       Added ch. 43, §§ 43-19-43-33 G-12-03-22-10B1 3-22-2012 I 44-29 G-12-03-22-10C2 3-22-2012 I 46-8 G-12-04-12-10A1 4-12-2012 I, II 2-19, 2-20 III 2-22 IV 2-26 G-12-04-12-10C1 4-12-2012 I       Added 42-318(41) G-12-04-12-10C2 4-12-2012 I       Added 42-159(4) G-12-04-12-10D1 4-12-2012 I 36-39 II 36-43 III 46-92(c), (e) R-12-04-12-11A1 4-12-2012 I, II App. A G-12-04-26-H2 4-26-2012 I 36-10 G-12-05-10-H1 5-10-2012 I       Rpld 42-128 G-12-05-24-H2 5-24-2012 I       Rpld 2-229-2-238 G-12-06-14-F2 6-14-2012 I 42-223 G-12-06-14-F3 6-14-2012 I 44-32(b)(1) II 44-32(c)(1) III 44-32(d)(1) IV 44-32(f)(2), (3) G-12-06-14-H1 6-14-2012 I 46-99(a)-(f) G-12-06-28-F6 6-28-2012 I 14-303 G-12-07-12-G1 7-12-2012 I       Dltd 44-221-44-238       Added 44-221-44-240 II 10-56(d) III       Added 44-6 G-12-07-26-F2 7-26-2012 I       Added 42-128 G-12-07-26-F5 7-26-2012 I 2-56 G-12-09-13-F2 9-13-2012 I 42-223 G-12-09-13-H4 9-13-2012 I 46-99       Added 46-99.1 G-12-10-11-F2 10-11-2012 I, II       Dltd 42-127(1), (2) III 42-127(3) G-12-10-11-F3 10-11-2012 I 42-127(5) G-12-10-11-H4 10-11-2012 I 46-140 II       Added 46-140.1 III       Added 46-140.2 IV 46-5 V 46-132(a) VI 46-160(c), (d) VII, VIII 46-195(f)(1), (g)(1) IX 46-196(b)(1), (2) X 46-200(a) XI ch. 46, app. A XII 36-74(a) XIII 40-22(a) XIV 40-23(a) XV 42-322(b) R-12-10-11-G12 10-11-2012 I App. A G-12-11-20-F2 11-20-2012 I 42-223 G-12-11-20-F3 11-20-2012 I 10-242 10-244 II 10-223, 10-224 III 10-187, 10-188 IV 10-86, 10-87 V 10-42, 10-43 VI 10-40, 10-41 VII 10-44, 10-45 VIII 10-267       Added 10-268 IX, X       Added 10-308, 10-309 XI 16-51, 16-52 R-12-12-06-F4 12-6-2016 I App. A G-13-01-10-G1 1-10-2013 I       Added 46-70(b)(5) G-13-01-24-L2 1-24-2013 I       Added 46-70(b)(6) G-13-02-14-E2 2-14-2013 I 42-223 G-13-02-28-H2 2-28-2013 I       Added 22-8 G-13-03-14-F2 3-14-2013 I       Dltd 30-1-30-14       Added 30-1-30-23 II 34-40 III 46-5 IV 46-97(d)(8) V 46-98(c)(10) VI 46-141(d)(6) VII 46-142(d)(8) VIII       Dltd 46-143(c)(7) IX 46-143(d)(8) X 46-144(d)(8) XI 46-145(d)(4) XII 46-146(d)(2) XIII 46-147(d) XIV 46-149(d)(6) XV 46-150(d)(6) XVI 46-151(d)(6) XVII       Dltd 46-155(c)(2)d XVIII 46-155(d)(11) XIX 46-159(c)(4) XX       Dltd 46-160(e)(2)d XXI       Dltd 46-160(j)(3) XXII       Dltd 46-160(y)(10) XXIII 46-161(b)(2)l XXIV       Dltd 46-224(1)g R-13-03-14-F4 3-14-2013 I, II App. A G-13-03-14-H1 3-14-2013 I 46-92(e), (e)(3) G-13-05-09-F2 5-9-2013 I, II 44-29(f)(4), (7) III 44-30(a)(1) G-13-06-27-E1 6-27-2013 I 36-154 G-13-06-27-E2 6-27-2013 I 44-29(h) II 44-30(e) G-13-07-11-H2 7-11-2013 I       Added 46-155.1 II       Added 46-155.2 III       Added 46-155.3 IV 46-5 V 46-132(a) VI       Added 46-160(j)(6) VII       Added 46-160(p)(4) VIII 46-160(q)-(s) IX       Added 46-160(aa)(5), (6) X 46-160(dd)(2) XI 46-160(gg)(2) 46-160(hh)(3) 46-160(kk) XII 46-195(g) XIII 46-199(a), (b) 46-199(c)(1), (2) XIV 14-210 XV 40-23(a) XVI 43-22(a) G-13-07-25-G2  7-25-2013 I 2-78(d)(2) G-13-08-08-E2  8- 8-2013 I       Added 22-9 R-13-08-08-G2  8- 8-2013 I App. A G-13-09-12-E2  9-12-2013 I 42-223 G-13-10-24-F2 10-24-2013 I 42-127(10) G-13-11-26-E2 11-26-2013 I 44-29(h) II 44-30(e) G-13-11-26-E3 11-26-2013 I 24-25-24-29 G-13-11-26-E4 11-26-2013 I 42-223 G-13-11-26-E5 11-26-2013 I 42-223 G-13-12-05-E3 12- 5-2013 I 44-344(b)(3) G-13-12-19-E2 12-19-2013 I 32-33(a)(2) R-14-02-13-H10  2-13-2014 I App. A O-2014-1167  3-13-2014 I 42-223 O-2014-1168  3-13-2014 I, II 42-127(5), (7) O-2014-1169  3-13-2014 I 42-223 O-2014-1170  3-13-2014 I, II 42-127(5), (8) O-2014-1176  3-27-2014 I 42-285 O-2014-1214  3-27-2014 I 30-23 O-2014-1237  4-10-2014 I       Added 42-318(c)(42) 2014-1263  4-10-2014 I 46-5 II 46-139 III 36-112 IV, V 36-118, 36-119 VI 36-155 VII 36-204 O-2014-1309  4-10-2014 I 42-42 II-IV 42-44-42-46 V, VI 42-101, 42-102 VII, VIII 42-157, 42-158 IX 42-191 X-XII 42-223-42-225 XIII 42-315 O-2014-1362  5- 8-2014 I-IV 42-127(7)-(9) O-2014-1376  5-22-2014 I 42-285 O-2014-1549  7-10-2014 I 44-32 O-2014-1551  7-10-2014 I, II 42-127(7) O-2014-1552  7-10-2014 I 42-127(6) O-2014-1630  8-14-2014 I 42-127(10) O-2014-1645  8-28-2014 I 36-5(5) II 36-6 III 36-8 IV 36-39(e)(6) V 36-76(c)(3) VI 36-116(b)(4) VII 36-120(a) VIII, IX 44-3, 44-4 X 44-6(a) XI       Dltd 44-29-44-33       Added 44-29-44-37 XII 44-55 XIII 44-173 XIV 44-174 XV 44-191(a)(3), (c) O-2014-1753  9-25-2014 I       Added 42-318(c)(43) O-2014-1908 11-13-2014 I       Added 44-6(3) O-2014-1988 11-13-2014 I       Dltd 2-77(c) 2 2-78(e), (f) 3       Dltd 2-84(c) 4       Dltd 2-85(c) O-2015-2251  3-12-2015 I 38-22 O-2015-2312  3-12-2015 I 43-24 II 43-26 O-2015-2374  4-23-2015 I 42-128(1) O-2015-2383  4-23-2015 I       Added 44-229(a)(1)b 44-230       Added 44-231(a)(1)b 44-232 44-233(a)(5), (6) 44-234 44-235(a)(5), (6) O-2015-2384  6-11-2015 I       Added 44-32(c)(2)b-d II       Added 44-34(e)(2)-(4) O-2015-2423  5-14-2015 I 44-174 44-175(6) 44-177, 44-178 44-182(a)(4) 44-183 44-184(2) 44-185-44-191 O-2015-2470  5-14-2015 I 20-1(b) II       Rpld 26-22(b) R-2015-2480  5-14-2015 I(Exh. A) App. A O-2015-2537  6-25-2015 I       Added 24-75-24-78 O-2015-2567  6-11-2015 I       Added 30-3(12) R-2015-2757  8-27-2015 I App. A O-2015-2758  8-27-2015 I 46-5 II       Added 46-161(c) O-2015-2795  9-24-2015 I 42-223 O-2015-2895 10- 8-2015 I 18-1-18-12 R-2015-2896 10- 8-2015 I App. A O-2015-3110 12-17-2015 I 2-326 O-2015-3114  1-14-2016 I 44-37(f)(2), (3) O-2016-3144  1-28-2016 I 46-134(c)(3)       Added 46-134(c)(6) II 46-135(c)(3)       Added 46-135(c)(6) III 46-136(c)(3)       Added 46-136(c)(4)       Rnbd 46-136(c)(4)-(c)(12)       as 46-136(c)(5)-(c)(13) IV 46-137(d)(4)a       Added 46-137(d)(8) V       Added 46-138(c)(6) VI       Added 46-199(f) VII       Added 46-201 O-2016-3145  1-14-2016 I, II 30-4 III 30-8(b) O-2016-3150  1-28-2016 I 44-149(d)(2) O-2016-3177  2-11-2016 I 42-223 O-2016-3214  2-25-2016 I 42-285 O-2016-3333  4-14-2016 I 30-2(a)(3) O-2016-3414  5-12-2016 II 42-159(4) O-2016-3438  5-12-2016 I 2-78(d), (e) O-2016-3445  5-12-2016 I 14-303(a)(1) R-2016-3422  5-12-2016 I(Exh. A) App. A 2016-3423  5-26-2016 I       Added 42-129(d) O-2016-3539  7-14-2016 I, II 32-22, 32-23 O-2016-3573  7-14-2016 I       Added 46-134(c)(7) II       Added 46-135(c)(7) III       Added 46-136(c)(14) IV       Added 46-137(d)(9) V       Added 46-138(c)(7) O-2016-3574  7-14-2016 I 46-195(i)(3) 2016-3608  7-28-2016 I       Added 42-129(e) O-2016-3671  8-11-2016 I 42-472       Dltd 42-473-42-482       Rnbd 42-483-42-488       as 42-473-42-478 42-473 42-477       Dltd 42-489, 42-490       Rnbd 42-491-42-493       as 42-479-42-481 42-479 R-2016-3673  8-11-2016 I(Exh. A) App. A O-2016-3730  9- 8-2016 I 14-241-14-245 O-2016-3761  9- 8-2016 I 2-79(b)(1) II 2-80 III, IV       Added 2-88, 2-89 O-2016-3762  9-22-2016 I 8-208 O-2016-3776  9-22-2016 I 46-155.2(c)(1)       Added 46-155.2(c)(3)d       Rnbd 46-155.2(c)(3)d, e       as 46-155.2(c)(3)e, f O-2016-3778  9-22-2016 I 46-160(s-1) O-2016-3780  9-22-2016 I       Added 46-136.1 II 46-160(e)(2) O-2016-3797 10-27-2016 I 10-242 10-244 II 10-223, 10-224 III 10-187, 10-188 IV 10-86, 10-87 V 10-42, 10-43 VI 10-40, 10-41 VII 10-44, 10-45 VIII 10-267, 10-268 IX 10-309       Added 10-310 X 16-51, 16-52 O-2016-3831 10-27-2016 I-III 42-127(5), (7), (9) O-2016-3832 10-27-2016 I 42-128(3) O-2016-3846 10-27-2016 I 44-174 44-178(d), (f)       Added 44-178(g)       Rnbd 44-178(g)       as 44-178(h) 44-179 44-181 44-183 44-186 44-188       Added 44-191(a)(11) 44-191(d)(1)       Added 44-191(d)(6)       Rnbd 44-191(d)(6)       as 44-191(d)(7)       Added 44-192 O-2016-3984 12-15-2016 I 24-25-24-29 O-2017-4116  1-26-2017 I 42-106(b) O-2017-4119  2- 9-2017 I 42-128(1) O-2017-4187  3- 9-2017 I 42-223 O-2017-4231  3-23-2017 I 46-5 II 46-141(d) III 46-142(d) IV 46-143(d) V 46-144(d) VI 46-145(d) VII       Added 46-145(f) VIII 46-146(d) IX 46-149(d) X 46-150(d) XI 46-151(d) XII       Rpld 46-154(d)       Rnbd 46-154(e)       as 46-154(d) O-2017-4232  3-23-2017 I 36-6 II 36-107(g) III 36-119(a), (c) IV       Added 36-128 O-2017-4233  3-23-2017 I 43-20 43-21(d) 43-22(a), (b), (d) 43-23(b) 43-24 43-25(a) 43-27 43-30(b) 43-32(a), (c) O-2017-4244  3-23-2017 I 36-180(a) O-2017-4288  4-13-2017 I 46-5 II 46-155.1 III 46-155.2 IV 46-155.3 V       Added 46-160(d-1) 2017-4289  4-13-2017 I 36-116(b), (c)(6) II 46-200 O-2017-4290  4-13-2017 I 36-37 36-39(c)-(f), (i) 36-40(b)-(d), (f) 36-41(d) 36-42(a)-(d) 36-43(a)-(e) 36-44(a)-(d) 36-45(c) 36-46(b), (c) 36-48(a)       Rpld 36-48(d) O-2017-4291  4-13-2017 I 10-50 II       Rpld 10-51 III       Rpld 10-52 IV 36-6 V       Rnbd 36-207(b)       as 36-207(c)       Added 36-207(b) O-2017-4304  4-13-2017 I 44-228(a) O-2017-4305  4-13-2017 I 44-6(b) O-2017-4287  4-27-2017 I 46-132 II       Added 46-136.2 III       Added 46-144.1 IV, V       Added 46-155.4, 46-155.5 VI 46-160 VII 46-195(f)-(h) VIII 46-199(b), (c) O-2017-4343  4-27-2017 I UDO § 8-144(a), (f) UDO § 8-146       Dltd UDO § 8-147 UDO § 8-148 UDO § 8-149(d)       Added UDO § 8-149(e)       Rnbd UDO § 8-149(e), (f)       as UDO § 8-149(f), (g)       Added UDO § 8-149(h) UDO § 8-150(b)(1) UDO § 8-151(c), (f), (g) UDO § 8-152 O-2017-4581  7-13-2017 I 2-78(d), (e) O-2017-4587  7-27-2017 I       Added 42-318(c)(44) O-2017-4589  7-13-2017 I, II 2-19, 2-20 O-2017-4719  9-14-2017 I 42-223 O-2017-4778  9-28-2017 I 32-19 II 32-22 III 32-24 IV, V 32-28, 32-29 VI 32-34 O-2017-4779  9-28-2017 I-III 44-32-44-34 O-2017-4835 11- 9-2017 I 44-30 II 44-35(d), (e) O-2018-5091  1-25-2018 I       Added 14-213.1 O-2018-5096  2- 8-2018 I, II 32-33(a)(2) R-2018-5346  4-12-2018 I(Exh. A) App. A O-2018-5461  5-24-2018 I       Added 44-431-44-441 O-2018-5779  9-13-2018 I 42-128(1) O-2018-5788  9-13-2018 I       Added 24-101-24-103 O-2018-5865  9-27-2018 I-IV       Added Adopt. Ord. O-2018-5866  9-27-2018 II 14.213.1 III 24-101-24-103 IV 32-33(a)(2) V 42-128(1) VI 44-30 VII 44-35(d), (e) VIII 44-431-44-441 IX UDO § 8-144(a), (f) UDO § 8-146 UDO § 8-148 UDO § 8-149(d)-(h) UDO § 8-150(b)(1) UDO § 8-151(c), (f), (g) R-2018-5954  9-27-2018 I(Exh. A) App. A O-2018-5955  9-27-2018 I 2-78(d), (e) O-2018-6037 12-20-2018 I 8-1-8-6 8-31-8-34 8-57, 8-58 8-90-8-94       Added 8-95, 8-96 8-117-8-119 8-137-8-139       Dltd 8-162-8-173       Added 8-162-8-164 8-200-8-208       Dltd 8-209 8-227-8-230 8-254-8-261 8-286-8-288 8-310-8-312       Dltd 8-313-8-319       Added 8-313 8-342-8-349       Added 8-351-8-356       Added 8-361-8-364 III App. A O-2018-6161 12-20-2018 I 4-2 O-2019-0080  2-14-2019 I UDO § 2-26 O-2019-0081  2-14-2019 I UDO § 8-79(a) O-2019-0083  2-14-2019 I UDO § 2-93(c) O-2019-0084  2-14-2019 I UDO § 10-2(a), (b) O-2019-0085  2-14-2019 I UDO § 10-26 O-2019-0094  2-28-2019 I 44-149, 44-150 44-151(a)-(c) O-2019-0097  2-28-2019 I, II 32-33(a)(2) O-2019-0103  2-28-2019 I 42-285 O-2019-0124  3-14-2019 I       Dltd 42-500       Added 42-500-42-513 O-2019-0129  3-14-2019 I, II 14-209, 14-210 III       Added 14-213.2 O-2019-0136  3-14-2019 I UDO § 10-66(c), (d) II UDO § 10-67(c) III UDO § 10-68 O-2019-0137  3-14-2019 I UDO § 8-163 O-2019-0138  3-14-2019 I 2-271 O-2019-0201  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 4-82(e)(2) O-2019-0202  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 1-50 O-2019-0203  5- 9-2019 I       Dltd UDO § 2-16(d)(2)b       Rnbd UDO § 2-16(d)(2)c, d       as UDO § 2-16(d)(2)b, c       Added UDO § 2-16(d)(3)       Rnbd UDO § 2-16(d)(3), (4)       as UDO § 2-16(d)(4), (5) O-2019-0204  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 2-15(d)(2) II UDO § 2-16(d)(2)a III UDO § 2-17(d)(1)f IV UDO § 2-18(d)(2) V UDO § 2-19(d)(2) O-2019-0205  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 2-71(d)(4) II UDO §2-72(d)(4)a       Added UDO § 2-72(d)(4)g O-2019-0206  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 2-34(e)(1) II UDO § 2-42(e)(1) III UDO § 2-56(e)(1) IV UDO § 2-57(e)(1) O-2019-0207  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 2-32(e)(1)a, b       Dltd UDO § 2-32(e)(1)e       Rnbd UDO § 2-32(e)(1)f       as UDO § 2-32(e)(1)e II UDO § 2-33(e)(1)a, b       Dltd UDO § 2-33(e)(1)e       Rnbd UDO § 2-33(e)(1)f       as UDO § 2-33(e)(1)e III UDO § 2-58(e)(1)a, b       Dltd UDO § 2-58(e)(1)e       Rnbd UDO § 2-58(e)(1)f       as UDO § 2-58(e)(1)e O-2019-0208  5- 9-2019 I UDO § 2-77 II       Added UDO § 2-91(hh)(4) R-2019-0188  5- 9-2019 I App. A  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Texas Statutes 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article  Section 
this Code 1175(1) 44-271 3271a 44-275  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 8 ch. 142 8-32 142.009 8-33 ch. 143 8-32 251.002 UDO, § 1-50 UDO § 8-10  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 4 11.38 Ch. 4 4-1 28.18 UDO § 2-91 61.36 Ch. 4 4-1 ch. 105 4-2 105.03 4-2 105.05 4-2 109.31 et seq. Ch. 4 109.53 4-3  
V.T.C.A. Business and Commerce Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 36 6-59 6-68  
V.T.C.A. Business Organizations Code  Section 
this Code ch. 153 6-59  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 6.002 Char. § 14.14 ch. 63 Char. § 14.05 75.002 26-26 101.101 Char. § 14.07  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.003 38-76 38-100  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. 2-25 Char. Art. 5 1.001 et seq. Ch. 2 ch. 2, subch. C Char. § 5.01 2.002 Char. § 5.06 ch. 41 Char. § 5.01 141.003 Char. § 3.02 Char. § 5.02 ch. 253 Char. § 14.08  
V.T.C.A. Family Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 31 24-27 51.08 24-29  
V.T.C.A. Finance Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 302.002 42-512  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 29 Char. § 4.03 ch. 29, ch. 30 Ch. 22 ch. 414 16-1 24-3 ch. 417 Ch. 16, Art. II 417.007 16-22 ch. 418 Ch. 12 418.023 Ch. 42, Art. IV 418.101 et seq. 12-4 ch. 441 20-1 441.221 et seq. 20-1 ch. 551 Char. § 3.09 Char. § 3.12 2-21-2-23 2-26 UDO § 8-165 ch. 552 2-358 ch. 573 2-57 Char. § 14.03 ch. 851 et seq. 2-59 2009.054(c) 2-358  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 42.09 Ch. 8, Arts. IV, V ch. 241 6-55 242.031 6-55 243.004 6-56 ch. 341 Ch. 18 Ch. 32 ch. 342 Ch. 14, Art. VII Ch. 32 342.007 14-182 ch. 361 Ch. 32 ch. 363 Ch. 32 ch. 365 Ch. 32 32-20 ch. 382 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IX 382.018 Ch. 16, Art. IV 382.0191 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 13 ch. 431 Ch. 18 ch. 437 Ch. 18 18-1 437.0196 18-2 ch. 438 Ch. 18 ch. 751 et seq. Ch. 16 756.041 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 782.002 22-8 ch. 821 et seq. Ch. 8 ch. 822, subch. E 8-4 822.101 8-4 ch. 826 8-343 ch. 826, subch. E 8-364  
V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 42.041 6-55 42.041(b)(14) 26-56  
V.T.C.A. Labor Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 21 Char. § 14.08  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 5 et seq. Ch. 2 tit. 7, subch. A, Char. § 2.04 ch. 9 Char. Arts. 1-15 Char. §§ 14.11, 14.12 9.001 et seq. Ch. 2 9.002 Char. § 14.12 9.004 Char. § 14.11 tit. 12, subch. A Char. § 2.04 ch. 26 Ch. 2 26.021 Char. § 1.01 tit. 28 Char. § 2.02 41.001 et seq. Char. § 1.02 42.001 et seq. Ch. 2 42.021 UDO § 1-50 ch. 43 Char. § 1.03 43.002 UDO § 2-7 43.002(c) UDO § 2-7 43.141 et seq. Char. § 1.04 51.001 et seq. Char. Art. 2 51.072 Char. Art. 2 ch. 53 Char. § 3.13 1-1 54.001 1-9 54.016 14-246 54.031 et seq. UDO §§ 8-163, 8-164 ch. 101 et seq. Char. Art. 8 Char. Art. 10 Ch. 2, Art. V ch. 101 Char. § 14.05 ch. 101 et seq. Ch. 38 101.022 Char. § 8.01 ch. 102 Char. § 8.03 102.011 Char. § 8.03 ch. 103 Char. § 8.10 ch. 105 2-323 Char. § 8.08 131.903 Char. § 14.04 ch. 141 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 143 2-78 143.014 2-78 143.021(a) 2-78 143.089(g) 2-78 ch. 145 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 ch. 171 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 Char. § 14.04 ch. 176 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 ch. 201 et seq. 2-360 ch. 201 Char. § 8.02 Char. § 14.01 Ch. 2, Art. VI 203.026 Ch. 2, Art. VI ch. 211 UDO § 1-2 UDO § 10-2 UDO § 10-26 UDO § 10-30 211.006 UDO § 2-2 UDO § 10-21 ch. 212 UDO § 4-2 ch. 212, subch. A UDO § 4-82 ch. 212, subch. C UDO § 4-97 212.004(b) UDO § 10-35 212.009(a) UDO § 10-34 212.013 UDO § 10-32 212.015 UDO § 10-30 212.016 42-506 UDO § 4-82 UDO § 10-31 212.071 et seq. UDO § 4-97 212.0115 UDO § 4-2 UDO § 10-34 213.002 UDO § 1-7 214.214 UDO § 8-144 215.031 Ch. 28 216.902 UDO § 8-71 ch. 217, subch. C 14-209 217.003 Ch. 16, Art. V 24-2 ch. 243 Ch. 6, Art. III 243.003 6-54 ch. 245 UDO § 2-7 UDO § 8-112 UDO §§ 10-1, 10-2 245.004, 245.005 UDO § 2-7 ch. 251 Char. § 2.03 252.021 et seq. 2-326 Char. § 8.09 252.022 2-326 Char. § 8.09 252.023 2-326 Char. § 8.09 ch. 281 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 283 44-271 44-273 44-284 283.002(2) 44-272 283.002(6) 44-272 ch. 284 44-432 284.003 44-435 284.054 44-438 284.055 44-440 ch. 306 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 334 38-100 334.043 38-101 ch. 341 et seq. Ch. 16 341.012 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 341.905 Ch. 24, Art. II 342.003 Ch. 16, Art. V 351.903 Ch. 24, Art. II ch. 372 44-432 ch. 395 42-502 UDO § 4-82 395.012(b) UDO § 4-85 395.013 UDO § 4-85 395.014(7) UDO § 4-82 395.016 42-500 395.016(f) UDO § 1-50 395.019 UDO § 4-82 395.025 UDO § 4-85 ch. 401 et seq. Char. Art. 11 Ch. 44 ch. 551 UDO § 10-66 ch. 552, subch. C 44-330 44-336 552.041 et seq. 44-330 44-336 552.044(8) 44-334 552.045(b)(1)-(3) 44-334 552.053 44-343 552.053(b) 44-343 580.003(a) 44-343  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 153 Ch. 16, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1201 42-415 ch. 1301 UDO § 8-10 ch. 1801 et seq. Ch. 28 ch. 1903 UDO § 8-10 1903.002 UDO § 8-10 1903.002(c)(1) UDO § 8-10 1903.053 UDO § 8-10 ch. 2001 Ch. 38, Art. V 38-118 ch. 2151 34-31 ch. 2154 Ch. 16, Art. V ch. 2302, ch. 2303 Ch. 42, Art. IV ch. 2308 Ch. 42, Art. IV 2308.201 Ch. 42, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 31 14-301  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 12 1-9 ch. 21, ch. 22 6-62 ch. 25 6-62 28.02 16-1 28.03 24-3 28.08 Ch. 14, Art. X 31.03 Ch. 42, Art. IV ch. 36 2-118 38.10 22-1 42.01(c) Ch. 14, Art. VIII ch. 43 6-62 48.01 Ch. 14, Art. IX  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 12.002 UDO § 10-35 92.251 et seq. UDO § 8-151  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 38 Ch. 38, Art. II 1.05 Char. § 8.01 6.30 38-20 6.30(c) 38-20 11.13 38-19 11.13(m) 38-19 11.253(a)(2) 38-21 33.01 38-20 UDO § 10-57 33.07 38-20 152.001 38-76 38-100 ch. 156 Ch. 38, Art. IV 38-77 38-103 156.101 38-77 38-103 156.103(a) 38-77 38-103 156.103(a)(1) 38-77 38-103 156.103(a)(3) 38-77 38-103 156.103(c) 38-77 38-103 156.103(d) 38-77 38-103 156.151 38-109 182.025 44-271 ch. 301 et seq. Char. Art. 8 Char. Art. 10 ch. 311 44-432 ch. 312 38-22 312.205 38-22 ch. 321 Ch. 38, Art. III 321.101 38-48 321.105 38-49 321.210 38-51 ch. 351 Ch. 38, Art. IV 351.101 38-85 351.101(a)(1) 38-86 351.101(a)(3)-351.101(a)(5) 38-86  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 42 392.032 UDO § 8-91 ch. 396 Ch. 42, Art. IV ch. 501 14-301 ch. 501 et seq. 42-67 502.001 42-318 541.201 28-54 542.202(a)(2) Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 11 543.001 et seq. 22-6 543.009 22-1 543.111 et seq. 22-2 ch. 544 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 4 544.007(d) 42-417, 42-418 545.101 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 6 545.351 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 5 545.356 42-127 ch. 546 42-418 ch. 550 Ch. 42, Art. IV 42-69 ch. 551 Ch. 42, Art. II, Div. 9 551.201 42-415 ch. 552 28-58 552.007 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III ch. 643 Ch. 42, Art. IV 681.011 42-310 682.002 22-6 ch. 683 Ch. 14, Art. XI ch. 683 et seq. 14-301 683.014 14-301 683.031 14-301 683.071 et seq. 14-303 ch. 707 22-8 707.008 22-8 707.008(a)(2) 22-8 707.008(b) 22-8  
V.T.C.A. Utilities Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 44 33.008 44-271 ch. 66 44-271 44-273 44-279 44-400 66.006 44-400 251.001 44-277  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 7.251 44-91 11.039 44-227 16.315 UDO § 8-156 ch. 28 Char. § 14.15  
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
Article  Section 
this Code 2.12 2-150 14.06(b) 22-6 15.03(b) 22-6 18.05 Ch. 16, Art. II ch. 45 Ch. 22 45.052 22-3 22-9 45.053 22-9 45.056 22-9 102.017 22-4 102.0172 22-5 102.0174 22-9 103.0031 22-6  
