CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SINTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OF - SINTON, TEXAS OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Edward Adams 
Mayor 
____________ 
Nathan Lindeman 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Danny Davila 
Cheryl Rigotti 
Patricia Garcia Vargas 
City Council 
____________ 
John Hobson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Don Kubicek 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cathy Duhart 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sinton, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The titles and chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged by subject, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    Each section number consists of two parts separated by a decimal. The figure before the decimal refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the decimal refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 10 is numbered 10.02. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. New chapters, articles and divisions may be included in the same way, or, in the case of chapters, may be placed at the end of the title embracing the subject; in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject; and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new chapter, article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the title. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Cathy Duhart, City Secretary; John Hobson, City Manager; and Don Kubicek, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sinton, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative tables; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sinton, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Sinton, Texas. 2015. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2015-09 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SINTON, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SINTON: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Sinton, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 157, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 17, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3 . The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; 
(2)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern dumping of refuse shall have a maximum fine of $4,000.00; and 
(3)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
    However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
    Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 17, 2015 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately following its passage, approval, and publication as provided by law, and it is accordingly so ordained. 
    Passed and adopted by the Sinton City Council this 15 th day of December, 2015. 
/s/ Edward Adams 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Cathy Duhart 
      City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/Omitted Supp. No. 2015-06 Omitted 1 2015-07 Omitted 1 2015-08 Omitted 1 2015-09 Included 1 2016-01 Omitted 1 2016-02 Omitted 1 2016-03 Included 1 2016-04 Included 1 2016-05 Included 1 2015-04 Included 2 2016-06 Included 2 2016-07 Omitted 2 2016-08 Omitted 2 2016-09 Included 2 2016-10 Included 2 2016-11 Included 2 2016-12 Omitted 2 2016-13 Omitted 2 2017-01 Included 2 2017-02 Included 3 20170828(Res.) Included 3 2018-01 Omitted 3 2018-02 Included 3 2018-03 Omitted 3 2018-04 Omitted 4 2018-05 Omitted 4 2018-06 Omitted 4 2018-07 Omitted 4 2019-01 Included 4 2019-02 Included 4 2019-03 Omitted 4  
PART I - CHARTER, SINTON, TEXAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Sinton, Texas, as adopted by referendum on November 19, 1966. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original referendum. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, numerical representation and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Constitution reference- Charter to be consistent with constitution and general laws, art. XI, § 5. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 9. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The residents of the City of Sinton in San Patricio County, Texas, within the corporate limits now established and as hereafter altered, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a municipal body politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the City of Sinton, hereinafter referred to as the city, and having such powers, privileges, rights, duties, and immunities as are herein provided. 
Sec. 1.02. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the council-manager government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of the state and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the council, which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021. 
Sec. 1.03. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City of Sinton shall be the same as have heretofore been established, and as of this date, which boundaries are more fully set out on an official map recorded in Volume Eight, Page 180, of the Minutes of the City of Sinton, here referred to for more complete description. 
    The boundaries of the city may be altered by extension of contraction though annexation or detachment of territory by any legal method approved by the State of Texas under Chapter 43 of the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 1971-10, § 1, ref. of 9-11-1971; Ord. No. 1973-15, §§ 1, 2, ref. of 9-8-1973; Ord. No. 1995-03, ref. of 5-6-1995) 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 41. 
Sec. 1.04. - General powers of the city. 
    The city shall be a home rule city, with full power of local self-government, including the right to amend this Charter, as provided by the constitution and laws of this state. It shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such granted powers. It may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and may be contracted with; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas, or any agency or political subdivision thereof, or the federal government or it agencies, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city and its inhabitants; may acquire property within, or without its corporate city limits for any municipal purpose in fee simple, or any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and; subject to the provisions of this Charter may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, and control such property as may now or hereafter be owned by it; may pass ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of the good government order, peace of the city and the welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of its inhabitants, and shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every kind and nature whatsoever, subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, state laws and this Charter. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be judged to be exclusive, and, in addition to the powers enumerated or implied herein, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all the powers which, under the constitution and laws of this state, it would be competent for this Charter to enumerate specifically. 
State Law reference- General powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 51; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 
Sec. 1.05. - Streets and public property. 
    The city shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over, and under the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, public squares, public ways and public parks within and without the corporate limits of the city, and in, upon, over, and under all public property of the city. With respect to each and every public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public square, public park, or other public way within or without the corporate limits of the city, the city shall have the power to establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate the same; to regulate, establish or change the grade thereof; to police, control, and regulate the use thereof, and to abate and remove in a summary manner any encroachment thereon. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26. 

Sec. 2.01. - Number and terms of office. 
    The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of five (5) members elected by majority vote by place number from the city at large for four (4) year term and shall be known as the City Council of the City of Sinton. 
(Ord. No. 1997-04, ref. of 5-3-1997; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 6-19-2018, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
Sec. 2.02. - Qualifications. 
    Each member of the council shall have been a resident citizen of the city for a period of not less than six months immediately preceding his election, and shall be a qualified voter of the State of Texas on the date of filing. No member of the council shall be a candidate for, nor hold any other elective office, appointive city office, or be a paid employee of the city. 
    Any citizen with all the above qualifications except as to residence, but who shall have been a resident of any territory that is annexed under the provisions of this Charter for a period of not less than six months immediately preceding his election shall be eligible to serve on the council. 
    If any member of the council shall cease to possess any of the above qualifications or be convicted of a misdemeanor by theft or any felony, his office shall immediately become vacant. If any member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings without explanation acceptable to a majority of the other members, or is absent from three consecutive regular meetings with or without cause, his office shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the council. A councilmember who does not attend a meeting while on official City business shall not be considered absent from the meeting. 
    No person related within the second degree by affinity or the third degree by consanguinity to a member of the Council or to a person employed by the City as City Manager, Department Head, or Supervisor may be a candidate for the Council. 
(Ord. No. 1997-04, ref. of 5-3-1997; Ord. No. 2015-05, ref. of 5-9-2015; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Age and residence requirements for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003. 
Sec. 2.03. - Compensation. 
    The mayor shall receive the sum of $175.00 per month and councilmembers shall receive the sum of $125.00 per month. If the mayor or councilmember does not attend a meeting while on official city business, he shall not be considered absent from the meeting. No compensation shall be allowed for not attending each regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2005-A, ref. of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 2.04. - Mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
    The newly elected council members shall take office at the first meeting following the election. However, should a run-off be necessary under section 3.04, the newly elected council members shall take office at the first meeting following the run-off election. At the meeting at which the newly-elected council members take office, the council shall elect from its membership a mayor and mayor pro tempore. "The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore shall be elected annually; in May, from its membership." The mayor and mayor pro tempore shall serve for one year or until their successors have been duly elected and qualified. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and for receiving service of civil process, and by the governor for purposes of military law; he shall sign all contracts, conveyances, and bonds authorized by the council, but shall have no administrative duties. The mayor shall be entitled to vote upon matters considered by the council but shall have no veto power. The mayor pro tempore shall perform all duties of the mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
Sec. 2.05. - Vacancies. 
    When a vacancy occurs, for any reason, in the council, the remaining members shall, within 30 days, appoint a qualified person to serve until the next general city election, when it shall be filled for the unexpired term, if any, by the regular election procedure. 
(Ref. of 8-11-1979) 
Sec. 2.06. - Powers of the council. 
    All powers and authority which are expressly or impliedly conferred on or possessed by the city shall be vested in and exercised by the council; provided, however, the council shall not exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other city officers by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.07. - Prohibitions. 
    No councilman shall hold any other elective office or any other city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected to the council, and no former councilman shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to the council. 
    Neither the council nor any of its other members shall dictate the appointment or removal of any administrative officers or employees who the manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment or removal of such officers and employees. 
    Except for purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.08, the council and its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
    The city shall not lend its credit, make loans, grant public money, nor provide personnel or services of the city to any individual or business entity for economic development. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 2001-03, ref. of 5-5-2001) 
State Law reference- Dual officeholding, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 574. 
Sec. 2.08. - Investigative powers. 
    The council shall have the authority to investigate the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency, and, for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of any records or other evidence material to the investigation. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999) 
Sec. 2.09. - Judge of qualifications. 
    The council shall be the judge of the qualification and election of its own members and shall, on the next regular meeting after each regular and special election, canvass the returns and declare the results of each election. 
Sec. 2.10. - Meeting of the council. 
    The council shall hold one regular meeting in each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings and may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its citizens. All council meetings shall be at the city hall except that the council may designate another place for such meetings after due notice. The mayor, the city manager or any three members of the council may call a special meeting of the council. Notice of all meetings and conduct of all meetings shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1981-03, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993; Ord. No. 1995-05, ref. of 5-7-2005) 
State Law reference- Open meetings of governmental bodies, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
Sec. 2.11. - Procedure. 
    The council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business. Three members shall constitute a quorum to do business but the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership shall be necessary for the adoption of any ordinance or resolution. Minutes of all proceedings shall be kept and shall constitute one of the archives of the city to which any citizen may access at all reasonable times. The vote upon the passage of every ordinance or resolution shall be by a show of hands and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and of the person performing the duties of city secretary. 
Sec. 2.12. - City secretary. 
    The city secretary shall be appointed by the city manager and shall meet or exceed all qualifications in the job description. The city secretary or his deputy shall give notice of council meetings, keep the minutes of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full all ordinances and resolutions in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him and those elsewhere provided in this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999; Ord. No. 2015-05, ref. of 5-09-2015) 
Sec. 2.13. - City attorney. 
    The council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the City of Sinton who shall be the city attorney. Practicing law in the City of Sinton shall be established by having an office in the City of Sinton a minimum of two years prior to appointment. He shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the council. He shall be the legal advisor, attorney and counselor for the city, its officers and departments. The council shall, when it deems necessary, appoint one or more assistants to the city attorney and set their compensation. The city attorney and his assistants shall represent the city in all litigation, but at the council's discretion may or may not participate in litigation for the collection of delinquent taxes. Special attorneys may be employed under contract for the collection of delinquent taxes and for any other purposes at such fees and for such length of time as the council may prescribe. 
(Ord. 2015-05, ref. of 5-9-2015) 
Sec. 2.14. - Procedure to enact legislation. 
    The council shall legislate by ordinance only, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Sinton." All ordinances, unless otherwise provided by the Charter or by the terms of such ordinance, shall take effect immediately upon passage. 
    Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and subject matter shall be clearly expressed in its title. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it be read at more than one time or considered at more than one session of the council. 
    The descriptive caption and penalty, fine or forfeiture section of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of its provisions shall be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the City of Sinton with a statement of places where copies have been filed for public inspection, and every such ordinance shall not take effect until after the date of the publication. The city secretary shall note on every ordinance whose caption and penalty clauses are required to be published, and on the record thereof, the date of publication which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication. 
    Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of the council meetings. 
State Law reference- Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 52.013. 
Sec. 2.15. - Codification of ordinances. 
    The council shall have the authority to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts without further proof. 
State Law reference- Code of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 53. 
Sec. 2.16. - Reserved. 
Note- Sec. 2.16, Administrative departments, has been deleted from the charter. 
(Ord. No. 1985-03, ref. of 4-6-1985) 
Sec. 2.17. - Parks advisory board. 
    Each council member shall appoint one member for a total of five (5) members to the parks advisory board, who shall be qualified voters of the State of Texas, and have an interest in service to the public through the parks of the City of Sinton. They shall work in an advisory capacity to the council in planning, development and regulation of use of park facilities. Members of this board shall be appointed for two-year terms, shall elect a chairman from their membership and shall meet at the call of the chairman or at the request of the council. Any member who is absent from three (3) consecutive meetings without being excused by all of those present, shall be dropped from the board, and notice of such dropping given to the mayor, and the council shall fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice. 
(Ref. of 8-11-1979; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Elections generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 3.01. - Order and regulation of elections. 
    The general city election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, at which time councilmembers will be elected to fill those places which become vacant that year, whether by the normal expiration of terms, or by operation of section 2.05. The election shall be ordered by the mayor on resolution of the council. Any special election of whatever nature shall be ordered by the mayor on resolution of the council and shall be held on such dates as are authorized by the laws of the State of Texas then current at the time of the resolution ordering such election. Notice of elections shall be published as required by applicable state law. 
    The council shall appoint the election judges and other officials, shall set the hours and place for holding each election and shall make all regulations it considers necessary or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter of the laws of the state governing elections, for the prevention of fraud and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. 
(Ref. of 8-11-1979; Ord. No. 1981-03, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
State Law reference- Establishing precincts required, V.T.C.A., Election Code §§ 42.061 and 43.004; appointing election officers, V.T.C.A., Election Code §§ 32.005, 32.011, and 32.035; voter qualifications, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 11 and § 31.005. 
Sec. 3.02. - Filing as a candidate. 
    Any person qualified under section 2.02 who desires to become a candidate for the council and to have his name appear on the ballot, shall file an application meeting the requirements of applicable state law with the city secretary within the time required by applicable state laws. Each candidate shall clearly designate in the application to have such candidate's name appear on the ballot, the number of the place on the city council to which such candidates seeks election. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Sec. 3.03. - The official ballot. 
    The name of each candidate shall be placed on the ballot under the designated place for which such candidates shall have filed, and in such manner that the names of the candidate for each place shall be clearly separate and distinguishable from the names of the candidate for every other council place. In the event more than one candidate files for any place on the council, the city secretary shall notify all the candidates for such place of the time and place of a drawing by lots to be conducted by the city secretary to determine the order in which the names of such candidates shall appear on the ballot, which notice shall be given to the candidates at least 24 hours prior to the drawing and each candidate, or a representative named by such candidate, may attend. If two candidates have the same surname, or have names so similar that confusion of identity is likely, the address of their place of residence shall be placed on the ballot with their name. 
    All official ballots shall be printed at least 20 days prior to the date of the election and absentee voting shall be governed by the general election rules of this state. The time limits specified above shall not apply to runoff elections. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985) 
State Law reference- Ballot form, content, and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 52. 
Sec. 3.04. - Election by plurality. 
    At each regular election, election to each place on the council [shall] be by plurality of all votes cast for each candidate place to be filled. In the event a tie vote makes it impossible to determine the winning candidate, the council shall order a runoff election between the tied candidates on the third Saturday following the election where the tie occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985) 
State Law reference- Vote required for election to office, V.T.C.A., Election Code ch. 2. 
ARTICLE IV. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 4.01. - Initiative and referendum. 
    The electors of the city shall have the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of such power may propose any ordinance except one appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes and to adopt or reject the same at the polls. 
Sec. 4.02. - Referendum. 
    The electors of the city shall have the power to reject in a referendum election any ordinance adopted by the council except one appropriating money, authorizing the levy of taxes or authorizing the issuance and servicing of tax or revenue bonds which have been approved by the voters in an election held for that purpose. 
Sec. 4.03. - Requirements for initiative and referendum petitions. 
    Any five residents, qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form. 
    Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to 25 percent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular city election, or 200, whichever is greater. 
    All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be repealed. 
    Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator stating he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be repealed. 
    Initiative petitions may be filed at any time but referendum petitions must be filed within 30 days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be repealed. 
Sec. 4.04. - Filing, examination, and certification of petitions. 
    The petition for initiative or referendum shall be filed with the city secretary who shall, within 20 days thereafter, determine whether the petition is sufficient in form and has been signed by the requisite number of voters. The city secretary shall promptly notify each member of the petitioners' committee by certified mail of his finding. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend with the city secretary within four days after notice of insufficiency has been mailed and files a supplementary petition within 14 days after notice has been mailed. 
Sec. 4.05. - Suspension of effect of ordinance by petition. 
    When a referendum petition is filed with the city secretary, the ordinance sought to be repealed shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when there is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, the council repeals the ordinance, or after canvass of votes of the referendum election. 
Sec. 4.06. - Action by the council. 
    When a petition as originally filed, or amended, is found to be sufficient, the city secretary shall so certify to the council at its next regular meeting. If the council fails to adopt an ordinance proposed by initiative without change in substance or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days after the petition was certified as sufficient, it shall submit the proposed ordinance or the referred ordinance to the qualified electors of the city for approval or rejection at the earliest uniform election date it may be submitted to the voters. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Sec. 4.07. - Ballot for initiated or referred ordinances. 
    Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors under provision of this article shall be submitted by ballot title, prepared in all cases by the city attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance. Immediately below the ballot title, the ballot shall contain the following propositions in the order indicated: "For the ordinance," and "Against the ordinance." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot. 
Sec. 4.08. - Results of election. 
    If a majority of the electors voting on a purposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof it shall become effective upon canvass of the vote of the election. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereupon shall be deemed repealed. 
    No ordinance which has been initiated by petition and adopted at an election by the qualified voters shall be repealed by the council within two years thereafter, and no ordinance enacted by the council and thereafter rejected by the qualified voters in an election held on petition for referendum shall be reenacted by the council within two years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999) 
Sec. 4.09. - Recall of elected officials. 
    The citizens of the city shall have the power to remove any member or members of the council from office by recall, and may exercise this power by filing with the city secretary a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to 50 percent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular city election, or 500, whichever is greater. The recall petition shall be initiated, signed, verified and filed in the same manner as initiative and referendum petitions. The petition must distinctly and specifically point out the grounds upon which the recall is predicated. 
Sec. 4.10. - Recall election. 
    Immediately after a recall petition has been filed, the city secretary shall examine it, and if the city secretary finds it sufficient the city secretary shall submit it to the council with the city secretary's certificate of sufficiency within five days and notify the councilperson or councilpersons sought to be recalled of the city secretary's action. If the councilperson or councilpersons sought to be recalled does not resign within five days after such notice, the council shall order a recall election to be held at the earliest uniform election it may be submitted to the voters. 
    Ballots used in a recall election shall submit with respect to each person whose removal is sought the question, "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of the councilperson by recall?" Immediately below each such question the two following propositions shall be listed, one above the other in the order indicated: 
    "For the removal of (name of person)." 
    "Against the removal of (name of person)." 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Sec. 4.11. - Results of recall election. 
    When a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of a councilman he shall continue in office for the remainder of his term. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of a councilman, he shall be deemed removed from office regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in section 2.05. A councilman removed from office by recall shall not be eligible to succeed himself. 
Sec. 4.12. - Limitation on recall. 
    No councilman shall be subject to recall within six months of his first election to office and no councilman shall be subjected to more than one recall election during any two-year term in office. A recall election need not be ordered by the council against any councilman on whom a petition is filed if his term of office is to expire within 90 days after the petition is filed with the city secretary. 
Sec. 4.13. - District judge may order election. 
    Should the council refuse or fail to order any election provided for in this article when all the requirements have been met by the petitioners' committee, it shall then be the duty of the presiding judge of the judicial district of San Patricio County, upon application by the petitioners' committee, to order such elections and to enforce carrying into effect the provisions of this article. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29; rules of procedure, etc., V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 45. 

Sec. 5.01. - Municipal court [established]. 
    A municipal court of the City of Sinton shall be created and maintained for the trial and disposition of misdemeanor offenses with the powers and duties as are now and may hereafter be prescribed by the constitution and statutes of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987) 
Sec. 5.02. - Judge of the municipal court. 
    The judge of the court shall be qualified voter and resident of the city. He shall be appointed by the council to serve at the pleasure of the council and at such salary as may be fixed by the council. 
    When the judge is absent, disabled or unable to perform his duties for any cause, or his office becomes vacant by reason of death, removal or resignation, the mayor or mayor pro tempore shall be the judge of said court, or the council may appoint a special judge of said court who shall serve until the judge of said court returns to his duties or a successor is appointed and qualified. The person so appointed shall meet the qualifications for the position as mandated by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985; Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987) 
Sec. 5.03. - Clerk of municipal court. 
    The city council may appoint a municipal court clerk who shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the court's seal, and to do and perform all acts and duties permitted and required of clerks of the court of Texas in issuing process and conducting the business of said court. 
(Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. 4-6-1985; Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987) 
ARTICLE VI. - THE CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 6.01. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city. He must, however, reside in the city during his tenure in office. 
Sec. 6.02. - Term and salary. 
    The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a four-fifths vote of the entire council. The action of the council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, ref. of 5-9-2015) 
Sec. 6.03. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall have the power and the duty to: 
(a)  Appoint, and remove any officer or employee of the city except those officers appointed by the council and except as otherwise provided by this Charter; 
(b)  Prepare and submit the annual budget to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
(c)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(d)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable; 
(e)  Attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in all discussions but the city manager shall have no vote; 
(f)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
ARTICLE VII. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 1 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 1 et seq.; municipal law enforcement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341. 

Sec. 7.01. - Establishment. 
    There shall be established and maintained a police department to preserve order within the city and to secure the residents of said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss. 
Sec. 7.02. - Chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, appointed by the city manager for an indeterminate term at a salary to be set by the council. 
Sec. 7.03. - Appointment of subordinates. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to appoint, discharge, and remove all subordinate personnel of the police department, subject to the approval of the city manager, and shall have the power to suspend, with or without pay, any subordinate personnel for not more than five days with prior approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999) 
ARTICLE VIII. - THE BUDGET[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

Sec. 8.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of the succeeding calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this Charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
State Law reference- City fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05. 
Sec. 8.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The city manager shall, at least 60 days prior to the beginning of each budget year, submit to the council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided by sections 8.11 and 8.13. For such purpose, at such date as he shall determine, he, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each office, department, or agency estimates of revenue and expenditure of that office, department, or agency detailed by organization units and character and object expenditure, and such other supporting data as he may request. In preparing the budget, the city manager shall review the estimates, shall hold hearings thereon and may revise the estimates, as he may deem advisable. 
State Law reference- Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 102. 
Sec. 8.03. - Budget a public record. 
    The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary open to public inspection during normal office hours. The city manager shall have sufficient copies of the budget and budget message prepared for distribution to interested persons. 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 
Sec. 8.04. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
    At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the council shall set the place and time of the public hearing on the budget and give notice of the public hearing as required by applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
State Law reference- Special notice by publication for budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.0065. 
Sec. 8.05. - Public hearing on budget. 
    At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates or any item thereof. 
State Law reference- Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.006. 
Sec. 8.06. - Vote required for adoption. 
    The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of at least a majority of all members of the whole council. 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.007. 
Sec. 8.07. - Date of final adoption; failure to adopt. 
    The budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be finally adopted, with or without amendment, not later than the first regular council meeting in September of the then current fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget, as submitted by the city manager, shall be deemed to have been adopted by the council. In amending the budget, the council may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any program or amounts, except estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget at time of adoption or later shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total funds available. 
(Ord. No. 1995-03, ref. of 5-6-1995) 
State Law reference- Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.007. 
Sec. 8.08. - Effective date [of] budget; certification; copies made available. 
    Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget as adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, the county clerk of San Patricio County, and the state comptroller of public accounts in Austin. The adopted budget shall be printed, mimeographed, or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments, and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
State Law reference- Approved budget filed with municipal clerk, posting on internet, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.008. 
Sec. 8.09. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
Sec. 8.10. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
    From effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city, in the corresponding tax year. 
State Law reference- Levy of taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009. 
Sec. 8.11. - Budget message. 
    The budget message submitted by the city manager to the council shall be explanatory of the budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the budget year and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in expenditure and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
Sec. 8.12. - Supporting schedules. 
    Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material, in respect to both current operations and capital outlays, as the city manager shall believe useful to the council. 
Sec. 8.13. - Budget contents. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. It shall contain the following: 
(a)  A budget message; 
(b)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures for all funds; 
(c)  An analysis of property valuations; 
(d)  An analysis of tax rate; 
(e)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for the preceding five years; 
(f)  General fund resources and all other fund resources in detail; 
(g)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity; 
(h)  Summary of purposed expenditures by character and object; 
(i)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries mentioned in (g) and (h) above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay; 
(j)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds; 
(k)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, call date, if any, amount authorized, amount issued, and amount outstanding; 
(l)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds; 
(m)  A special funds section; 
(n)  The appropriation ordinance. 
    The total estimated expenditures of each fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the national committee on municipal accounting or some other nationally accepted classification. 
Sec. 8.14. - Anticipated revenues; comparison with other years. 
    In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue there shall be placed the actual amount of such item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 8.15. - Proposed expenditures; comparison with other years. 
    The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance, and capital outlay of each office, department, or agency of the city shall be itemized by character and object. In parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of expenditure for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 8.16. - Emergency appropriations. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provision of section 2.14. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes or time warrants at the lowest rate of interest obtainable, as determined by the city manager with the approval of the council, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which emergency appropriation was made. 
State Law reference- Emergency expenditure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.009. 
Sec. 8.17. - Reduction of appropriations. 
    If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

Sec. 9.01. - Director of finance; surety bond. 
    There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the city manager who shall provide a bond with such surety and amount as the council may require, except that such bond shall be in an amount of not less than $20,000.00, the cost to be borne by the city. 
Sec. 9.02. - Director of finance; power and duties. 
    The city manager shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(a)  Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget; 
(b)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(c)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city and each of its offices, departments, and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance, require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient; 
(d)  Submit to the council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(e)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(f)  Supervise and be responsible for the assessment of all property within the corporate limits of the city for taxation, make all special assessments for the city, prepare tax maps and give such notice of taxes and special assessments as may be required by law; 
(g)  Supervise and be responsible for the collection of all taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the city or for whose collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from the state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department, or agency of the city; 
(h)  Serve as ex officio city treasurer and have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city, and have deposited daily all funds coming into his hands in such depository(s) as may be designated by resolution of the council; 
(i)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(j)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, material, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city; 
(k)  Approve all proposed expenditures. No appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds; 
(l)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Sec. 9.03. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time with the approval of the council transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department, or agency. At the request of the city manager and within the last three months of the budget year, the council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. 
Sec. 9.04. - Accounting supervision and control. 
    The city manager shall have power and shall be required to: 
(a)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city; 
(b)  Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable; 
(c)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the city and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges; 
(d)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office; 
(e)  Request and receive proposals for providing auditing services for the city from capable public accounting firms. Contract awarded shall be for three consecutive years with an option for a year to year extension for no more than three years. 
(Ord. No. 2005-A, ref. of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 9.05. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
Sec. 9.06. - Fees shall be paid to city. 
    All fees and charges for city service received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city and shall be paid to the department of finance at such times as required by the city manager. 
Sec. 9.07. - Division of purchases. 
    There shall be established in the department of finance a division of purchases. The division of purchases, pursuant to rules and regulations established by ordinance, shall contract to purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office, department, or agency of the city. 
    The division of purchases shall also have power and shall be required to: 
(a)  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials, and equipment required by the city; 
(b)  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment, and determine their quality, quantity, and conformance with specifications; 
(c)  Have charge of such general storerooms and warehouses as the council may provide by ordinance; 
(d)  Transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies, or with the approval of the council sell surplus, obsolete, or unused supplies, materials and equipment. 
Sec. 9.08. - Sale of city property; procedure. 
    The sale of surplus, obsolete or unused personal property will be done in any manner prescribed by the city council, and all such sales will be open to competition. Surplus, obsolete or unused personal property of a probable value in excess of $1,000.00 shall be sold only after it has been advertised, in at least three metropolitan newspapers and the local paper, for sealed bids or public auction for a minimum of two consecutive weekends (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday). 
(Ord. No. 1999-03, ref. of 5-1-1999) 
State Law reference- Municipal acquisition, sale or lease of property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 251 et seq. 
Sec. 9.09. - Purchasing procedure. 
    Before the city makes any purchase or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, opportunity shall be given to assure competition. The city manager shall have authority to make expenditures without specific prior approval of the city council, for all budgeted items, not exceeding an amount set annually by a resolution of the city council, but in no event shall this amount exceed the authority mandated by law. Where an expenditure of more than the amount set by such resolution is involved, notice of the time and place, when and where such contract shall be let shall be published in a newspaper of the city one time a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the time of the closing of receiving of bids. Council shall not be obligated to make any award at the time of bid opening, but shall be afforded such time to study all bids as it deems necessary. The first publication for bids shall be not less than 14 days from the date of closing. Council shall retain the right to reject any or all bids. Nothing herein shall apply to contracts for professional services, nor to work done by the city and paid for by the day as such work progresses. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from making emergency purchases in any amount without the necessity of taking bids when such purchase is necessary to protect public health or safety and that the taking of bids would unnecessarily delay necessary action. 
(Ref. of 8-11-1979; Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985) 
State Law reference- Purchasing and contracting authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252. 
Sec. 9.10. - Contracts for city improvements. 
    All contracts for city improvements shall conform to applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Sec. 9.11. - Accounting control of purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the division of purchases shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged. All written requisitions shall be approved by the city manager or his authorized representative. 
Sec. 9.12. - Disbursement of funds. 
    All checks or vouchers for the withdrawal of money from the city depository (excepting Payroll checks for regular city employees) shall be signed by the city manager and the city secretary and countersigned by the mayor or mayor pro tem. In the absence of the city manager or the city secretary, checks may be countersigned by some other officer designated by the council by resolution. Payments that in normal payment practices would be paid in one check or voucher may not be paid in multiple checks or vouchers. 
(Ord. No. 1997-04, ref. of 5-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Drawing of checks and warrants, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.074; checks payable at depository, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.075; debts payable other than at municipal treasury, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.076. 
Sec. 9.13. - Borrowing in anticipation for revenues other than taxes. 
    In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of revenues other than taxes of that budget year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "special revenue note for the year 19[20]___ (stating the budget year)." Such notes may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes have been issued. 
Sec. 9.14. - Sale of notes; report of sale. 
    All notes issued pursuant to this article may be sold at not less than par and accrued interest at private sale by the city manager without previous advertisement, but such sale shall be authorized by the council as provided in section 8.16. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED 

Secs. 10.01-10.10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Specific authority for municipalities to issue securities, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 1501 et seq. 

Sec. 11.01. - Power to borrow. 
    The city shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the city as permitted by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
Secs. 11.02-11.05. - Reserved. 
Note- The Charter was amended by deleting provisions contained in Art. XI, §§ 11.02-11.05. Said provisions pertained to bond ordinance and election, issuance of bonds, advertising and sale of bonds, and creation of sinking fund and investments, and carried no history note. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 551 et seq. 

Sec. 12.01. - Power of the city. 
    In addition to the city's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public utilities, and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the city shall have such further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 12.02. - Power to grant franchise. 
    The council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, extend, and amend, by mutual agreement, all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the city. No franchise shall be for an indeterminate period and no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than 30 years from the date of the grant and no franchise shall be exclusive. 
Sec. 12.03. - Ordinance granting franchise. 
    All ordinances granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at two separate regular meetings of the council, and shall not be finally passed until 30 days after the first reading. No such ordinance shall take effect until 30 days after its final passage, and, pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the city, the cost of publication to be borne by the proponent of the franchise. 
Sec. 12.04. - Transfer of franchise. 
    No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance. The term "transferable" as used herein shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the franchise holder from pledging said franchise as security for a valid debt or mortgage. 
Sec. 12.05. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
    No values shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the city in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which it may acquire by condemnation or otherwise. 
Sec. 12.06. - Right of regulation. 
    Each grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the council: 
(a)  To forfeit by ordinance at any time any franchise for the failure of the holder to comply with all terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing, and a reasonable opportunity to correct the default; 
(b)  To require such expansion and extension of plant and facilities as are reasonably necessary to provide adequate service to the public; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public; 
(e)  To examine and audit at any time during regular business hours the records and accounts of any such utility which are relevant to the city's right of regulation, and to require and prescribe annual and other reports, including reports of operation within the city; 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas, including the right to establish minimum annual fees to maintain the franchise in force; 
(g)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each utility; provided, however, that any utility which shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor and successors, shall be deemed in sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
Sec. 12.07. - Consent of property owners. 
    The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; however, nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as in now or may hereafter be provided by law. 
Sec. 12.08. - Extensions. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Sec. 12.09. - Rights of prior grants. 
    All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the city and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except the power of the city to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every grant, renewal or extension of a franchise hereafter shall be subject to all the terms and conditions contained in this article whether or not they are listed or referred to in the grant, extension or renewal. Nothing in this article shall operate to limit in any way the discretion of the council or the electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
Sec. 12.10. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
    Accounts for each public utility owned or operated by the city shall be kept in such manner to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by such utility to any city department. The council shall have an annual report made by a certified public accountant and shall publish such report showing the financial results of city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such data as the council may require. 
Sec. 12.11. - Regulation of rates. 
    The council shall have full power to regulate by ordinance, after notice and hearing, the rates of every public utility operating in the city and shall have the right to employ expert advice and assistance in determining a reasonable rate and equitable profit to the public utility. Notice of any proposed increase in utility rates and service costs shall be given through publication of the proposal in one issue of the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing on such proposal. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing, the name of the proponent and comparison of the existing schedule of rates and charges with the proposed schedule, the cost of the notice to be paid by the proponent. The council shall have the power to require within the franchise grant, or any extension or renewal thereof, or as condition precedent to any hearing concerning rates and services of any public utility operating within the city, that the proponent seeking the rate or service change pay the reasonable cost of the service of a rate consultant chosen by the council. No notice need[s] to be given nor public hearing held where the change in rates or service charges is solely one of reduction. 
Sec. 12.12. - Service beyond the city limits. 
    The council shall have the authority to sell and distribute water and to sell and provide for sewer services and any other utilities and services to customers outside the limits of the City of Sinton under such terms, conditions and charges as determined by the council. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 

Sec. 13.01. - Platting of property. 
    Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the city, or within any area over which the city may have jurisdiction under state law, who may divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the city shall comply with platting requirements of applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 42; municipal regulation of subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212; recording of plats, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.002; extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43. 
Sec. 13.02. - Development of property. 
    No expenditure of public funds shall be authorized by the council for privately owned subdivisions situated within or beyond the limits of the city except for the extension of utilities or services provided by the city to such areas. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 
Sec. 13.03. - Planning and zoning commission. 
    Each council member shall appoint one member for a total of five (5) members to the Planning and Zoning Commission, who shall be residents of and own real property in the city and who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed at the first regular meeting in November of each year for a two-year term with one-half to be appointed each year on a continuing basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 
Sec. 13.04. - Vacancies on the commission. 
    Vacancies occurring on the commission shall be filled by the council for the remainder of the term within 30 days after the vacancy occurs. Membership shall be accompanied by active participation in the work of the commission and any member who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings shall be dropped automatically and the commission chairman shall notify the council immediately that a vacancy exists. 
Sec. 13.05. - Organization of the commission. 
    At its first meeting following the annual appointment of members by the council, the commission shall elect one of its members as chairman. The commission shall establish its own rules of procedure which shall include the following: 
(a)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership and an affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to pass on pending question; 
(b)  The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any question; 
(c)  All meetings shall be open to the public and minutes of the proceedings shall be kept and shall be a public record; 
(d)  The city manager shall be ex officio secretary to the commission. 
Sec. 13.06. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
    The commission shall have the power and be required to: 
(a)  Be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the council; 
(b)  Make, amend, extend, and add to a master plan for the physical development of the city; 
(c)  Review all plans for platting or subdividing of land within the city and within adjacent areas as permitted by law and submit findings and recommendations to the council; 
(d)  Make and recommend to the council for adoption, a zoning plan and amendments thereto; 
(e)  Meet not less than once each month with all meetings to be at the city hall unless prior notice of a change in meeting place has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
(f)  Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the council may prescribe in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 13.07. - Board of adjustment. 
    Each council member shall appoint one member for a total of five (5) members to the Board of Adjustment. The city council shall appoint four (4) alternative members of the board of adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular members in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14.01. - Oath of office. 
    All officers of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed in the constitution of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference- Oath of office, Tex. Const. art. 16, § 1. 
Sec. 14.02. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen or any representative of the press during regular business hours. 
State Law reference- Public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552; Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 
Sec. 14.03. - Official newspaper. 
    The council shall have the power to contract annually with, and by resolution designate, a public newspaper of general circulation in the city as official organ thereof, and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter required to be published by this Charter, by the ordinances of the city, or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference- Official newspaper, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2051.041 et seq. 
Sec. 14.04. - Notice of claim. 
    Before the city shall be liable to damage claim, or suit for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property has been damaged or someone in his behalf shall give the city manager or the city secretary notice in writing duly verified within six months after the date of the alleged damage or injury stating specifically in such notice when, where and how the injury or damage was sustained setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible, and giving the names and addresses of all witnesses known to claimant upon whose testimony claimant is relying to establish the injury or damage. In case of injuries resulting in death, the person or persons claiming damage shall within six months after the death of the injured person give notice as required above, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean the city waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
State Law reference- Governmental liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101 et seq. 
Sec. 14.05. - Assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The real and personal property belonging to the city shall not be liable for sale or appropriation under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debit it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
State Law reference- Garnishment, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 63; garnishment of municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.023. 
Sec. 14.06. - Security or bond. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the duty is a party for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of the city, but all actions, suits and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given and the city shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking or security required in ordinary cases had been given and executed. 
State Law reference- Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 6.002. 
Sec. 14.07. - Personal interest. 
    Any member of the council, officer, or employee of the city who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by any reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that interest to the council and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as an officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the awarding or performance of such contract. Any officer or employee who violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the city manager or the council. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14.08. - Nepotism. 
    No person related within the second degree by affinity or the third degree by consanguinity to any member of the council or to the city manager shall be appointed to any office, position, clerkship, or other service of the city. No person shall be employed by the city in a position that is supervised by a supervisor who is related to the person within the second degree by affinity or by third degree by consanguinity nor in a department which is headed by a department head who is related to the person within the second degree by affinity or the third degree by consanguinity. These prohibitions shall not apply to any person who shall have been continuously employed in such office, position, clerkship, or other service of the city for a period of six months prior to the election of the member of the council related to such employee in the prohibited degree nor more than 30 days prior to the appointment of the member of the council, city manager, department head, or supervisor related to such employee in the prohibited degree. The prohibited degrees of relationship are shown by these charts. 
(Ord. No. 1997-04, ref. of 5-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 573.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14.10. - Power to settle claims. 
    The council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the city except suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes. 
Sec. 14.11. - Judicial note. 
    This Charter shall be held a public act, and shall have the force and effect of a general law; may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice thereof shall be taken in all courts and places without further proof. 
Sec. 14.12. - Effect of Charter on existing law. 
    All city ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter and not in conflict with this Charter shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the council, and all rights of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect. 
Sec. 14.13. - Interim municipal government. 
    Upon adoption of the Charter amendment which changes the election date to the third Saturday in May each year, the election of places 1, 2, and 3 will be held on the third Saturday in May of 1988, and the election of places 4 and 5 will be held on the third Saturday in May of 1989. Thereafter, the election of places 1, 2, and 3 will be held on the third Saturday in May of each even-numbered year and the election of places 4 and 5 will be held on the third Saturday in May of each odd-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1985-3, ref. of 4-6-1985; Ord. No. 1987-3, ref. of 4-4-1987) 
Sec. 14.14. - Termination of current year budget; preparation and adoption of interim budget. 
    During the period of time between the date that the qualified voters determine that this Charter shall be adopted for the City of Sinton, Texas, and the time that a new budget can be prepared and adopted as provided above, the council (with the assistance of the city manager, if there be one) shall amend the current city budget as they deem proper to terminate the operations of the city as a general law city; and within 30 days prepare and adopt a short year budget to provide for the operations of the city until the first full year budget can be prepared as provided in section 8.07, and the other applicable sections listed above. The initial short year budget, if there be one, shall be prepared, adopted, amended if necessary, and administered in all respects under the laws and requirements of a general law city. 
Sec. 14.15. - Inventory of property. 
    The city manager shall keep a written inventory of all real property and all permanent equipment belonging to the city. Inventory of expendable items shall be kept of unbroken packages. 
Sec. 14.16. - Separability clause. 
    If any section or part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of a section of this Charter. 
Sec. 14.17. - Amending the Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, ref. of 4-4-1981; Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993) 
State Law reference- Charter amendments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.004 et seq. 
Sec. 14.18. - Charter review commission. 
    At its first regular meeting in October of each even-numbered year, each council member shall appoint one member for a total of five (5) citizens of the city, to the Charter Review Commission. It shall be the duty of the commission to: 
(a)  Inquire into the operation of the city government under the charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision and to this end, public hearings may be held and the commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the city to require the submission of any of the city records which it may consider necessary to the conduct of such hearing; 
(b)  Make any recommendations it considers desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of this charter by the several departments of the city; 
(c)  Purpose amendments to this charter to improve its effective application to current conditions; 
(d)  Report its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the council. 
    The council shall receive and have published in the official newspaper of the city any report submitted by the charter review commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and, if any amendment or amendments be presented as a part of such report, may order such to be submitted to the electors of the city in the manner provided in section 14.17. 
    The term of office of the charter review commission shall be three (3) months, and, if during this term no report is presented to the council, then all records of the proceedings of the commission shall be filed with the city manager and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, ref. of 5-1-1993; Ord. No. 2017-01, ref. of 5-6-2017) 
Sec. 14.19. - Submission of Charter to electors. 
    The charter commission finds and declares that this Charter is so constructed that in order for it to function efficiently it must be adopted in its entirety. For this reason, the commission finds it would be impracticable to segregate each subject for a separate vote thereon, and therefore directs it to be voted on as a whole, and that it be submitted to the qualified electors of the city at an election to be held for that purpose on November 19, 1966. In not less than 30 days prior to the election for the adoption of this Charter, the city secretary shall mail a copy of this Charter to each qualified elector of the city as appears from the tax collector's latest tax roll. 
    If said Charter is approved by a majority of the electors voting at said election, it shall become the Charter of the City of Sinton upon the entering in the city records of the council of an official order declaring the adoption of the Charter. A copy of the adopted Charter, authenticated and certified by the city secretary and the seal of the city, shall be forwarded to the secretary of state of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference- Adoption of Charter or amendment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.005. 
Sec. 14.20. - Special council election. 
    In not more than ten days after adoption of this Charter, the council shall order a special election as provided in section 3.01 for the election of two councilmen to complete membership on the council as required by section 2.01. 
Sec. 14.21. - Wording interpretation. 
    The gender of the wording throughout this Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either gender. All singular words shall include the plural and all plural words shall include the singular. All references to law, state law, or laws of the State of Texas, however expressed in this Charter, shall mean "as presently enacted or as may be amended or superseded." The use of the word city in this Charter shall mean the City of Sinton, Texas, and the use of the word Charter shall mean the Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, ref. of 5-9-2015) 
WE, the members of the City of Sinton charter commission elected by the citizens of Sinton to frame a home rule charter for the city, do hereby certify that this is a true and correct copy of the charter prepared by this commission. 
THOMAS M. HOUSER, Vice Chairman 
TRAVIS MOORMAN, Chairman 
RALPH BARKHURST 
CHARLES H. BOYER, Secretary 
ODELL BURCH 
JOHN HALL 
HARRY D. COIN 
D. S. HITT, JR. HARRELL CURLEE 
DOYLE JONES 
CASPER GERDES, JR. 
ROBERT L. JOSEPH 
REGINO RIOS 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Legislation Referendum 
Date Section Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 1971-10 9-11-1971 1 1.03 Ord. No. 1973-15 9-8-1973 1, 2 1.03 Ref. of 8-11-1979 8-11-1979 - 2.05 - 2.17 - 3.01 - 9.09 Ord. No. 1981-03 4-4-1981 - 2.10 - 3.01 Ord. No. 1981-3 4-4-1981 - 2.04 - 3.02 - 9.09 - 9.10 - 14.13 - 14.17 Ord. No. 1985-03 4-6-1985 - 2.16 Ord. No. 1985-3 4-6-1985 - 3.02 - 3.03 - 3.04 - 5.02 - 5.03 - 9.09 - 14.13 Ord. No. 1987-3 4-4-1987 - 2.04 - 3.01 - 5.01 - 5.02 - 5.03 - 13.07 - 14.13 Ord. No. 1993-4 5-1-1993 - 2.10 - 3.01 - 3.02 - 4.06 - 4.10 - 8.04 - 9.02 - 9.08 - 9.10 - 11.01 - 11.02 - 11.03 - 11.04 - 11.05 - 13.01 - 13.07 - 14.04 - 14.17 - 14.18 Ord. No. 1995-03 5-6-1995 - 1.03 - 8.07 Ord. No. 1997-04 5-3-1997 - 2.01 - 2.02 - 9.12 - 14.08 Ord. No. 1999-03 5-1-1999 - 2.07 - 2.08 - 2.12 - 4.08 - 7.03 Ord. No. 2001-03 5-5-2001 - 2.07 Ord. No. 1995-05 5-7-2005 - 2.10 Ord. No. 2005-A 5-7-2005 - 2.03 - 9.04 Ord. No. 2015-05 5-9-2015 - 2.02 - 2.12 - 2.13 - 6.02 - 14.21 Ord. No. 2017-01 5-6-2017 - 2.01, 2.02 - 2.04 - 2.17 - 13.03 - 13.07 - 14.18 Ord. No. 2018-02 5-6-2017 1 2.01  
Title I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10.01. - Title of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sinton, Texas," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1970, § 1-1; Code 1996, § 10.01) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Sec. 10.02. - Interpretation. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law. 
(Code 1996, § 10.02) 
Sec. 10.03. - Application to future ordinances. 
    All provisions of title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.03) 
Sec. 10.04. - Captions. 
    The captions of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be defined or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the captions, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1970, § 1-2; Code 1996, § 10.04) 
Sec. 10.05. - Definitions. 
(a)  General rule. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance, unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any federal, state or local agency or officer shall include any successor agency or officer. 
    City, municipal corporation, municipality, or town. The term "city," "municipal corporation," "municipality," or "town" means the City of Sinton, in the County of San Patricio and the State of Texas. 
    City council. The term "city council" means the city council of Sinton, constituting the governing body of the city. 
    Code, this Code or this Code of Ordinances. The term "Code," "this Code," or "this Code of Ordinances" means this Municipal Code, as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections. 
    County. The term "county" means San Patricio County, Texas. 
    Highway. The term "highway" means any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    May. The term "may" means the act referred to is permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officer, office, employee, commission, or department. The term "officer," "office," "employee," "commission," or "department" means an officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term "person." 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means the portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall. The term "shall" means the act referred to is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" means any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tex. Admin. Code or TAC. The abbreviation "Tex. Admin. Code" or "TAC" means the Texas Administrative Code, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means and includes the most recent edition or supplement of Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." means the most recent edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended or revised now or in the future. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" means any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1970, § 1-3; Code 1996, § 10.05) 
State Law reference- General definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005. 
Sec. 10.06. - Rules of interpretation. 
    The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance: 
(1)  And or or. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
(2)  Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy. 
(3)  Gender; singular and plural; tenses. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(4)  General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
(5)  Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month of the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
(6)  Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
(7)  Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
(8)  Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, or Central Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be, except that, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by the state for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the same remains in effect. 
(Code 1970, § 1-3; Code 1996, § 10.06) 
Sec. 10.07. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1970, § 1-6; Code 1996, § 10.07) 
Sec. 10.071. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 10.072. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 10.08. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
(Code 1996, § 10.08) 
Sec. 10.09. - Reference to offices. 
    Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
(Code 1996, § 10.09) 
Sec. 10.10. - Errors and omissions. 
    If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. 
(Code 1996, § 10.10) 
Sec. 10.11. - Reasonable time. 
(a)  In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(b)  The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded. 
(Code 1996, § 10.11) 
Sec. 10.12. - Ordinances repealed. 
    This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 10.12) 
Sec. 10.13. - Ordinances unaffected. 
    All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. 
(Code 1996, § 10.13) 
Sec. 10.14. - Effective date of ordinances. 
    All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.14) 
Sec. 10.15. - Repeal or modification of ordinance. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(b)  No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided. 
(c)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided. 
(Code 1996, § 10.15) 
Sec. 10.16. - Ordinances which amend or supplement Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sinton, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Sinton, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1970, § 1-4; Code 1996, § 10.16) 
Sec. 10.17. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10.18. - Emergency action. 
    Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Code 1970, § 1-7; Code 1996, § 10.18; Ord. No. 1985-15, 11-19-1985) 
Sec. 10.99. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; 
(2)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern dumping of refuse shall have a maximum fine of $4,000.00; and 
(3)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. If any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence. 
(e)  In any prosecution in the municipal court of the city or of any other court of competent jurisdiction, a complaint charging a violation of this Code need not negate the existence of any affirmative defense but the existence of such may be raised by the defendant in any such prosecution by way of defense as provided in the Texas Penal Code. 
(f)  A complaint charging a violation of any provision of this Code in the municipal court of the city or any other court of competent jurisdiction need not negative the existence of any exception but the existence of the same may be raised by the defendant in such prosecution by way of defense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; punishments, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 12. 
Title III - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 30. - CITY GOVERNMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- See the Charter, which contains provisions concerning the mayor, city council and other city officials. 
State Law reference- Organization of municipal government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 5 et seq.; form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 26. 

CHAPTER 31. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
ARTICLE I. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 31.15. - Interlocal law enforcement. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts in all respects V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 362.001-362.003. 
(b)  The city, acting by and through its mayor, mayor pro tem or in their absence or inability to act, the city manager or in his absence or inability to act, the chief of police, may send or direct any of its regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist any other county or municipality, when a request is received for assistance from the mayor, or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency, in such other municipality or county, representing that there exists in such other county or municipality a need for additional law enforcement officers to protect health, life and property of such other county or municipality or its inhabitants, and the visitors thereof, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during the time of natural or manmade calamity. Such law enforcement officers, so sent to another municipality or county shall be in all things subject to the foregoing act and such officer or officers shall be and become peace officers of such other county or municipality under the command of the law enforcement officer therein, who is in charge in that city or county. As provided in the act they shall be vested with all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer in such other county or municipality to which sent, and such law enforcement officers of the city shall be considered under the terms of the foregoing described act as being in compliance therewith, and shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other compensations while performing police duties outside of the territorial limits of the city as though the same services were being rendered in the city and the city shall pay to such officers such wages, salary, pension and other benefits, together with medical, travel, food, lodging and other expenses incurred on account of performing services outside of the territorial limits of the city and the city shall be reimbursed by the other county or municipality requesting the services out of which such payments and expenses arose, as is provided by the said Senate Bill No. 233. 
(Code 1970, § 2-11, 2-12; Code 1996, § 31.15; Ord. No. 1970-5, 5-19-1970) 
Sec. 31.16. - Reserve police unit. 
(a)  Created. In order to better preserve the general safety of the citizens of the city and to provide for trained police assistance in times of emergency, there is hereby created a reserve police unit for the police department under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. The reserve unit shall be a volunteer organization under the control and direction of the city manager acting through the chief of police. 
(b)  Operation; responsibility of city manager. The city police reserve unit shall be operated under basic policies and rules as established by the city council. The city manager, acting through the chief of police, shall be responsible for ensuring that the policies and rules of the unit are adhered to, and for the development of training programs and operating procedures. 
(c)  Members to act only under police chief. Members of the police reserve unit shall act in the capacity of a police officer only upon the direction and under the supervision of the chief of police. A member of the police reserve unit shall have no police authority or power except when specifically assigned to duty by the chief of police. 
(d)  Changes in police reserve. The city council may, at any time, change the policies under which the police reserve is organized and administered, and may expand or disband the unit as the city council may deem in the best interests of the safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1970, §§ 191/2-21-191/2-24; Code 1996, § 31.16; Ord. No. 1977-7, 11-1-1977) 
CHAPTER 32. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 32.01. - Council to establish personnel policies. 
    The city council shall establish and adopt written policies governing employment with the city. 
(1)  The city council will from time to time review these policies for possible needed changes. 
(2)  It will be the responsibility of the city secretary to familiarize all new employees of these policies, and all employees of changes as they arise. 
(Code 1996, § 32.01; Ord. No. 1994-18, 12-6-1994) 
Sec. 32.02. - Personnel board. 
(a)  Created; composition; appointment of members. There is hereby created and established within the city a personnel board consisting of three members unanimously appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Terms and removal of members. The members of the personnel board shall be appointed for a term of three years but shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the council. Terms shall be overlapped so as to create an opening on the board every year. 
(c)  City manager as ex officio member. The city manager shall be a member ex officio of the personnel board, but shall not have a vote. His function will be that of an advisor only and he shall attend all meetings. 
(d)  Chairperson. The personnel board shall elect one of its members as chairperson, serving such term as may be decided by the board. 
(e)  Meetings. Meetings of the personnel board will not be on a regularly scheduled basis but instead such board shall meet when the board deems necessary or when a meeting is requested by the city council or the city manager. 
(f)  Powers and duties. The personnel board's function shall be to act in an advisory capacity only. The board's duties shall be to: 
(1)  Make any investigations which the board may consider desirable concerning the administration of personnel in the city government; 
(2)  Recommend personnel rules, such rules including provisions governing appointments, promotions, transfers, separations, appeals, employee evaluations and development, and other personnel matters; 
(3)  Hear and consider appeals, receive evidence and determine facts, and recommend the affirmation, modification or reversal of administrative actions appealed from, to the city manager as well as recommendations to the city manager of proper action to be taken; 
(4)  Make recommendations to the city council concerning employment benefits, such as sick and vacation leave, hours of work, holidays, retirement and the like; 
(5)  Make recommendations to the city council on the establishment and maintenance of a pay plan and wage and position scale; and 
(6)  Study any other personnel matters as deemed necessary by the city council or the city manager. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-55.1-2-55.6; Code 1996, § 32.02; Ord. No. 1979-8, 8-21-1979) 
Sec. 32.03. - Job applicant and employee drug screening. 
    In the interest of public safety, job applicants and employees will be required to undergo a drug screening and confirmation test as a component of the regular physical examination administered to applicants for city positions, and to existing employees where there is reasonable suspicion of the illegal use of drugs. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drug means any drug or controlled substance as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002, including, but not limited to, marijuana, hashish, or hash oil, cocaine, LSD, heroin, opiates, opium, amphetamines, concentrated cannabis, or cannabinoids, morphine or its derivatives, mescaline, peyote, phencyclidine (PCA, angel dust), methadone, quaaludes, exotic/designer drugs, benzodiazepines, seconal, codeine, barbiturates, phenobarbital, or valium. This includes legally obtainable drugs which have been obtained illegally. 
(2)  Drug testing. 
a.  Procedures. Two testing procedures will be used: 
1.  Initial test (screening). The initial assay of urine and blood specimens for the presence of specified drug/drug metabolite levels. 
2.  Confirmation test. A second procedure used to demonstrate the presence of specified drugs of abuse or use in given urine specimens. This test must be different in format and theory from that of the initial test procedure utilized. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) is the currently acceptable procedure. 
b.  Reasonable suspicion. There are several types of symptoms or circumstances which constitute sufficient justification for testing either in and of themselves or in combination with other symptoms or circumstances. They are: 
1.  Absenteeism. 
2.  Money problems. 
3.  Reliable tips from coworkers or citizens. 
4.  Accidents. Testing required for those involved in accidents with over $200.00 property damage or reportable personal injury. 
5.  Observation by two or more reliable witnesses of physical symptoms or discovery of incriminating evidence. Testing is required in this circumstance. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
a.  Applicants will be notified of the drug testing requirements of the physical examination on application for employment or volunteer service and given the opportunity to withdraw their applications with no record made of such applications prior to the test. 
b.  An applicant, employee or volunteer must sign an informed consent and release of liability form in order to be tested. Any applicant, employee or volunteer who fails or refuses to sign this form will be removed from employment or consideration for employment. 
c.  The city secretary shall direct persons to be tested to the medical facility. The drug test must be undertaken as soon as possible after notification, and in no event later than 48 hours after notice to the person to be tested. 
d.  Persons to be tested shall be advised before the initial drug test of the opportunity to submit medical documentation that may support a legitimate use for a specific drug and that such information will be reviewed by the physician at the selected facility to determine whether the individual is licitly using an otherwise illegal drug. 
e.  Persons to be tested shall be permitted to provide urine specimens in private, and in a restroom stall or similar enclosure so that they are not observed while providing the same. Collection site personnel of the same gender as the individual being tested, however, may observe the individual provide the urine sample when such personnel have reason to believe the individual has attempted to alter or substitute the sample being provided. Collection site personnel may have reason to believe that a particular individual may alter or substitute the specimen to be provided when: 
1.  The individual has previously tampered with a sample; 
2.  Facts and circumstances suggest that the individual is under the influence of drugs at the time of the test; or has equipment or implements capable of tampering with or altering urine samples; or 
3.  The specimen has a temperature outside the range of 32.5 to 37.7 degrees Celsius (90.5 to 99.8 degrees Fahrenheit) or shows signs of contaminants. 
f.  A person testing positive will be dismissed from employment. Volunteers and job applicants testing positive will be eliminated from consideration for employment for six months. 
(4)  Confidentiality. All information from an applicant's drug test is confidential and only those city employees with a need to know, as determined by the city manager, are to be informed of test results. The results of a positive drug test shall not be released until the results are confirmed. The records of unconfirmed positive test results and negative test results shall be destroyed by the testing laboratory. Those specimens which are confirmed as positive will be stored, frozen and secured by the testing laboratory for at least one year. 
(Code 1970, § 2-50; Code 1996, § 32.03; Ord. No. 1989-3, 4-18-1989; Ord. No. 1990-11, 12-4-1990) 
Sec. 32.04. - Health care coverage. 
    The city will pay $100.00 allowed for dependent health coverage for dependent health coverage per month or an employee may opt up to a better coverage if available with the city's medical health insurance plan. This statement is to be added to the "Employee Policy Manual" under chapter 7.00 Benefits, section 7.01 Medical and Life Insurance. 
(Code 1996, § 32.04; Ord. No. 1998-10, 9-15-1998) 
Sec. 32.05. - Retiree's medical insurance. 
    The city will pay full-time retiree's medical health insurance. The city retiree must have at least 25 years of credit service with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS), with all 25 years being continuous with the city and who will be drawing a retirement check from TMRS. This policy will go into effect with the passing of this ordinance and will be retroactive for employees that are employed with the city at this time. This is to be added to the "Employee Policy Manual" under chapter 7.00 Benefits, section 7.05 Employment Insurance. 
(Code 1996, § 32.05; Ord. No. 1998-10, 9-15-1998; Ord. No. 2008-01, 4-22-2008) 
Sec. 32.06. - Longevity pay. 
    Every full-time regular employee will receive longevity pay after one full year of employment with the city. The rate of pay will be $3.00 per month multiplied by the number of years service. This policy is already in the "Employee Policy Manual" under chapter 5.00 Employee Compensation and Advancement, section 5.15 Longevity Pay. 
(Code 1996, § 32.06; Ord. No. 1998-10, 9-15-1998) 
ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 32.15. - Entering into agreements. 
    The governing body acting for and on behalf of the city shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the federal Social Security Act and V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 606.021 through 606.031. 
(Code 1970, § 2-2; Code 1996, § 32.15; Ord. No. 316, 3-8-1955) 
Sec. 32.16. - Designation of agent; administrative officer. 
(a)  The mayor is appointed as agent of the governing body and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the body and the city. 
(b)  The city secretary is the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required by state and federal law. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-3, 2-4; Ord. No. 316, 3-8-1955) 
Sec. 32.17. - Funding. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the social security acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1970, § 2-5; Ord. No. 316, 3-8-1955) 
ARTICLE III. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 32.30. - Participation by city. 
(a)  Generally. On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing or hereafter established participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)  Notification of trustees. The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in the system. 
(c)  Employees to be members. Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(d)  Deposits. In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five percent of the earnings of each employee of the departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service the maximum earnings of this city is full salary. 
(e)  Duties of secretary. The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(f)  When effective. Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be effective October 1, 1975. 
(Code 1970, § 2-13; Code 1996, § 32.30; Ord. No. 1975-12, 8-19-1975) 
Sec. 32.31. - Supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)  Generally. The city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city (as above defined) participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and all the benefits and obligations of participation in the fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  Notification of trustees. The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above-mentioned departments participate in the supplemental benefits fund of the system. 
(c)  Employees to be covered. Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in the fund shall, as a condition of his employment, be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of the system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to the fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(d)  Duties of secretary. The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, provided that the rate of contribution to the fund shall not exceed 0.5 percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under the fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(e)  When effective. Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental benefits fund shall be effective October 1, 1975. 
(Code 1970, § 2-14; Code 1996, § 32.31; Ord. No. 1975-18, 8-19-1975) 
Sec. 32.32. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.404, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the System in force and effect on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the System, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit," as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d). 
(b)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). 
(c)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this ordinance on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 32.33. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the System. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, § 2, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 2, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 32.34. - Dates of allowances and increases. 
    The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2012, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the System. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this ordinance ceases to be in effect under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(e), provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the System has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, § 3, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 3, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 32.35. - Increased deposit rate. 
    All employees of the city, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall make deposits to the System at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings effective October 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 4, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 32.36. - Remove maximum contribution rate limit. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.407(g), the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the System at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the System, as the System's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 5, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 32.37. - City contributions. 
    Effective January 1, 2005, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is 200 percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment, and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 9-7-2004) 
ARTICLE IV. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unlawful employment practices, V.T.C.A., Labor Code § 21.051 et seq. 

Sec. 32.45. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city hereby declares its firm commitment to a policy of equal employment opportunity with this affirmative action plan serving as a guide in the attainment of this policy. 
(b)  The city shall not allow discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, age, disability, religion or national origin to enter into any employment activities or any contractual arrangements. 
(c)  This plan is not passive in nature. It is an active, continuing plan containing both guidelines and adequate monitoring capacities, which, when applied, should assure equal employment opportunity in all phases of city operations. 
(Code 1996, § 32.45; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974; Ord. No. 1984-11, 6-19-1984) 
Sec. 32.46. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employment means the employment relationship between the city and any city employee or prospective employee, whether full- or part-time. 
(Code 1970, § 2-57; Code 1996, § 32.46; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.47. - Recruitment procedures. 
(a)  Notice of job vacancies will be disseminated in the following manner 
(1)  Posted in city hall; 
(2)  Placed in advertisement in newspapers having local circulation; 
(3)  Posted in placement offices of local area schools and colleges; 
(4)  Notice will be sent to the appropriate field office of the Texas Employment Commission. 
(b)  All of the above posters and advertisements shall clearly state that the city is an equal opportunity employer. 
(c)  The city staff shall maintain contacts with leaders in the minority community and will encourage referrals of qualified minority members for possible job evaluation and placement. 
(Code 1970, § 2-58; Code 1996, § 32.47; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.48. - Employee selection. 
(a)  All employee selections shall be on the basis of demonstrated merit and fitness without regard to race, color, creed, sex, age, disability, religion or national origin. 
(b)  Special employee qualifications beyond those contained in job descriptions on file at the city will not be imposed on any specific candidate for employment unless special approval is given by the city manager. 
(c)  Ceteris paribus, preference will be given first to those individuals residing within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-59; Code 1996, § 32.48; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974; Ord. No. 1984-11, 6-19-1984) 
Sec. 32.49. - Working conditions, pay scales and promotion. 
(a)  The city's pay scale shall be nondiscriminatory in both essence and effect. Supervisory personnel shall conduct periodic reviews of their subordinate's pay scales and recommend adjustment of inequities. 
(b)  Selection criteria for promotion shall consist solely of demonstrated merit, ability, education and experience. 
(c)  All city personnel shall be provided safe, sanitary and healthful working conditions. Less desirable and unpopular work assignments shall be distributed as equally as possible among employees of the same classification within an organizational element. 
(Code 1970, § 2-60; Code 1996, § 32.49; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.50. - Training and educational opportunities. 
(a)  The city encourages all employees to further their educational and training status. 
(b)  When appropriate, designated city employees shall be authorized by the city manager to participate in workshops, seminars and other work sessions in order to increase their training and competency within their field. When so authorized, employees shall be reimbursed for their expenditures. 
(Code 1970, § 2-61; Code 1996, § 32.50; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.51. - Demotion and termination. 
    At no time shall demotion or termination of any employee be based on race, color, creed, sex, age, disability, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1970, § 2-62; Code 1996, § 32.51; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974; Ord. No. 1984-11, 6-19-1984) 
Sec. 32.52. - Employee responsibility. 
(a)  No employee shall discriminate against any other employee because of his race, color, creed, sex, age, disability, religion or national origin. 
(b)  Any violation of subsection (a) of this section by an employee of this city shall constitute grounds for demotion or termination after proper investigation is made. 
(c)  All employees of the city are charged with the responsibility of knowing and observing both the spirit and intent of this affirmative action program. 
(d)  All prospective employees of the city will be advised of this program and its requirements prior to their appointment to the staff. 
(Code 1970, § 2-63; Code 1996, § 32.52; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974; Ord. No. 1984-11, 6-19-1984) 
Sec. 32.53. - Program monitoring. 
(a)  The city employee who is designated as the personnel officer shall also be given the responsibility of acting as equal employment opportunity officer for the city. 
(b)  The equal employment opportunity officer (EO) shall be assigned the tasks of constantly monitoring the program, initiating revisions, and reporting violations to the city manager. Periodic reports on the effectiveness of the program will be issued by the EO and, after review by the city manager, shall be filed in the administration filing system. 
(Code 1970, § 2-64; Code 1996, § 32.53; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.54. - Complaint procedure. 
    The basic intent of this program is to eliminate discrimination complaints by eliminating their basic causes; however, in the eventuality that such a complaint does arise, it will be expeditiously handled in the following sequence: 
(1)  The affected employee will report his complaint to his immediate supervisor or to the equal opportunity officer. 
(2)  The equal employment opportunity officer, upon investigating the complaint, will then make his report to the city manager who will then take appropriate action. 
(Code 1970, § 2-65; Code 1996, § 32.54; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.55. - Contracts. 
(a)  Any contractual agreement entered into by the city and any firm, group, or individual shall be subject to the equal employment opportunity requirements as set out in Executive Order 11246 and further the regulations as stated in this section of the city's affirmative action program. 
(b)  Although this section applies to construction contracts, it is not limited to such. Indeed, all contractual agreements by the city are to be included, such as vendors' agreements. 
(Code 1970, § 2-66; Code 1996, § 32.55; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.56. - Contractor selection. 
(a)  The city shall advertise for bids on any construction contract under applicable HUD guidelines. In addition, special emphasis will be placed on the notification of minority contractors (both prime and sub). 
(b)  In order that all prospective bidders be made aware of the city's firm commitment to equal employment opportunity, all bid documents shall contain section 202 of Executive Order 11246, and the additional proviso, to wit: 
"Unless there are diligent and sincere attempts on the behalf of the contractor to provide equal employment opportunity for minority persons, the contractor shall be found in noncompliance with his contractual obligations." 
(c)  The final selection of a prime contractor shall be on a nondiscriminatory basis coupled with the contractor's willingness to meet all contractual obligations such as in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 2-67; Code 1996, § 32.56; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.57. - Preconstruction conference. 
(a)  A preconstruction conference between the city and representatives from the contractors (both prime and sub) shall be held as soon as feasibly possible after the award of contract. Also in attendance, if possible, will be representatives from the HUD area office. The city shall notify the area office and specifically the equal opportunity division thereof sufficiently in advance in order that they may attend. 
(b)  During the conference, all contract provisions relating to equal employment opportunity shall be discussed and the city shall reiterate its determination to assure full compliance. 
(c)  The city shall also impress upon the contractor the need for an active program and shall offer its resources to the contractor for such items as minority employment applications and the like. 
(d)  The contractor's affirmative action plan shall be discussed in detail at this conference. See also section 32.58. 
(e)  Minutes shall be kept of the conference and copies shall be forwarded to the area office. 
(Code 1970, § 2-68; Code 1997, § 32.57; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.58. - Contractor's affirmative action. 
(a)  All contractors and subcontractors are required to take affirmative action to ensure that employees and applicants for employment are not discriminated against because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, age, disability or national origin. The model or guidelines which the contractor has for assuring the above is known as his affirmative action plan. 
(b)  The action outlined in this plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; selection for training, including apprenticeship; and posting in a conspicuous place, available to employees and to applicants for employment, notices regarding the equal employment opportunity requirements of Executive Order 11246. 
(c)  The city expresses a desire for all of its contractors to maintain a written affirmative action plan; however, the following are required by law: 
(1)  Prime contracts of $100,000.00 or more on projects costing $1,000,000.00 or more; 
(2)  Subcontracts of $100,000.00 or more on projects costing $1,000,000.00 or more; 
(3)  Those specifically identified by the HUD contract compliance officer. 
(d)  The contractor must submit his affirmative action plan within 15 days after notification by the city. 
(e)  All contractors and subcontractors shall maintain an affirmative action file to keep written reports with dates detailing their efforts to meet their affirmative action responsibilities. 
(Code 1970, § 2-69; Code 1996, § 32.58; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.59. - City responsibility. 
(a)  The city shall provide for full compliance with and active implementation of all federal, statutory, regulatory, executive order, and contractual requirements relating to equal employment opportunity. 
(b)  The city is also responsible as a part of normal contract administration for detecting all cases of noncompliance with the equal opportunity clause or written affirmative action requirements and for reviewing contractor performance to ensure that these responsibilities are met. 
(c)  All complaints received by the city are to be directed to the area director for equal opportunity. 
(Code 1970, § 2-70; Code 1996, § 32.59; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
Sec. 32.60. - Complaint procedure. 
    The basic intent of this program is to eliminate discrimination complaints by eliminating their causes; however, in the eventuality that such a complaint does arise which cannot be resolved locally, it will be expeditiously handled in the following sequence: 
(1)  The city shall assist the complainant by providing information as to the manner in which a complaint is to be submitted and by assisting, if necessary, in reducing the complaint to writing. If necessary, the city shall then immediately forward the complaint to the area director for equal opportunity and will be assisted in such if he so desires. 
(2)  Copies of the complaint procedure will be prominently displayed at the city office and the work site. 
(Code 1970, § 2-71; Code 1996, § 32.60; Ord. No. 1974-11, 11-19-1974) 
CHAPTER 33. - FINANCE AND TAXATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 33.02. - Attorney's fee on delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
    Ad valorem taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent incur an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due to defray costs of collection. 
(Code 1970, § 22-2; Code 1996, § 33.02; Ord. No. 1996-03, 2-20-1996) 
State Law reference- Additional penalty for collection costs of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 

Sec. 33.10. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such rooms or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term "hotel" includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term "hotel" does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 152.001. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or the preceding year. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(Code 1970, § 22-21; Code 1996, § 33.10; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976) 
Sec. 33.11. - Levy of tax; exception. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of a room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon any person exempted under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(c)  All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section will only be used as permitted under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(Code 1970, § 22-22; Code 1996, § 33.11; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976; Ord. No. 1984-17, 9-18-1984; Ord. No. 1990-1, 2-20-1990; Ord. No. 1994-04, 4-5-1994) 
Sec. 33.12. - Collection of tax. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 33.11 for the city. 
(Code 1970, § 22-23; Code 1996, § 33.12; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976) 
Sec. 33.13. - Reports. 
    On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 33.12 to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the city secretary may reasonably require. The person shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the time of filing the report. 
(Code 1970, § 22-24; Code 1996, § 33.13; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976) 
Sec. 33.14. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city secretary shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable the city secretary to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 22-25; Code 1996, § 33.14; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976) 
Sec. 33.15. - Violations. 
    No person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report herein, or shall fail to pay to the city secretary the tax imposed herein when the report for payment is due, or shall file a false report. In addition to the penalty provided in section 10.99, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall be subject to the fees and penalties of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004. 
(Code 1970, § 22-26; Code 1996, § 33.15; Ord. No. 1976-1, 3-3-1976; Ord. No. 1987-12, 8-18-1987) 
ARTICLE III. - AD VALOREM TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Property tax code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 33.25. - Homestead exemption. 
    Upon compliance with all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances, $5,000.00 of the assessed value residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or older and/or disabled shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 33.25; Ord. No. 1995-05, 5-7-1995) 
Sec. 33.27. - Taxation of tangible personal property in transit. 
(a)  Definitions. The terms in this section have the same meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253. 
(Code 1996, § 33.27; Ord. No. 2008-01-15, § 1, 1-15-2008) 
ARTICLE IV. - INVESTMENT POLICY 

Sec. 33.60. - Purpose. 
    The city council may purchase, sell, and invest its funds and funds under its control in investments authorized by the Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 2256, in compliance with these investment policies to emphasize safety of principal and liquidity and address investment diversification, yield, and maturity and the quality and capability of investment management. 
(Code 1996, § 33.60; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.61. - Authorized investments. 
(a)  The types of authorized investments in which the city's funds may be invested are: 
(1)  As authorized by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.009; 
(2)  Certificates of deposit conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.010, the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(3)  Repurchase agreements conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.011, the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(4)  Securities lending program conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.0115; 
(5)  Bankers' acceptances conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.012, the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(6)  Mutual funds conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.014, the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(7)  Commercial paper conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.013, the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(8)  Guaranteed investment contracts conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.015, the Public Funds Investment Act; and 
(9)  Investment pools conforming to the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 2256.016 and 2256.019, the Public Funds Investment Act. 
(b)  Only these investments may be made by the Investment Officer without prior city council approval: 
(1)  Obligations of the United States or its agencies and instrumentalities; 
(2)  Direct obligations of this state or its agencies and instrumentalities; 
(3)  Collateralized mortgage obligations directly issued by a federal agency or instrumentality of the United States, the underlying security for which is guaranteed by an agency or instrumentality of the United States; and 
(4)  Other obligations, the principal and interest of which are unconditionally guaranteed or insured by, or backed by the full faith and credit of, this state or the United States or their respective agencies and instrumentalities. 
All other investments must have prior approval of the city council before the investment officer makes the investment. 
(c)  The city may invest with any or all of the following institutions or groups consistent with federal and state law and the current bank depository contract: 
(1)  TexPool; 
(2)  The city's depository bank; 
(3)  Other state or federally chartered banks; 
(4)  Fully insured savings and loan associations; and 
(5)  Major brokerage houses. 
(d)  The city shall require delivery of all securities or shall have them held in the city's name by an independent third party prior to payment being made by the city for the investment. 
(e)  All invested funds will be fully collateralized or insured consistent with federal and state law and the current bank depository contract. All securities pledged as collateral shall be deposited in trust with the Federal Reserve Bank or an independent investment institution under an appropriate legal contract. The amount of securities so pledged shall be determined by their market value. 
(Code 1996, § 33.61; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.62. - Maximum allowable stated maturity. 
    The maximum allowable stated maturity of any individual investment owned by the city is 90 days. 
(Code 1996, § 33.62; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.63. - Maturity of pooled fund groups. 
    For pooled fund groups, the maximum average dollar-weighted maturity allowed based on the stated maturity date for the portfolio is 90 days. 
(Code 1996, § 33.63; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.631. - Methods to monitor market price of investments. 
    The investment officer shall establish methods to monitor the market price of investments acquired with public funds. 
Sec. 33.632. - Settlement of transactions. 
    The city shall provide for settlement of all transactions, except investment pool funds and mutual funds, on a delivery versus payment basis. 
Sec. 33.633. - Procedures to monitor rating changes in investments; liquidation. 
    The investment officer shall establish procedures to monitor rating changes in investments acquired with public funds and the liquidation of such investments consistent with the provisions of V.T.C.A, Government Code § 2256.021. 
Sec. 33.64. - Bids for certificates of deposit. 
    Bids for certificates of deposit shall be solicited in writing or electronically. 
(Code 1996, § 33.64; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.65. - Investment strategies. 
    The investment strategies for each of the funds under the city's control are: 
(1)  Consolidated cash fund. The investment objectives for the consolidated cash fund are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires the fund to be in an investment available on demand; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the demand deposit; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by placing the fund in an investment available on demand; 
d.  Yield will be maximized through competition for depository contracts; 
e.  Marketability of the investment does not apply to this fund as it is in an investment available on demand; and 
f.  Diversification of the investment portfolio does not apply to this fund as it is in an investment available on demand. 
(2)  Water supply and replacement fund. The investment objectives for the water supply and replacement fund are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires that a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair be placed in an investment available on demand and the balance may be held at a longer maturity; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the investment; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by investing a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair in an investment available on demand; 
d.  Marketability of the investment is maintained by marketable investments of short maturities; 
e.  Diversification of the investment portfolio is maintained by diversifying it between investments available on demand and investments of longer than demand maturity; and 
f.  Yield is maximized through prudent investment decisions. 
(3)  Fire equipment replacement fund. The investment objectives for the fire equipment replacement fund are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires that a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair be placed in an investment available on demand and the balance may be held at a longer maturity; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the investment; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by investing a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair in an investment available on demand; 
d.  Marketability of the investment is maintained by marketable investments of short maturities; 
e.  Diversification of the investment portfolio is maintained by diversifying it between investments available on demand and investments of longer than demand maturity; and 
f.  Yield is maximized through prudent investment decisions. 
(4)  Street improvement fund. The investment objectives for the street improvement fund are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires that a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair be placed in an investment available on demand and the balance may be held at a longer maturity; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the investment; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by investing a sufficient amount for emergency replacement or repair in an investment available on demand; 
d.  Marketability of the investment is maintained by marketable investments of short maturities; 
e.  Diversification of the investment portfolio is maintained by diversifying it between investments available on demand and investments of longer than demand maturity; and 
f.  Yield is maximized through prudent investment decisions. 
(5)  Interest and sinking funds. The investment objectives for interest and sinking funds are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires the fund to be in an investment available on scheduled payment dates; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the demand deposit; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by placing the fund in investments with maturities meeting scheduled payment dates; 
d.  Yield will be maximized through prudent investment decisions; 
e.  Marketability of the investment is maintained by marketable investments of short maturities; and 
f.  Diversification of the investment portfolio does not apply to this fund because of necessarily short maturities. 
(6)  All other funds. All other funds have comparatively small daily balances. The investment objectives for all other funds are: 
a.  The suitability of the investment to the financial requirements of the city requires the funds to be in an investment available on demand; 
b.  Preservation and safety of principal requires the investment be insured by a federal or state agency or a pledge of notes and other securities having a total market value equal to the amount of the demand deposit; 
c.  Liquidity is maintained by placing the fund in an investment available on demand; 
d.  Yield will be maximized through competition for depository contracts; 
e.  Marketability of the investment does not apply to this fund as it is in an investment available on demand; and 
f.  Diversification of the investment portfolio does not apply to this fund as it is in an investment available on demand. 
(Code 1996, § 33.65; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.66. - Review of investment strategies. 
    The city council shall review its investment policy and investment strategies not less than annually. 
(Code 1996, § 33.66; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.67. - Investment officers. 
    The city manager and the finance officer are jointly designated as investment officers of the city to be responsible for the investment of its funds and granted authority to deposit, withdraw, invest, transfer, and manage funds of the city. This authority is effective until rescinded by the city council or until termination of the investment officers' employment by the city. Any decision lacking their joint agreement will be referred to the city council. Unless otherwise authorized by law, no other person may deposit, withdraw, invest, transfer, or manage in any other manner funds of the city without express written authority of the city council. If funds of the city are moved into any institution located outside of the city limits of the city then the investment officers shall notify the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 33.67; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.68. - Disclosure of interests or relationships. 
(a)  An investment officer who has a personal business relationship with an entity seeking to sell an investment to the city shall file a statement disclosing that personal business interest. An investment officer who is related within the second degree by affinity or consanguinity, as determined under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573, to an individual seeking to sell an investment to the city shall file a statement disclosing that relationship. A statement required under this section must be filed with the state ethics commission and the city council. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, an investment officer has a personal business relationship with a business organization if: 
(1)  The investment officer owns ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business organization or owns $5,000.00 or more of the fair market value of the business organization; 
(2)  Funds received by the investment officer from the business organization exceed ten percent of the investment officer's gross income for the previous year; or 
(3)  The investment officer has acquired from the business organization during the previous year investments with a book value of $2,500.00 or more for the personal account of the investment officer. 
(Code 1996, § 33.68; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.69. - Unsuitable investments. 
    These investments are unsuitable: 
(a)  Obligations whose payment represents the coupon payments on the outstanding principal balance of the underlying mortgaged-backed security collateral and pays no principal; 
(b)  Obligations whose payment represents the principal stream of cash flow from the underlying mortgage-backed security collateral and bears no interest; 
(c)  Collateralized mortgage obligations that have a stated final maturity date of greater than ten years; and 
(d)  Collateralized mortgage obligations, the interest rate of which is determined by an index that adjusts opposite to the changes in a market index. 
(Code 1996, § 33.69; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.70. - Receipt and review of policy by business organizations. 
(a)  A written copy of the investment policy shall be presented to any person offering to engage in an investment transaction with an investing entity or to an investment management firm under contract with an investing entity to invest or manage the entity's investment portfolio. For purposes of this subsection, a business organization includes investment pools and an investment management firm under contract with an investing entity to invest or manage the entity's investment portfolio. Nothing in this subsection relieves the investing entity of the responsibility for monitoring the investments made by the investing entity to determine that they are in compliance with the investment policy. The qualified representative of the business organization offering to engage in an investment transaction with an investing entity shall execute a written instrument in a form acceptable to the investing entity and the business organization substantially to the effect that the business organization has: 
(1)  Received and reviewed the investment policy of the entity; and 
(2)  Acknowledged that the business organization has implemented reasonable procedures and controls in an effort to preclude investment transactions conducted between the entity and the organization that are not authorized by the entity's investment policy, except to the extent that this authorization is dependent on an analysis of the makeup of the entity's entire portfolio or requires an interpretation of subjective investment standards. 
(b)  The investment officer of the city may not buy any securities from a person who has not delivered to the city an instrument in substantially the form provided by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 33.70; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.71. - Compliance audit. 
    The city, in conjunction with its annual financial audit, shall perform a compliance audit of management controls on investments and adherence to the city's established investment policies. 
(Code 1996, § 33.71; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.72. - Standard of care. 
(a)  Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under prevailing circumstances, that a person of prudence, discretion, and intelligence would exercise in the management of the person's own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of capital and the probable income to be derived. Investment of funds shall be governed by the following investment objectives, in order of priority: 
(1)  Preservation and safety of principal; 
(2)  Liquidity; and 
(3)  Yield. 
(b)  In determining whether an investment officer has exercised prudence with respect to an investment decision, the determination shall be made taking into consideration: 
(1)  The investment of all funds, or funds under the city's control, over which the officer had responsibility rather than a consideration as to the prudence of a single investment; and 
(2)  Whether the investment decision was consistent with the written investment policy of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 33.72; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.73. - Investment training. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, the chief financial officer and the investment officer of the city shall: 
(1)  Attend at least one training session from an independent source approved by the city council or a designated investment committee advising the investment officer as provided for in the investment policy of the city and containing at least ten hours of instruction relating to the officer's responsibilities under this article within 12 months after taking office or assuming duties; and 
(2)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, attend an investment training session not less than once in a two-year period that begins on the first day of the city's fiscal year and consists of the two consecutive fiscal years after that date, and receive not less than ten hours of instruction relating to investment responsibilities under this article from an independent source approved by the city council or a designated investment committee advising the investment officer as provided for in the investment policy of the city. 
(b)  An investing entity created under authority of section 52(b), article III, or section 59, article XVI, Texas Constitution, that has contracted with an investment management firm under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.003(b) and has fewer than five full-time employees or an investing entity that has contracted with another investing entity to invest the entity's funds may satisfy the training requirement provided by subsection (a)(2) of this section by having an officer of the city council attend four hours of appropriate instruction in a two-year period that begins on the first day of the city's fiscal year and consists of the two consecutive fiscal years after that date. The chief financial officer of an investing entity created under authority of section 52(b), article III, or section 59, article XVI, Texas Constitution, and that has fewer than five full-time employees is not required to attend training required by this section unless the person is also the investment officer of the entity. 
(c)  Training under this section must include education in investment controls, security risks, strategy risks, market risks, diversification of investment portfolio, and compliance with this article. 
(d)  Not later than December 31 each year, each individual, association, business, organization, governmental entity, or other person that provides training under this section shall report to the comptroller a list of the governmental entities for which the person provided required training under this section during that calendar year. An individual's reporting requirements under this subsection are satisfied by a report of the individual's employer or the sponsoring or organizing entity of a training program or seminar. 
(Code 1996, § 33.73; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.74. - Internal management reports. 
(a)  Not less than quarterly, the investment officer shall prepare and submit to the city council a written report of investment transactions for all funds covered by this article for the preceding reporting period. 
(b)  The report must: 
(1)  Describe in detail the investment position of the city on the date of the report; 
(2)  Be prepared jointly by all investment officers of the city; 
(3)  Be signed by each investment officer of the city; 
(4)  Contain a summary statement of each pooled fund group that states: 
a.  The beginning market value for the reporting period; 
b.  The ending market value for the period; and 
c.  The fully accrued interest for the reporting period; 
(5)  State the book value and market value of each separately invested asset at the end of the reporting period by the type of asset and fund type invested; 
(6)  State the maturity date of each separately invested asset that has a maturity date; 
(7)  State the account or fund or pooled group fund in the city for which each individual investment was acquired; and 
(8)  State the compliance of the investment portfolio of the city as it relates to: 
a.  The investment strategy expressed in the city's investment policy; and 
b.  Relevant provisions of this article. 
(c)  The report shall be presented not less than quarterly to the city council and the mayor within a reasonable time after the end of the period. 
(d)  If the city invests in other than money market mutual funds, investment pools or accounts offered by its depository bank in the form of certificates of deposit, or money market accounts or similar accounts, the reports prepared by the investment officers under this section shall be formally reviewed at least annually by an independent auditor, and the result of the review shall be reported to the city council by that auditor. 
(Code 1996, § 33.74; Ord. No. 1995-15, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 33.75. - Selection of authorized brokers. 
    The city council or the designated investment committee of the city shall, at least annually, review, revise, and adopt a list of qualified brokers that are authorized to engage in investment transactions with the city. 
Sec. 33.76. - Statutory compliance. 
    All investments made by the city must comply with this article and all federal, state, and local statutes, rules, or regulations. 
CHAPTER 34. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.; management and preservation of public records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.021 et seq.; preservation and management of local government records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.151 et seq.; public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552. 

Sec. 34.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City's records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. The term does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the city; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, or other state law; or 
(7)  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda, or documents, other than a final written agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of a state department or institution, local government, special district, or other political subdivision of the state participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third party, or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
    Department head means the officer who, by ordinance, order or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 34.08. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 34.05. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 34.04. 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 34.06. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-111, 2-112; Code 1996, § 34.01; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.02. - Municipal records declared public property. 
    All municipal records as defined in section 34.01 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1970, § 2-113; Code 1996, § 34.02; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.03. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation of their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 201 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(Code 1970, § 2-114; Code 1996, § 34.03; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.04. - Records management officer. 
(a)  The city secretary, and the successive holders of the office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(b)  In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the municipality; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a form design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all of the city's departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the records management program meet the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (b)(13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-115, 2-118; Code 1996, § 34.04; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.05. - Records management committee. 
    A records management committee consisting of the department heads of the city is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvement if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-116; Code 1996, § 34.05; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.06. - Records management plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect essential records of the municipality and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-117; Code 1996, § 34.06; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.07. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 2-119; Code 1996, § 34.07; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.08. - Records liaison officers. 
(a)  Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer shall be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(b)  In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their department; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-120, 2-121; Code 1996, § 34.08; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
Sec. 34.09. - Records control schedules. 
(a)  Development. The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Monitoring. Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Approval. Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head, the members of the records management committee, the city manager and the records management officer. 
(d)  Filing. Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(e)  Implementation. A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 34.06 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(f)  Destruction of records. 
(1)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(2)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(3)  A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-122-2-124; Code 1996, § 34.09; Ord. No. 1991-07, 11-5-1991) 
CHAPTER 35. - CIVIL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency Management, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418; false reports of emergencies, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06; interference at scene of emergency, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.15; tampering, etc., with emergency equipment, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03. 

Sec. 35.01. - Emergency management director. 
(a)  Appointment. There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in subsection (b) of this section. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The powers and duties of the director shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(2)  The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
a.  The direction and control of the actual emergency operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of civil preparedness personnel. 
b.  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the civil preparedness organization of the city. 
c.  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management organizations. 
d.  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
e.  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
f.  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. The rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
g.  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
h.  The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of, all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
i.  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1970, §§ 6-1-6-3; Code 1996, § 35.01; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.02. - Emergency management council. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the county and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Code 1970, § 6-4; Code 1996, § 35.02; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.03. - Operational organization. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency operations plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Code 1970, § 6-5; Code 1996, § 35.03; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.04. - Sirens or other devices; unlawful operation. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 6-6; Code 1996, § 35.04; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.05. - Inconsistent regulations. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1970, § 6-7; Code 1996, § 35.05; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.06. - Conflict with state or federal statutes, military or naval orders. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1970, § 6-8; Code 1996, § 35.06; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.07. - National incident management system. 
    The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004, as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, 9-20-2005) 
Sec. 35.08. - Nonliability of city. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who, voluntarily and without compensation, grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1970, § 6-9; Code 1996, § 35.07; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.09. - Expenditure of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 6-10; Code 1996, § 35.08; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
Sec. 35.10. - Oath. 
    Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 6-11; Code 1996, § 35.09; Ord. No. 1980-6, 10-2-1980; Ord. No. 1981-18, 10-1-1981) 
CHAPTER 36. - MUNICIPAL COURT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Judicial branch, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 21 et seq.; municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29. 

Sec. 36.01. - Municipal court building fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building fund (the "fund") pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017. 
(b)  The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund. 
(d)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. The term "security devices and/or services" includes any and all items described in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017(d). 
(e)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. (Code 1996, § 36.01; Ord. No. 1995-17, 12-19-1995) 
Sec. 36.02. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereafter known as the fund, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred disposition community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999 (or for convictions on offenses committed on or after ordinance is adopted). Fee may only be assessed and collected on offenses occurring on or after September 1, 1999. The fee may not be assessed or collected retroactively if fund is established at a later date than September 1, 1999. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer or (other official who discharges or performs the duties of the treasurer) of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase or maintenance of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(d)  Expiration and administration of fund. The purpose of the use of any funds remaining in the fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this ordinance and for that purpose this ordinance remains in effect. 
(Code 1996, § 36.02; Ord. No. 2001-08, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2004-04, 5-25-2004) 
CHAPTER 37. - CITY POLICY 

Sec. 37.01. - Claims against city. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall within six months from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received; 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained; 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained; 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred; 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle; 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented; 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed; 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that, previous to the filing of the original petition, the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: 301 East Market Street, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(f)  The notice requirements provided or ratified and approved by this section do not apply if the city has actual notice that death has occurred, that the claimant has received some injury, or that the claimant's property has been damaged. 
(Code 1970, § 2-6; Code 1996, § 37.01; Ord. No. 1983-3, 3-17-1983) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101. 
Title V - PUBLIC WORKS 
CHAPTER 50. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50.01. - Confidentiality of personal information from customer's utility records. 
    If properly requested on the form provided by the city, the city will make a good faith effort, but in no way makes any implied or stated guarantee, to not release information contained in the utility files to anyone except law enforcement agencies, other utility services, consumer reporting agencies (such as a collection or credit service), contractors or subcontractors approved by and providing services to any utility service or the governmental agency, and to anyone the customer has waived, in writing, the confidentiality requirement. The fee for implementing this service will be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 50.01; Ord. No. 1993-11, 10-5-1993) 
Sec. 50.02. - Penalty date for utility bills of elderly persons. 
(a)  A person 60 years of age or older may request the utility delay the day penalties apply to their utility bill of a premises they occupy entirely. 
(b)  It is the individual's responsibility to show proof of age. 
(c)  Penalties will be applied on the 25th day after the bill is issued and service will be discontinued on the 26th day after the bill is issued. 
(Code 1996, § 50.02; Ord. No. 1993-12, 10-5-1993) 
Sec. 50.03. - Adjustment of utility overpayments resulting from change of use of property. 
    When a consumer of solid waste, water or sewer services billed by the city changes the use of property in a manner that causes a change in any utility billing rate for the services furnished the property, the consumer shall notify the city of the change. Upon proof satisfactory to the city manager of the change of use and the time it began the city manager may adjust utility overpayments resulting from billings at the old rate for a period no greater than six months before notice of change of use is received by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 50.03; Ord. No. 1999-07, 6-15-1999) 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNICATIONS OF PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES 

Sec. 50.15. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Definitions of terms in the Act are adopted herein by reference for purposes of these rules. 
    Act means the Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 11 et seq. 
    Communication means any verbal or written communication. 
    Public utility means every entity defined in the act as a public utility doing business within the city and whose rates and services are subject to regulation by the city council. 
    Regulatory authority means the city council. 
    Regulatory chain means all members of the city council, and all employees of the city whose duties are directly connected in whole or in part with the regulation of rates and services of public utilities. The city employees who deal with public utilities on matters not involving the regulation of rates and services are not within the regulatory chain. 
(Code 1970, § 2-85; Code 1996, § 50.15; Ord. No. 1986-12, 11-4-1986) 
Sec. 50.16. - Purpose. 
    It is the declared purpose of these rules to properly direct communication between public utilities and the regulatory authority, and to provide for maintenance of records of such communications in compliance with the Act. The principal avenue for communications intended to affect or influence the decisions of the regulatory authority on matters regarding the regulation of public utility rates and services shall be in open session of the regulatory authority. The principal contact for communications regarding the day-to-day supervision of regulated utility companies by the city and regarding matters under review by the city staff shall be the city manager. 
(Code 1970, § 2-86; Code 1996, § 50.16; Ord. No. 1986-12, 11-4-1986) 
Sec. 50.17. - Communications records and logs. 
(a)  Maintenance by utility. Each public utility shall maintain a permanent record of all communications between employees or representatives of the public utility or its affiliates and any member of the regulatory authority, and any city employee in the regulatory chain, or any other city employee when the subject matter of the communication pertains to the regulations of rates and services. 
(b)  Maintenance by city employees. All members of the regulatory authority, any city employee in the regulatory chain, or any other city employee when the subject matter of the communication pertains to the regulation of rates and services of the public utility, shall also maintain a permanent record of all communications between themselves and employees and representatives of the public utility or its affiliates. 
(c)  Form and approval. The records referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be maintained as a log, and the form thereof shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  Contents. At a minimum, such records shall contain the name of the person communicating with the regulatory authority or the member or employee of the regulatory authority, the person contacted, the name of the business entity represented, the date of the contact or communication, a brief description of the subject matter of the communication, and the action, if any, requested by the public utility, affiliate or representative, and whether the communication was oral or written. 
(e)  Copy of log submitted by utility to city. Each utility shall submit a copy of its log by the tenth day of each month to the city secretary, which log shall be certified by the manager or officer of the utility. The log so submitted shall contain the required information from all contacts or communications occurring in the preceding calendar month. The city secretary shall maintain a cumulative file of all such logs, and such file shall be made available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(f)  Copy of log submitted by employees to city. All members of the regulatory authority, any city employee in the regulatory chain, or any other city employee when the subject matter of a communication pertains to the regulation of rates and services for the public utility, shall likewise maintain the log and submit a copy of the log by the tenth day of each month to the city secretary. The log so submitted shall provide the required information for all contacts or communications occurring in the preceding calendar month. The city secretary shall maintain a cumulative file of such log's entries, and such file shall be made available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(g)  Inspection of logs by city. The city manager, or his designated representative, shall be entitled to inspect the logs maintained by any public utility at any time during regular business hours. 
(h)  Communications not required to be logged. The following are exempt from the logging requirements set forth in this section: communications with city employees not in the regulatory chain when such contacts do not pertain to the regulation of rates and services. Examples include, but are not limited to, liaison with the city regarding street cuts or easements, use of property by the city, payment of taxes, settlement of tort claims, and private (nonbusiness) contacts with the city by utility employees acting in their personal capacity. 
(i)  Regulatory chain. All members of the city council, the city manager, the city secretary and the city attorney are members of the regulatory chain. Staff members employed by the persons enumerated above are also in the regulatory chain when their assigned duties relate to the regulation of public utilities rates and services. 
(Code 1970, § 2-87; Ord. No. 1986-12, 11-4-1986) 
Sec. 50.18. - Violations. 
    No person shall knowingly violate a provision of this chapter or knowingly fail to perform a duty required of him. 
(Code 1970, § 2-88; Code 1996, § 50.18; Ord. No. 1986-12, 11-4-1986) 
CHAPTER 51. - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 363; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

Sec. 51.01. - Brush and bulky items. 
    The city will collect, once per month, from residential customers, old furniture, appliances, junk, and bulk items placed at the curb on regular brush/bulk collection schedule. Materials shall be placed for pickup no more than three days prior to scheduled pickup. The following residential uses are not provided bulk pickup: apartments and bed and breakfast locations with more than two units. 
(1)  No material generated at a location other than the residence from which it is collected shall be placed in any place or pile for pickup and disposal. 
(2)  No material generated by a hired, commercial, or contracted person or service shall be placed in any place or pile for pickup and disposal. 
(3)  No boards, lumber, drywall, or other building and remodeling materials shall be placed in any place or pile for pickup and disposal. 
(4)  All persons utilizing the services must: 
a.  Place only materials in the place specified on or adjacent to his or her property (or the property managed, rented, or occupied by him or her) only. 
b.  Place no more than six cubic yards of brush or bulky items per monthly collection. Small amounts can be disposed of in the garbage container. 
c.  Items that cannot be effectively disposed of in the garbage container shall be placed behind the street curb within eight feet of the curb line of the street. Items should not be placed under any low wires or limbs and shall be placed at least six feet from any other objects (mailboxes, cars, garbage containers, etc.). Items placed in violation of this provision shall constitute a request for service. 
d.  Items placed out at the curb on non-collection days or non-compliant items placed at the curb will constitute a request for service for which a special pickup charge of $100.00 per six cubic yards will be assessed. By requesting this service the resident will be charged the fee and it will be added to the resident's city utility bill. The additional fee will be effective July 1, 2016. 
e.  A special pickup may be requested and/or required for out of cycle collection or collection of items that are not normally collected with this service (remodeling, demolition or building materials or when there is no water service at the location). Items set out on non-collection days will constitute a request for service for which a special pickup charge will be assessed. Special pickup charges are set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 1, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 51.02. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall violate the terms of this chapter and enforcement may be taken against any person who violates the terms of this chapter. Enforcement is in addition to any charges assessed to the property for items being removed and properly disposed. 
(b)  Additionally, failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Any materials placed out for collection shall be presumed to belong to and be the responsibility of the utility customer, owner, manager, tenant, or occupant of any dwelling, building, or premises in front of which, or adjacent to which, the materials are placed. 
(d)  The penalties set forth in the general provisions of this Code of Ordinances apply to any violation of the chapter. 
(e)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
CHAPTER 52. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power regarding sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.002. 

ARTICLE I. - WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 52.01. - Connection with city sewer required. 
    All owners or occupants of houses or buildings situated in any section of the city where the sanitary sewer now exists, or where it may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within 60 feet of any such sewer are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sewer, under the supervision of the city manager or his designated agent. 
(Code 1970, § 25-60; Code 1996, § 52.01; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.02. - Maintenance of closets and connections; notice to discontinue privy use. 
    It shall be the duty of any such property owners or occupants to keep and maintain water closets and connection thereof in perfect condition, and free from any obstruction, and it shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault above or below the ground in the city on any lot or parcel of land, the property line of which, at any point, extends to within a distance of 60 feet of a city sanitary sewer. All persons having such privies in such localities are required to abate the same within 30 days after notice by the city manager to do so, and to construct and to put in water closets and connect the same with the city sewer, as required herein. 
(Code 1970, § 25-61; Code 1996, § 52.02; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.03. - Operating water closets and urinals required during occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated on a lot, extending within 60 feet of any sewer of the city, any portion of which building is used for any purpose, during any portion of the day to fail to have at least one water closet connected with the city sewer within 30 days after notice from the city manager to do so, and to fail to have the water closets suitably arranged for use as urinals, unless a separate urinal is provided. 
(Code 1970, § 25-62; Code 1996, § 52.03; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.04. - Waste water receptacles required in food and washing establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owners and occupants of any building, situated within 60 feet of any sanitary sewer, in which building food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of wastewater; provided, however, if the water closet is of the kind suited to such use it may receive the wastewater, and the sink or hopper may be dispensed with. 
(Code 1970, § 25-63; Code 1996, § 52.04; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.05. - Domestic waste liquid not to be discharged on ground. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or to allow any person under his control to throw or deposit, on the surface of the ground, or in any hole or vault, in or under the surface of the ground, on any lot reaching within 60 feet of any city sanitary sewer, except in the proper and necessary fertilizing of the soil, any water which has been used for domestic purposes, or any liquid or solid filth, feces or urine. 
(Code 1970, § 25-64; Code 1996, § 52.05; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.06. - Prohibited sewer deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause or permit anyone under his control to throw or deposit, in any city sewer, or in any vessel or receptacle connected with any city sewer, any garbage, hair, ashes, fruits or vegetable peelings, refuse rags, cotton, cinders, or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, the necessary closet paper and liquid slops. 
(Code 1970, § 25-65; Code 1996, § 52.06; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 52.07. - Failure to connect toilets, sinks, washing machines, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all toilets, sinks, washing machines, etc., in his house or yard to the city sewer, or to allow any wastewaters of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Code 1970, § 25-65; Code 1996, § 52.07; Ord. No. 1031, 7-11-1967) 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 52.20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called the house lateral and house connection. 
    City means the City of Sinton, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage means solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use of, subject to control by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspend solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge means and includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state department of water resources; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge to all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1970, § 25-71; Code 1996, § 52.20; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.21. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 25-72; Code 1996, § 52.21; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.22. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 400 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 52.21(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1970, § 25-73; Code 1996, § 52.22; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.23. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
Not to Exceed Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample Arsenic 0.1 0.20 0.3 Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0 Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0 Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0 Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5 Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0 Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01 Nickel 1.00 2.0 3.0 Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2 Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0  
Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of state law. 
(c)  No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranylion; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellerium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1970, § 25-74; Code 1996, § 52.23; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.24. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1970, § 25-75; Code 1996, § 52.24; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.25. - Storm water and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage; 
or make any new connections from inflow sources. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26, and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1970, § 25-76; Code 1996, § 52.25; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.26. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1970, § 25-77; Code 1996, § 52.26; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.27. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1970, § 25-78; Code 1996, § 52.27; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.28. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstructions to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 1,500 mg/l, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1970, § 25-79; Code 1996, § 52.28; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.29. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial wastes; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state department of water resources, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property or into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1970, § 25-80; Code 1996, § 52.29; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.30. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; 
the approving authority shall require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 25-81; Code 1996, § 52.30; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.31. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1970, § 25-82; Code 1996, § 52.31; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.32. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public sewers; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1970, § 25-83; Code 1996, § 52.32; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.33. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, where needed); and 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1970, § 25-84; Code 1996, § 52.33; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.34. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH, oil and grease. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually. 
(e)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Code 1970, § 25-85; Code 1996, § 52.34; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.35. - User charge system. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as established in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with section 53.39; 
(4)  A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(c)  Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system. 
(d)  The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. 
(e)  User charge system shall be governed by section 53.62. 
(Code 1970, § 25-86; Code 1996, § 52.35; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.36. - Continuing discharges. 
    A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge; 
(2)  Has discharged the waste at least 24 months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 150 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1970, § 25-87; Code 1996, § 52.36; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.37. - Conditions or permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause, provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required; and 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1970, § 25-89; Code 1996, § 52.37; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 52.50. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of persons to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the persons against loss or damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person(s) and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1970, § 25-89; Code 1996, § 52.50; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.51. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer, potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
(a)  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
(b)  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
(c)  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due, in accordance with city policy set forth in section 53.64; or 
(d)  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 52.28 through 52.31. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes. 
(Code 1970, § 25-90; Code 1996, § 52.51; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.52. - Notice of violation; continuing prohibited discharges. 
(a)  The city shall serve a person discharging in violation of this chapter with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(b)  No person may continue discharging in violation of this chapter beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-91, 25-92; Code 1996, § 52.52; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.53. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by this chapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1970, § 25-94; Code 1996, § 52.53; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
Sec. 52.54. - Criminal mischief. 
    The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority or statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Code 1970, § 25-95; Code 1996, § 52.54; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03. 
Sec. 52.55. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided by section 10.99 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1970, § 25-93; Code 1996, § 52.55; Ord. No. 1983-4, 3-17-1983; Ord. No. 1987-12, 8-18-1987) 
CHAPTER 53. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 1 et seq.; water systems in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.017. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 53.01. - Authority of city manager in case of low water quantity or pressure. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to institute measures to conserve water in case of low water quantity or pressure. These measures may consist of rationing, restriction of use of water in watering yards and washing vehicles or whatever measures may be appropriate. 
(b)  The city manager will report any action taken at the next council meeting. 
(c)  No person shall violate any of the rationing or regulatory provisions instituted by the city manager pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1970, § 25-1; Code 1996, § 53.01; Ord. No. 1980-4, 7-29-1980) 
Sec. 53.02. - Wasting water. 
    In case of willful or unreasonable waste of water by any patron, the city shall have the right to cut off the water supply and recover all damages, and the action of cutting off the water supply may be taken by the director of public works upon learning of such waste and after having given notice of such waste to the patron. 
(Code 1970, § 25-10; Code 1996, § 53.02; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.03. - Interfering with hydrants. 
    Every hydrant placed by the water department for the purpose of extinguishing fires is hereby declared to be a public hydrant, and no person, other than members of the fire department, the state health department, and those authorized by the director of public works shall open any of the hydrants, or draw or attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere with the hydrants. 
(Code 1970, § 25-38; Code 1996, § 53.03; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.04. - Water conservation and drought contingency plan. 
    The Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan, attached to Ord. No. 1995-14, adopted October 3, 1995, as Exhibit "A" and made a part hereof by reference for all purposes, is hereby adopted as the official policy of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 52.80; Ord. No. 1995-14, 10-3-1995) 
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 53.15. - Policy as to supplying water. 
    In the sale of water by the city, to any person, firm or corporation, within and without the city limits of the city and in the supply of water for municipal use for the protection of property against fires in the city, the city does not agree, nor is the city bound to furnish water of any special or specific, or specified amount, but only undertakes to furnish such water and the amount of water that may be supplied from the wells of the city, or such other source or sources as the city may select, and in an amount within the capacity of the city's pumping plants. 
(Code 1970, § 25-6; Code 1996, § 53.15; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.16. - Nonliability of city. 
    In the event for any reason the city may become unable to supply water to its patrons within the city, or to the municipality for the prevention or suppression of fire, the city will in no manner be liable for damages by reason of any such failure to any patron of the water system, or to any person whose property may have been destroyed by fire, or otherwise damaged. 
(Code 1970, § 25-7; Code 1996, § 53.16; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.17. - Service outside city. 
    Nothing in this chapter or any other ordinance shall be construed to compel the city to furnish consumers beyond the corporate limits, or to continue to supply, once begun, such water service, sewer service or garbage service; and the city reserves the right to furnish such consumer it deems advisable, and to, at any time, wholly or partially discontinue to supply such water service, sewer service or garbage service to any consumer residing outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 25-8; Code 1996, § 53.17; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.18. - Limitations on use of water. 
    No water line is to be extended by any individual, firm, or corporation across a street or alley primarily for the purpose of watering any fowl or animal of whatsoever kind or nature, or for the purpose of furnishing water for plant life or any other purpose, except sprinkler systems designed for fire protection. 
(Code 1970, § 25-30; Code 1996, § 53.18; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.19. - Prohibited tapping; responsibility of users. 
(a)  No patron of the waterworks system of the city shall permit any person to tap any water pipe leading into his premises without the consent of the city. Any patron who violates this provision shall be subject to having his water service discontinued. 
(b)  Owners or occupants of premises having service pipes and connections will be held strictly responsible for all uses of water from such service by other parties. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-31, 25-32; Code 1996, § 53.19; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.20. - Filling wells and the like. 
    The filling of wells from mains is prohibited and the filling of cisterns, tanks, barrels or vats through hoses attached to fire hydrants shall be unlawful and any person, his agent or employee, who shall fill or cause to be filled any cistern, tank, barrel or vat in any manner other than herein provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as in this chapter elsewhere provided. 
(Code 1970, § 25-39; Code 1996, § 53.20; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.21. - Feed pumps. 
    Feed pumps for supply water to steam boilers will not be permitted to take water directly from the service pipes, but must be drawn from an open receptacle into which the water has been previously discharged. 
(Code 1970, § 25-40; Code 1996, § 53.21; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.22. - Boilers. 
    In all cases where boilers are used, the plumbing shall be done in such a manner as will prevent the hot water from backing into the water pipes. The owner of the premises will be held responsible for all damages resulting from hot water backing up into them. 
(Code 1970, § 25-41; Code 1996, § 53.22; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
ARTICLE III. - CONNECTIONS AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 53.35. - Application for connections. 
    Any person desiring connection with the city water or sewer system shall make application to the city, giving the location, name of owner of the property, the number of the lot and block, and the name of the street and building number, if possible. If the application is approved, and upon payment of the connection or tapping fee, the city shall make the necessary connections. The application shall constitute a contract on the part of the person making the same to agree to comply with the rules and regulations of the city and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 25-9; Code 1996, § 53.35; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.36. - Manner of making connections. 
(a)  All connections within the city limits or to the patrons outside the city limits made from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  It shall be the policy of the city to supply water to its patrons through mains and lines owned or controlled by the city and which shall be located in the streets, between the curb and sidewalk lines, or in alleys, adjacent to property being served, or on easements controlled or owned by the city. 
(2)  The city may assess, in addition to the service connection charge, the estimated cost of breaking and replacing pavement necessary to make such connections; such assessment is to be paid prior to the work being done. In event the assessment is more than the actual cost of such breaking and replacing, the difference shall be refunded to the patron upon completion of the work. 
(3)  In the event any connection requires boring under or crossing over any street or highway, the city may also assess the estimated cost of boring under or crossing over any street or highway in furnishing water or sewer service, regardless of the distance from the water main to the property line. 
(4)  The city will set a meter at the property line and extend a two-foot service line where the cutoff will be installed for use by the customer. 
(5)  All distances mentioned in this section will be measured by the most direct route along the streets, alleys or easements. 
(b)  The city shall maintain water service lines from the main to the customer's meter. Maintenance of the water service from the meter to its termination shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Code 1970, § 25-12; Code 1996, § 53.36; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1981-12-A, 7-16-1981) 
Sec. 53.37. - City control of system extensions. 
    All pipes or mains for the extension of the waterworks system of the city shall be laid under the management and control of the water department. 
(Code 1970, § 25-13; Code 1996, § 53.37; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.38. - Meters. 
    The location and size of all meters shall be designated by the water department. 
(Code 1970, § 25-14; Code 1996, § 53.38; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.39. - Sewer taps. 
    Only a plumber licensed by the state or homeowner working on a house in which he resides may make a sewer tap. All service taps will be four inches in diameter or larger and will be made with a tapping saddle or a sanitary tee. The tap will be made rootproof with oakum and covered with cement or rubber tapping boots with stainless steel bands. All sewer taps will be inspected by the city before they are covered. The customer will be responsible for all maintenance and repairs to the sewer service line from the customer's property line to its termination. 
(Code 1970, § 25-17; Code 1996, § 53.39; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1981-12-A, 7-16-1981; Ord. No. 1983-10, 7-5-1983) 
Sec. 53.40. - Service lines. 
    All service lines shall be of Mueller's copper service pipe, or copper pipe of similar construction and equal in quality, or PVC plastic pipe, or Yardley service tubing or equal. 
(Code 1970, § 25-18; Code 1996, § 53.40; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.41. - Stops and valves. 
(a)  The water department shall cause to be placed in each service line a stop. In cases where the service line is one inch or smaller, the stop shall be Mueller's H-15275 round way ground key curb stop, solid T handle, or a stop of similar construction and equal in quality. 
(b)  Where the service line is of a size 11/2 inches or larger, the stop shall be a gate valve. 
(c)  All stops, as aforesaid, shall be for the exclusive use of the city and shall be under the exclusive control of the city. 
(d)  Where a two-inch valve or smaller size is used, the same shall be connected to the copper service pipe with Mueller's H-15425 copper connection, or a copper connection of similar construction and equal in quality, or a brass or copper nipple, or PVC plastic. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-19-25-22; Code 1996, § 53.41; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.42. - Connection specifications. 
    Hereafter, all connections to the city water mains, or to any mains controlled by the city, shall be made on the side of the mains and not on the top of the mains, and the service pipe shall be laid not less than 18 inches below the surface of the street and gutter. 
(Code 1970, § 25-23; Code 1996, § 53.42; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.43. - Distance of connections from joints. 
    All connections hereafter made to the water mains of the city shall be at least two feet from any joint in the water mains. 
(Code 1970, § 25-24; Code 1996, § 53.43; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.44. - Placement of taps. 
    In no case shall taps in the city water mains or elsewhere be closer than 12 inches to any other tap. 
(Code 1970, § 25-25; Code 1996, § 53.44; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.45. - Copper service pipe. 
    Where copper service pipe is used, the pipe, at the point of connection to the city water main, shall be bent in the form of a gooseneck and connected to the city water main with a Mueller H-1500 ground joint corporation stop, or a stop of similar construction and equal in quality. 
(Code 1970, § 25-26; Code 1996, § 53.45; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.46. - Use of old connections. 
    No service pipe shall be utilized by any plumber or other person in any premises where a ferrule or corporation cock has been previously inserted, or water conveyed for the purpose of giving an additional supply, except in conformity with and subject to these rules and regulations, nor shall any two ferrules, or corporation cocks be inserted into any of the distributing mains within the distance of 18 inches of each other, nor shall any change of connection be made to any premises where water has been previously used, until the connection previously used shall have been drawn and the opening in the pipe stopped with a brass plug, at the expense of the party asking the change, or when a corporation cock is used, the same shall be turned off. 
(Code 1970, § 25-27; Code 1996, § 53.46; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.47. - Work to be done by licensed plumber; report to inspector. 
(a)  No addition or alteration of any tap, pipe, water cock, or other fixture shall be made except by a plumber licensed by the state, and any plumber making any changes shall report the same to the plumbing inspector, stating the nature and extent thereof which report shall be in writing and filed in the office of the city inspector, and no water shall be turned on until the return is made. 
(b)  Within 48 hours after completing any attachment or connection or making any repairs, additions, or alterations, the plumber shall make a true return in writing on the permit, of all the work done by him under such permit, and file the same with the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-28, 25-29; Code 1996, § 53.47; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.48. - Duties of consumers. 
    Water consumers shall keep their own service pipe lines and apparatus in good repair and condition, protected from freezing at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water. It is especially stipulated by the city that no claim shall be made against them by reason of the breakage of any service pipe or service cock, or from any damage by reason of shutting off the water to repair mains, or for any other purpose, and in case of neglect or refusal to promptly repair any imperfection in the service pipes, lines, stops, or other fixtures, the director of public works may cause the same to be done at the expense of the owner, which expense shall be paid at the office of the water department before the water is turned on. 
(Code 1970, § 25-35; Code 1996, § 53.48; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.49. - Fire protection service pipes. 
(a)  Service pipes intended for fire protection must not be tapped or used for the general supply of water to the premises; such supply must be taken through a separate service pipe. 
(b)  No service pipe for the fire protection will be allowed on the premises that does not also have a pipe for a general supply of water. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-36, 25-37; Code 1996, § 53.49; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 53.60. - Connection charges. 
    The following connection charges will be in effect from the effective date of this chapter: 
(1)  Water. 
a.  The city shall charge actual cost, including material and labor, for making the tap or connection plus ten percent. 
b.  $25.00 shall be added to the above fees for connection or tap charges outside the city limits. 
(2)  Sewer. 
a.  For any connection made by any user of the city's sanitary system inside the city, fees shall be paid as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
1.  A single business or single-family residence is defined as one designed and built for occupancy by one family or business. A multiple family residence or business includes apartments; duplex or any buildings designed for use by several families or businesses, and is so defined. Multiple units shall be charged $150.00 per family unit or per business unit on the basis that each unit is one individual connection. The cost of each such connection shall be borne by such customer and no such connection shall be made without the inspection and approval of a designated agent of the city as to the workmanlike quality of such connections and as to the compliance with good practice and the provisions of the ordinances of the city. No such tap shall be left open overnight or allowed to remain open at such times as might allow surface drainage into the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
2.  $125.00 of the fees shall be placed in a special fund titled Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund and shall only be used for sewer facilities improvements. $25.00 shall be considered as an inspection fee and shall be considered revenue in the water and sewer fund. 
b.  For any connection made by any user of the sanitary sewer system outside the city limits, the fees as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid. 
(Code 1970, § 25-15; Code 1996, § 53.60; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1978-9, 10-17-1978; Ord. No. 1979-14, 12-18-1979; Ord. No. 1994-08, 5-3-1994) 
Sec. 53.61. - Deposits. 
(a)  A utility deposit shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Where a patron's service has been discontinued due to nonpayment, before reconnection, the deposit will be increased to adequately protect the city. 
(c)  The deposit will be held until termination of service, at which time any amount not due the city will be refunded. 
(Code 1970, § 25-16; Code 1996, § 53.61; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1981-12-A, 7-16-1981; Ord. No. 1987-7, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 2011-02, 6-22-2011) 
Sec. 53.62. - Monthly service charges. 
(a)  Monthly service charges shall be as currently established in Appendix A, Schedule of Fees or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Sewer service. The rates and charges for sewer service of the city shall consist of a base rate for debt service and system depreciation and a user charge for system operation and maintenance. The rates and charges shall be assessed to the following categories: 
(1)  Single-family residence and multiple-family dwelling units. Base rate: Each single-family residential connection shall be assessed a base rate of $19.41 per month. The rate of $19.41 per month shall be assessed for each family unit in multiple family dwelling units. 
User charge: Each residential and multiple-family dwelling unit using the sewer system shall be assessed a monthly rate based on 70 percent of the user's average water consumption, as computed in the months of December, January and February. One dollar and forty-four cents ($1.44) shall be assessed for each 1,000 gallons with a minimum charge of $1.44. In the event a customer moves from one address to another, within the city, his sewer rate at the new address shall be the same rate as that at the former address until the annual re-rating which shall occur in March of each year. In the event that no previous rate has been established by the customer, the rate assessed shall be determined by taking the overall average of changeable water consumption to all single family residences on the sewer system. 
(2)  Business units and combination business-residential units. Base rate: The base rate shall be assessed in terms of connection equivalents, which equivalents shall be determined as follows: Customer's previous 12 months' water consumption as determined at the annual re-rating in March, shall be divided by 365 and the result of such division shall then be divided by 245. The figure arrived at by the second division shall be the customer's connection equivalent. Each business or combination business residential connection shall be assessed a base rate of $19.41 per connection equivalent per month being assessed for each individual business or residential unit. In the event of a new sewer connection or a change in the use of the existing connection the base rate assessed shall be based on the connection equivalent as determined by the director of public works in calculating sewer connection fees, until such time as the customer has established a six month average. At such time the base rate shall be based on the six month average until the annual re-rating which shall occur in each year in the month of March. 
User charge: The user charge shall be assessed on 100 percent of the customer's average water consumption as computed for the months of December, January, and February. One dollar and forty-four cents ($1.44) shall be assessed for each 1,000 gallons with a minimum charge of $2.22. In the event that no previous rate has been established by the customer, the rate assessed shall be determined by taking the overall average of chargeable water consumption of all similar businesses on the sewer rate. 
(3)  Public schools. The base rate shall be assessed in terms of connection equivalents, which equivalents shall be determined as follows: Customer's previous 12 months water consumption as determined at the annual re-rating in March, shall be divided by 365 and the result of such division shall then be divided by 245. Each public school shall be assessed a base rate of $19.41 per connection equivalent. In the event that new schools are constructed, the base rate shall be based on the connection equivalents as determined by the director of public works in determining sewer connection fees, until such time as the new school has established a 12 month average. At such time the base rate shall be based on the 12 month average until the annual re-rating in March. 
User charge. The user charge shall be based on 70 percent of the average water consumed as computed for the months of December, January, and February. One dollar and forty-four cents ($1.44) shall be assessed for each 1,000 gallons with a minimum charge of $2.22. 
(4)  Outside the city limits. Single-family residence and multiple-family dwelling units base rate: Each single-family residential connection shall be assessed a base rate $27.19 per month. The rate of $27.19 per month shall be assessed for each family unit in multiple family dwelling units. 
User charge. Each residential and multiple-family dwelling unit using the sewer system shall be assessed a monthly rate based on 70 percent of the user's average water consumption, as computed the months of December, January, and February. Two dollars and seventeen cents ($2.17) shall be assessed for each 1,000 gallons with a minimum charge of $2.17. In the event a customer moves from one address to another, outside the city limits, his sewer rate at the new address shall be at the same rate as that at the former address until the annual re-rating, which shall be in March of each year. In the event that no previous rate has been established by the customer, the rate assessed shall be determined by taking the overall average of changeable water consumption of all single family residences on the sewer system. 
(Code 1970, § 25-43; Code 1996, § 53.62; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1994-07, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 1994-15, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 1995-04, 3-14-1995; Ord. No. 1996-08, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 1997-07, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 1998-04, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2000-02, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-02, 3-18-2003; Ord. No. 2005-01, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 2005-02, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 2006-02, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 2006-03, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 2010-05, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 2010-06, 8-17-2010; Ord. No. 2011-04, 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 2016-09, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 2016-10, 9-20-2016) 
Cross reference- Water and sewer charges, App. A. 
Sec. 53.63. - Separate charges. 
    In all cases where two or more houses, offices, apartments, businesses or buildings are served by one meter without specific written approval of the city, separate minimum charges shall be made for each house, and/or apartment and/or building and/or offices; and no allowance shall be made for a vacancy of either house, apartment or building, unless the owner shall furnish satisfactory proof to the city that water service to such house, apartment or building has been discontinued; and at the same time by a written statement agree that in the event of a reconnection, the same shall be equipped with a separate meter and a separate charge paid therefor. 
(Code 1970, § 25-44; Code 1996, § 53.63; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.64. - Billing. 
(a)  All monthly water bills, sewer and garbage charges shall be billed and considered in all things as one charge and the payment thereof shall not be divided at any time for any reason and the payment thereon shall apply to the bill as a whole. Such bill shall be rendered monthly unless otherwise specified. The term "month" or "monthly" for billing purposes means the period between any two consecutive readings of the meter by the city, such readings to be taken as near as practicable every 30 days. The monthly charges shall become due and payable upon issuance and shall be payable in full at the city office within ten days after the date of issuance, and in case any user or customer does not pay the amount due, a ten percent penalty will be added to the amount due and unpaid. A customer's water service may be disconnected if the bill has not been paid within 20 days from the date of issuance and if proper notice has been given in accordance with the city's collection and disconnect policy. Failure to receive a bill in no way excepts a user or customer from payment of the bill. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect: 
(1)  That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; 
(2)  That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and 
(3)  That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing, at which time he may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint. 
(c)  Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days. 
(Code 1970, § 25-45; Code 1996, § 53.64; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1981-12-A, 7-16-1981) 
Sec. 53.65. - Disconnects and reconnects. 
(a)  If a customer has not paid their bill before the 20th of each month, they can request a payment extension plan. This request can only be used three times per calendar year. All payments must be paid in full by the last business day of the month. 
(b)  If a customer's service has been disconnected for nonpayment or temporarily disconnected at the request of the customer, a reconnect fee will be added to the customer's account. The city will charge a reconnect fee, a fee for pulling a meter to prevent unauthorized continued use of water, and an additional charge for tampering with the meter if necessary, in amounts as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 53.65; Ord. No. 2011-02, 6-22-2011) 
Sec. 53.66. - Moving service. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation owing water rents and moving to other premises shall pay all former delinquencies before service is connected. 
(Code 1970, § 25-49; Code 1996, § 53.66; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.67. - Estimated bills. 
(a)  If easy access to a meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever by a patron, or if entrance to the premises is made dangerous by a vicious dog or otherwise, thereby preventing a meter reader from procuring a reading of the meter, the charges may be estimated for the amount not to exceed double the normal charge, and it is further provided that in case the consumer does not remedy the condition and should he further refuse to pay the estimated bill, the water department shall have the right to discontinue the service without further notice and service shall not be resumed until the conditions complained of have been remedied and all charges for water service paid. 
(b)  If a meter fails to register the water correctly consumed by reason of the register or meter being out of order, the water department may estimate the charge based on the averaged consumption of the current month, the previous month and last year's current month. If a meter has to be estimated for more than three consecutive months without an acceptable reason, the meter register will be replaced. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-50, 25-51; Code 1996, § 53.67; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 2011-01, 4-19-2011) 
Sec. 53.68. - Checking meters. 
    If a patron complains of the charges for water supplied him and if he demands that the meter supplying his premises be tested, the water department may remove and test the meter provided that the consumer or his representative shall witness such test. If it is found that the meter does not register in error more than two percent fast, the consumer shall pay the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for making the test and no adjustment of the charges shall be made. If, however, the meter should register more than two percent fast, the consumer shall pay no fee for such test, and the water department shall make appropriate adjustment in the water service charges. 
(Code 1970, § 25-52; Code 1996, § 53.68; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.69. - Water supply replacement fund. 
    There shall be added to the water service charge to all customers a sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per water meter to be placed in a special fund to be known as the water supply replacement fund and to be used for replacement and extension of the city water system as may be ordered by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 25-53; Code 1996, § 53.69; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974; Ord. No. 1982-10, 9-2-1983; Ord. No. 1988-8, 8-16-1988) 
Sec. 53.70. - Street improvement and construction fund. 
    There shall be added to the water service charge to all customers residing in the city limits a sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, per water meter to be placed in a special fund, to be known as the street improvement and construction fund, to be used for the improvement and construction of streets, as may be ordered by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 25-55; Code 1996, § 53.70; Ord. No. 1987-7, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 53.71. - Disposition of receipts. 
    All receipts from the waterworks system of the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city, such receipts to be disbursed by the city manager in such manner as the council may direct. 
(Code 1970, § 25-42; Code 1996, § 53.71; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 53.85. - Duties of director of public works. 
(a)  The director of public works shall, under the direction of the city manager, have full charge of the water department of the city and all property, fixtures, appurtenances and supplies belonging thereto. 
(b)  The director of public works shall see that all employees of the water system do their duty and comply with the rules and regulations of the city. 
(c)  He shall further see that all patrons of the water department shall obey the rules and regulations prescribed for the management of the waterworks system of the city, and the city secretary shall see that all persons using water pay for the same. 
(Code 1970, § 25-11; Code 1996, § 53.85; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.86. - Right of entry. 
    Every patron of the waterworks system must agree, and does agree, that the director of public works, or anyone acting under the direction of the city manager, shall at any time be permitted to enter any premises or building in which water is used for any purpose related to water or sewer services. It is expressly agreed and must be understood that the city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in the mains for the purpose of repairing the same, making connections or extensions to the same, for the purpose of cleaning same, and in so doing the city shall not be liable in any manner for the damages. 
(Code 1970, § 25-33; Code 1996, § 53.86; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.87. - Map of waterworks system. 
    The director of public works shall keep in his office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipes laid or belonging to the city, giving the size of same and showing the locations of all valves and fire hydrants. 
(Code 1970, § 25-34; Code 1996, § 53.87; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.88. - Additional methods of disconnection. 
    In cases where the water has been turned off for nonpayment of water rent, or for any other cause, or when, in the opinion of the superintendent, turning off the water on the service cock is not sufficient protection against further abuse, he may turn the street cock off, insert a plug, or remove the meter. 
(Code 1970, § 25-47; Code 1996, § 53.88; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Sec. 53.89. - Permission required to turn on water after disconnection. 
    No person whose service shall have been turned off shall be allowed to reopen same or turn on the water, or permit the same to be done except on written permission of the water superintendent, or those under his orders, and any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in section 10.99. 
(Code 1970, § 25-48; Code 1996, § 53.89; Ord. No. 1974-7, 9-17-1974) 
Title VII - TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 1 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal authority to regulate by traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 

CHAPTER 70. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 70.01. - Authority and responsibility of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the general responsibility and authority to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
(b)  Wherever in this chapter the authority is given to the city manager to do acts as he deems, or, in his opinion, are advisable, necessary or desirable, such acts shall be based on his observations and studies, according to generally used and accepted traffic-control principles or techniques. Traffic innovations and experiments, however, are not to be inhibited hereby. 
(Code 1970, §§ 23-1, 23-2; Code 1996, § 70.01; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
State Law reference- Power of local authorities to regulate traffic by traffic-control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 
Sec. 70.02. - Authority to make emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city manager may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1970, § 23-3; Code 1996, § 70.02; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.03. - Presumption as to signs. 
(a)  As to any given traffic-control device, signal, sign, marker or marking, it shall be initially presumed that such device, signal, sign, marker or marking independently erected by the city manager has been installed pursuant to his observations and studies, based on generally used and accepted traffic-control principles or techniques. 
(b)  Any responsibility or authority imposed or conferred on the city manager by the provisions of this chapter may be performed by the city manager or by those officers, employees or agents of the city working under his supervision and control and designated by him to perform the same. 
(c)  The city manager shall evidence the adoption, amendment, deletion or addition of any traffic regulation by the maintenance of a sign inventory card index indicating such regulations, and the presence of a card indicating such regulation, in such index and the placement of the appropriate traffic control device, signal, sign, marker or marking shall be evidence of the action of the city manager. Such regulations shall be in addition to the specific regulations set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 23-4; Code 1996, § 70.03; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.04. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar vehicle shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street in a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable. 
(Code 1970, § 23-31; Code 1996, § 70.04; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.05. - Obedience required. 
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 23-71; Code 1996, § 70.05; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.06. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all traffic laws of this city and of the state. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there or in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 23-72; Code 1996, § 70.06; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.07. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1970, § 23-73; Code 1996, § 70.07; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.08. - Arrests without warrant. 
    Any police officer of the city shall have the power and is hereby authorized to arrest, without a warrant of arrest being first issued, any person who violates any traffic ordinance of the city or any provision of the state motor vehicle laws as are applicable within the city limits in the presence of or within the view of such arresting officer. 
(Code 1970, § 23-74; Code 1996, § 70.08; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.09. - Reserved. 
Sec. 70.10. - Roller skating, rollerblading, skateboarding, bicycles and scooter within the city limits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Rollerblades means shoes with inline wheels located along their soles, used for gliding or rolling along a hard surface. 
    Roller skates means shoes with a pair of small wheels located on the ends, used for gliding or rolling along a hard surface. 
    Scooter means a foot-operated or engine-powered vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted between two wheels tandem and upright steering handle attached to the front wheel. 
    Skateboard means any device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, consisting of a short, oblong board with four or more wheels, typically ridden in a standing position. 
(b)  Riding on sidewalks, squares and parks prohibited. No person shall ride bicycles, rollerblades, scooters, skateboards, roller skates or any other similar devices within any private or public facilities from Scofield Avenue to the U.S. post office at San Patricio Avenue. 
(c)  Signs. No person shall ride bicycles, rollerblades, scooters, skateboards, roller skates or any other similar devices on any public or private property located within the city when such activity is prohibited by one or more signs conspicuously displayed upon such property by or at the direction of the owner or lawful occupier of such property. Signs prohibiting such activity must state that a violation may subject the violator to a fine up to $500.00. 
(Code 1996, § 70.10; Ord. No. 2008-03, 10-14-2008) 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 70.20. - Existing devices affirmed and ratified. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by the chief of police or other officers or employees of the city and now in use for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and confirmed to be official traffic-control devices; provided, however, such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 23-11; Code 1996, § 70.20; Ord. No. 1982-07, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.21. - Authority to install. 
    The city manager shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city and state law. 
(Code 1970, § 23-12; Code 1996, § 70.21; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.22. - Manual and specifications. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices hereafter installed or erected shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state commission on highways and public transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law and this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1970, § 23-13; Code 1996, § 70.22; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
State Law reference- Adoption of sign manual, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001. 
Sec. 70.23. - Presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1970, § 23-14; Code 1996, § 70.23; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.24. - City manager to designate crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain crosswalks, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
(3)  Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Code 1970, § 23-15; Code 1996, § 70.24; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.25. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys and to restrict direction of movement on streets. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Determine and designate one-way streets or alleys, and he shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof; no such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place; 
(2)  Determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and he shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof; the city manager may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(Code 1970, § 23-16; Code 1996, § 70.25; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.26. - Authority to place devices altering or restricting turns. 
    The city manager is authorized to: 
(1)  Place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law; 
(2)  Determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections; the making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or signs prohibiting such turns may be removed when the turns are permitted. 
(Code 1970, § 23-17; Code 1996, § 70.26; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.27. - Authority for stop signs and yield signs. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs or other official traffic-control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junctions. 
(Code 1970, § 23-18; Code 1996, § 70.27; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 70.28. - City manager to designate loading zones. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1970, § 23-19; Code 1996, § 70.28; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
CHAPTER 71. - TRAFFIC RULES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 541 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL RULES 

Sec. 71.01. - Stop required when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1970, § 23-26; Code 1996, § 71.01; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.02. - Weaving in and out of traffic prohibited. 
    No driver of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall weave in and out of traffic to the extent that such weaving unreasonably interferes with the right-of-way of other vehicles on the right or left. 
(Code 1970, § 23-27; Code 1996, § 71.02; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.03. - Cutting in prohibited. 
    When traffic is traveling in parallel lanes, no driver or operator of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall cut from one lane of traffic to another so as to unreasonably interfere with the right-of-way of any other vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1970, § 23-28; Code 1996, § 71.03; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.04. - Prima facie evidence of weaving and cutting in. 
    In regard to sections 71.02 and 71.03, the fact that any adjacent vehicle, into the path of which the weave or cut is made, shall slacken its pace abruptly or shall swerve into any parallel lane or near to any obstruction in the street or object at the side thereof shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the right-of-way of that vehicle by the driver of the vehicle weaving or cutting in. 
(Code 1970, § 23-29; Code 1996, § 71.04; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.05. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles, and the traffic upon and the conditions of the roadway. 
(Code 1970, § 23-30; Code 1996, § 71.05; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.06. - Truck routes. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the operator of any truck or truck-trailer combination, or the operator of any vehicle which has a capacity in excess of 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight according to the manufacturer's rating, to drive or operate such truck or such truck-trailer or such vehicle upon any street within the city limits. 
(b)  It is, however, excepted, and this section shall not be construed to prohibit, the operation of any truck or any truck-trailer combination, or any vehicle described in this section from making any delivery to or pickup from any point within the city limits. 
(c)  There is further excepted, and this section shall not be construed to prohibit, any truck or truck-trailer combination or vehicle from using the following-described state highways which shall be designated as truck routes: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 181 within the city limits; 
(2)  U.S. Highway 77 within the city limits; 
(3)  U.S. Highway 881 within the city limits; 
(4)  U.S. Highway 2046 within the city limits. 
(Code 1970, § 23-61; Code 1996, § 71.06; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.07. - U-turns. 
    It shall be unlawful for a driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction or to make a 180-degree turn (U-turn) on Sinton Street from South San Patricio Avenue to Pirate Boulevard. 
(Code 1996, § 71.07; Ord. No. 1998-01, 1-20-1998) 
Sec. 71.08. - Use of wireless communications while driving. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hands-free device means speakerphone capability or a telephone attachment or other piece of equipment, regardless of whether permanently installed in the motor vehicle, that allows use of the wireless communication device without use of either of the operator's hands. 
    Park or parked means for the operator to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and location. The term "park" or "parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
    Wireless communication device means a device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 USC 332. 
(b)  An operator of a motor vehicle may not use a wireless communication device while operating a motor vehicle within the city limits. 
(c)  This section does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle using a wireless communications device: 
(1)  While the vehicle is parked; 
(2)  That is affixed to the vehicle and used as a global positioning or navigation system; 
(3)  That is used with a hands-free device; 
(4)  Who is an operator of an authorized emergency vehicle while acting in an official capacity; 
(5)  Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device; or 
(6)  While driving a motor vehicle on private property. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if a wireless communications device is used to make an emergency call to: 
(1)  An emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical or hazardous material response service; 
(2)  A hospital; 
(3)  A fire department; 
(4)  A health clinic; 
(5)  A medical doctor's office; 
(6)  An individual to administer first aid treatment; or 
(7)  A police department. 
(e)  A violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(f)  The culpable mental state required by section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is specifically negated and dispensed with and a violation under this subsection is a strict liability offense. 
(g)  To the extent that this section conflicts with the Texas Transportation Code, this section does not apply. 
(Code 1996, § 131.10; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicle while using a wireless communications device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.424 et seq. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Speed restrictions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.351 et seq. 

Sec. 71.20. - State speed laws applicable. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city except where the city manager, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determines that other speed limits shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive at a speed in excess of any speed so determined when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 23-41; Code 1996, § 71.20; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 71.21. - Authority of city manager. 
(a)  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city manager may decrease maximum speed limits at intersections and outside urban districts, and he may increase limits within urban districts. 
(b)  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city manager shall determine the maximum speed limits on arterial streets. 
(c)  Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be applicable at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1970, § 23-42; Code 1996, § 71.21; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
CHAPTER 72. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2); stopping, standing and parking generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.251 et seq. 

Sec. 72.01. - Authority of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to prohibit or limit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times or during specified hours. 
(b)  No prohibition, regulation or limitation relating to stopping, standing or parking imposed under this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be effective unless official traffic-control devices are erected and in place at the time of an alleged offense, and it shall be the duty of the city manager to erect and maintain such devices. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to designate one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. 
(d)  The city manager is hereby authorized to designate certain street areas where angle parking may be allowed if there is sufficient right-of-way for the safe movement of traffic. He will cause these areas to have proper pavement marking. 
(Code 1970, § 23-51; Code 1996, § 72.01; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982; Ord. No. 1984-4, 2-7-1984; Ord. No. 1994-10, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 72.02. - Standing in passenger loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1970, § 23-52; Code 1996, § 72.02; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 72.03. - Standing in freight loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of property in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of property exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter such zone to load or unload property. 
(Code 1970, § 23-53; Code 1996, § 72.03; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 72.04. - Blocking streets and alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful at all times to block any street or alley in the city, except that alleys behind stores, shops and other places of business may be used as places for loading and unloading goods, wares and merchandise, but such loading and unloading shall be done as expeditiously and with as little blocking as is reasonably possible. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of property be unattended for more than 30 minutes. 
(Code 1970, § 23-54; Code 1996, § 72.04; Ord. No. 1984-7, 5-15-1984) 
Sec. 72.05. - Parking of trailers on street rights-of-way. 
    The parking of boat trailers or other trailers on street rights-of-way for longer than 48 hours is prohibited. 
(Code 1970, § 23-55; Code 1996, § 72.05; Ord. No. 1983-14, 12-6-1983) 
Sec. 72.06. - Truck parking. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley right-of-way means the entire area of the city's right-of-way for an alley. 
    Commercial motor vehicle. 
(1)  The term "commercial motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to transport passengers or property that: 
a.  Has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds; 
b.  Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds; 
c.  Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers; or 
d.  Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded under 49 CFR 172, subpart F. 
(2)  The term "commercial motor vehicle" has that definition regardless of whether the vehicle is used for a commercial purpose. 
    Park means the standing of a commercial motor vehicle, whether occupied or not. 
    Stand or standing means any halting, even momentarily, of a commercial motor vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street right-of-way means the entire area of the city's right-of-way for a street without reference to any curbline or pavement line, excepting U.S. Highway 181, U.S. Highway 77, U.S. Highway 188 and U.S. Highway 2046. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the operator of a commercial motor vehicle to park the vehicle on any street right-of-way or any alley right-of-way within the city. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The commercial motor vehicle was parked temporarily while loading or unloading merchandise or passengers; 
(2)  The commercial motor vehicle was street construction, maintenance, or repair equipment engaged in constructing, maintaining or repairing the street or alley on which it was standing; 
(3)  The commercial motor vehicle was a truck, trailer, or vehicle use by a public service utility company engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; or 
(4)  The commercial motor vehicle developed a mechanical defect making it disabled or unsafe to proceed further and was parked during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. 
(Code 1996, § 72.06; Ord. No. 2000-06, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 72.07. - Unattended vehicles presumed left by owner. 
(a)  When a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley or other place in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, it shall be presumed that the owner unlawfully stopped, stood or parked the vehicle. 
(b)  Proof of ownership of a vehicle may be made by a computer generated record of the registration of the vehicle with the state department of highways and public transportation showing the name of the person to whom state license plates were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was issued. 
(Code 1996, § 72.07; Ord. No. 2000-07, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 72.08. - Registered owner of a vehicle. 
    In a prosecution for an offense under subchapter G, chapter 545, Texas Transportation Code involving the stopped, standing or parking of an unattended motor vehicle, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped, stood or parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(Code 1996, § 72.08; Ord. No. 2001-06, 11-6-2001) 
Title IX - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER 90. - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate care and control of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 821.001-828.013; treatment and disposition of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 90.001. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any living nonhuman dumb creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal control officer means an appointed chief enforcement officer for animal control within the city. 
    Animal control shelter means a facility for the impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
    At large means not under the control of the owner, either by leash, chain, cord or other suitable materials attached to a collar or harness or not under the immediate oral control or not restrained securely within an enclosure or fence unless such land is owned by or under the control of the owner of the animal; or in the case of a wild, vicious or exotic animal, not in a suitable enclosure. 
    Cat means an animal of the feline family, both male and female. 
    Dog means an animal of the canine family, both male and female. 
    Enclosure means a suitable structure by design to prevent escape such as a fence, coop or shed. 
    Exotic means an animal introduced from a foreign country. 
    Kennel means any building, lot, yard, shed or other place on which five or more dogs more than six months old are kept; or any building, lot, yard, shed or other place on or in which one or more dogs are housed or boarded for pay. 
    Owner means any person, owning, keeping, harboring or having control or custody of an animal. 
    Running at large, when applied to animals generally, means loose and not under positive control of the owner while off the owner's property; when applied to wild, vicious or exotic animals, means not in a suitable enclosure. 
    Torture or cruelty means every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused, permitted or allowed to continue when there is a reasonable remedy or relief. 
    Vicious. 
(1)  When applied to a dog, cat or other domestic animal. Any dog, cat or other domestic animal within the city shall bite, scratch or otherwise attack a person who is not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner or person having control of such animal or not otherwise provoking or teasing such animal shall be deemed vicious or dangerous to persons or other animals. 
(2)  When applied to other than a domestic animal. Any animal, including any reptile, which by nature, is normally considered dangerous to a person or other animals shall be deemed vicious or dangerous to persons or other animals. 
    Wild animals means undomesticated animals, including reptiles, not ordinarily considered home, farm or ranch animals. 
(Code 1970, § 4-1; Code 1996, § 90.001; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979; Ord. No. 1992-6, 6-16-1992) 
Sec. 90.002. - Enforcement by health officer and animal control officer. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the health officer to oversee all health and sanitation provisions contained in sections 90.001 through 90.010. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint an animal control officer. The animal control officer, his designated deputy, animal warden and/or any city law enforcement officer shall have police powers in the enforcement of this chapter, and no person shall interfere with, hinder, molest or abuse the animal control officer, his deputy, the animal warden or any law enforcement officer in the exercise of such powers. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-2, 4-3; Code 1996, § 90.002; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.003. - Animals declared a nuisance. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon school grounds or trespassing upon private property in such a manner as to damage property shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Defecation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper, rider or walker of any animal to permit the animal to discharge such animal's excreta upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner, within the city, providing that immediately thereafter, the owner does not remove the animal's excreta from the public or private property. This shall not apply to any person who, due to their disability, is unable to remove the animal's excreta. 
(c)  Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep on his premises, or in or about his premises, under his control any animal of any species which, by loud and unnecessary noises or unusual barking, howling or yelping, shall cause the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity to be disturbed. 
(d)  Excessive number of animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain custody of more animals per household than can be managed without causing a nuisance or threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1970, § 4-4; Code 1996, § 90.003; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.004. - Animals at large. 
    The running at large within the city of any cattle, horses, mules, burros, sheep, goats, jacks, jennets, hogs, dogs and fowl or any other animals or birds not herein specifically set forth is hereby prohibited and shall be declared a nuisance, and such animals or birds shall be impounded. The running at large of cats in such a manner to cause damage to property is hereby prohibited and shall be declared a nuisance, and such animals or birds shall be impounded. 
(Code 1970, § 4-5; Code 1996, § 90.004; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.005. - Animals tied or staked near public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any domestic animal to be tied or staked upon open or unfenced lot or land within the city so that such tied or staked animal is able to get on or across or within eight feet of any street, park or other public land or within eight feet of any sidewalk, public way, place or building. Such animal so tied or staked shall be considered dangerous to the public in general and declared a nuisance and shall be impounded. 
(Code 1970, § 4-6; Code 1996, § 90.005; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.006. - Operation of kennel. 
(a)  When a kennel operator houses, boards, or trains dogs for a fee, the kennel must be located in an area zoned for that use. 
(b)  All kennel operators shall obtain a permit to operate from the humane office of the city. 
(c)  Any owner of a dog kennel may make application to the city humane officer or his authorized agent to keep or operate a dog kennel. Such license shall be issued by the city humane officer or his authorized agent upon a proper form which has been signed and approved by a representative of the county health department showing that the dog kennel has met the basic requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this section. The license shall entitle the licensee to keep up to ten dogs six months old or older, except that such numbers shall not at any time exceed the number of dogs specified in the license. The annual fee to be paid for such dog kennel license shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, for each dog over six months of age to be maintained in or on the dog kennel. Such license shall be valid from one calendar year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. 
(d)  No dog kennel license shall be issued by the city humane officer or his authorized agent unless such kennel is located more than 50 feet from any residence or property line, and more than 150 feet from the property line of any food processing establishment or food service establishment, and is in a clean and sanitary condition. Any person operating a dog kennel shall keep such kennel at all times in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall not permit the same to become a nuisance by reason of uncleanliness, smell or noise. The failure to maintain a kennel in accordance with these standards shall be cause for revocation of the dog kennel license. The city may revoke the dog kennel license at any time for cause upon findings of a violation of this section at an administrative hearing before the city manager or his designee. The hearing shall not be held except upon written notice as set forth below. The licensee shall be entitled to be heard in his own defense and to present evidence at the hearing. 
(1)  The city manager or his designee may hold an administrative hearing to determine whether any license issued pursuant to this section should be revoked, or to otherwise regulate the keeping of an animal within the city, if the license holder or the owner of an unlicensed animal refuses or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the city health department, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(2)  No administrative hearing shall be held without giving the license holder, or owner of an unlicensed animal, prior written notice of the date, time and place of hearing. Written notice shall be deemed made with a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the address indicated in the holder's last license application or, if such application is not on file, to the owner's last known address, and deposited in the U.S. mail. Written notice shall also be deemed made when the notice letter is delivered by an employee or representative of the city health officer to such address. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the city manager or his designee shall determine if the person holding the license, or the owner of an unlicensed animal, has violated any provision of this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee, or any law governing the protection and keeping of the animal in question. If any such violation has been found to have occurred, the city manager or his designee, in his discretion, may order that any of the following actions be taken within ten days thereafter: 
a.  That the owner divest himself of the animal in question by either having it humanely euthanized or by removing it from the city; 
b.  That the holder or owner comply with specified conditions so as to be permitted to continue to keep the animal within the city; 
c.  A vicious animal be humanely euthanized as provided by regulation; or 
d.  Any other disposition deemed to be consistent with the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  If an applicant has withheld or falsified any information on an application, the city humane officer may refuse to issue a license or may revoke any license issued in connection with such application. 
(f)  No person has been convicted within the preceding 60 months of cruelty to animals under the animal laws of this city, state or any other jurisdiction in the United States shall be issued a license. 
(g)  Any person having been denied a license for any reason other than subsection (f) of this section may not reapply for a period of 90 days after such denial. Persons denied a license under subsection (f) of this section may not reapply during the 60-month period specified therein. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to require veterinary hospitals or clinics operated by licensed veterinarians to obtain kennel licenses, if all the operations and animal holding areas of such hospital or clinic are enclosed within a building. 
(i)  The issuance of a kennel license shall be deemed a waiver by the licensee permitting the access to and inspection of the licensed premises by the humane officer or his designee during reasonable hours for the purpose of ensuring compliance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 90.006; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979; Ord. No. 1992-6, 6-16-1992) 
Sec. 90.007. - Inhumane treatment. 
(a)  No person shall torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, unnecessarily or cruelly beat or needlessly mutilate or kill any animal or carry any animal upon any vehicle or otherwise in a cruel or inhumane manner or procure the same to be done within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide animals with sufficient, good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from weather, veterinary medical care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to beat, cruelly maltreat, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal, or cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(d)  Any animal determined to be suffering from inhumane treatment shall be impounded and its owner held liable for impoundment and/or medical expenses. 
(Code 1970, § 4-8; Code 1996, § 90.007; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
State Law reference- Seizure of cruelly treated animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022. 
Sec. 90.008. - Abandonment. 
    No person who has within control, either temporarily or permanently, any animal shall abandon such animal within the city. Failure by an owner to redeem an impounded animal within three days constitutes abandonment. 
(Code 1970, § 4-9; Code 1996, § 90.008; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.009. - Animals in food establishments. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal, licensed or unlicensed, on a leash or running at large, to be permitted in any establishment that handles, dispenses or sells food or beverage for human consumption. This section does not apply to service animals used in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.023. 
(b)  The owner or manager of any establishment in which a violation occurs shall, upon conviction, be subjected to the same fines as the owner or custodian of any animal which is found in any establishment which handles, dispenses or sells food for human consumption. 
(Code 1970, § 4-10; Code 1996, § 90.009; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.010. - Veterinarian's report of diseases transmittable from animal to man. 
    Any veterinarian who shall find any animal within the city limits affected with a disease which is transmittable from animal to man shall immediately report to the county health officer or his representative such case, together with the name, address and e-mail address of the owner and the location of the premises where the animal can be found. 
(Code 1970, § 4-11; Code 1996, § 90.010; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.011. - Reserved. 
Sec. 90.012. - Keeping of wild or exotic animals. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following are examples of exotic or wild animals: tigers, lions, cougars, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, lynx, bobcats, bears, wolves, chimpanzees, gorillas, gibbons, baboons, summings, elephants, rhinoceros, hippopotami, poisonous snakes or lizards, crocodiles, coyotes, or hybrids of wild dogs or cats interbred with domestic dogs or cats or vipers. 
(b)  Livestock which has been bred for novelty purposes such as miniature horses, pigs, mules, and chickens may be allowed with a specific use permit if all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(c)  No person shall keep a wild, dangerous, or exotic animal, as defined by this section, as a pet. 
(d)  No person may sell or exhibit for display a wild, dangerous, or exotic animal, whether gratuitously or for a fee. 
(Code 1996, § 90.012; Ord. No. 1993-13, 11-16-1993; Ord. No. 1994-11, 7-5-1994) 
ARTICLE II. - FOWL, BIRDS, RODENTS AND THE LIKE 

Sec. 90.025. - Fowl or other birds running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has under his control or in his possession chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, guinea fowl or other fowl or birds to permit them to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 4-25; Code 1996, § 90.025; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.026. - Fowl or other birds to be kept in enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep any chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks or any other fowl or bird within the city unless they are kept in an enclosure from which they cannot escape. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons or other fowl or birds to keep them in a pen, coop or enclosure which shall be a distance of at least 50 feet from every building or structure used for sleeping, dining or living, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and shall also be kept in such a condition as will be reasonably calculated not to become offensive to the sense of neighbors or to the public. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-26, 4-27; Code 1996, § 90.026; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.027. - Rodents and other small animals. 
    It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, white mice, hamsters and other small animals except dogs and cats, to keep such animals in a pen, coop or enclosure; such pen, coop or enclosure shall be a distance of at least 25 feet from every building or structure used for sleeping, dining or living, other than that of the owner, and shall also be kept in such a condition as not to become offensive to the senses of neighbors or to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 4-28; Code 1996, § 90.027 Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.028. - Impoundment. 
    Any fowl, bird or small animal subject to the provisions of this article found to be running at large shall be taken up and impounded in a place suitable for that purpose, at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1970, § 4-29; Code 1996, § 90.028; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.029. - Recapturing as a defense. 
    In those cases where a person is charged with violating this article wherein he can prove that he did not either willfully or carelessly permit such fowl, bird or small animal, to run at large, it shall be an absolute defense if he can show that he immediately, after becoming aware of the fact that his fowl, bird or small animal or any number of them were at large, or after he was notified of this fact by a neighbor or anyone else, recaptured such fowl, bird or small animal. 
(Code 1970, § 4-30; Code 1996, § 90.029; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 90.040. - Specific use certificate required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person in charge to keep or maintain any horse, mule, jack, jennet, cow, cattle, sheep or goat, or similar animal within the city without a specific use certificate issued by the city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of any hog or who has any hog under his management or control to keep the same or allow the same to remain in any pen or in any other place within the city without a specific use certificate issued. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a stable for horses within the city without a specific use certificate issued by the city council. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a feedlot for any type of livestock within the city without a specific use certificate issued by the city council. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-40-4-43; Code 1996, § 90.040; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.041. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person in charge of any horse, mule, jack, jennet, cattle, sheep, swine or goat, or similar animal, to allow or permit the same to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 4-44; Code 1996, § 90.041; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
State Law reference- Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 142.001 et seq.; running at large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 143.101 et seq. 
Sec. 90.042. - Enclosure. 
    Every such animal shall be kept in a stable, shed, pen or other suitable enclosure for such animals that shall be distant enough so as not to be offensive to residents of adjoining lots. Any such stable, shed, pen or enclosure, wherever located in the city, shall be a distance of at least 500 feet from every building or structure, other than the owner's, used for sleeping, dining or living, and shall be kept in such a sanitary condition, as will be reasonably calculated not to become offensive to the senses of the neighbors or to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 4-45; Code 1996, § 90.042; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.043. - Impoundment. 
    Any animal subject to the provisions of this chapter found to be running at large shall be taken up and impounded in a place suitable for that purpose at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1970, § 4-46; Code 1996, § 90.043; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.044. - Recapturing livestock as a defense. 
    In the cases where a person is charged with violating this article, whereas he can prove that he did not either willfully, carelessly or negligently permit such animal to run at large, it shall be an absolute defense if he can further show that he immediately, after becoming aware of the fact that his animal or any number of them were at large or after he was notified of the fact by anyone, recaptured such animal. 
(Code 1970, § 4-47; Code 1996, § 90.044; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Registration and restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031 et seq. 

Sec. 90.055. - License required; conditions and fees. 
(a)  Dogs and cats over five months of age shall be licensed as provided herein. 
(b)  There is hereby levied upon each dog and cat more than five months of age, which is kept, harbored or maintained by the owner thereof in the city, an annual license fee as prescribed below. License fees are due for renewal one year from date of issue. License fees are not refundable. Duplicate licenses may be issued for a fee as prescribed below. 
(c)  Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall issue to the owner a license receipt and a tag for each dog and cat so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the animal register. 
(d)  The city shall not issue any license or license tags for any dog or cat until the owner or person in charge of the dog and cat shall have obtained and presented a certificate from a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine, that such dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies within one year of request for the license. 
(e)  Dog and cat licenses and license tags shall not be transferred from one dog or cat to another and it shall be unlawful for the owner or person having control over or custody of any dog or cat to transfer such license or license tag from such dog or cat for which same was issued to any other dog or cat. 
(f)  License and permit fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 4-60; Code 1996, § 90.055; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.056. - Dogs to wear collar; cat owners to carry certificates. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep a dog more than five months of age on any premises within the city unless such dog wears a collar or harness and also securely attached to a collar or harness, a license tag showing such dog has been licensed by the city for the current year. Removal of a tag or collar without lawful authority is a violation of this Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this section for wearing of a collar or harness with tags shall not apply to cats, but the owners of cats shall have in their possession a current city registration and rabies vaccination certificate to be exhibited on demand to authorized city officials or any of their deputies or any policeman. The owner of a cat may tattoo the city registration number on an ear of the cat, and the city animal control warden shall check for the number on any cat that is impounded and, if found, use reasonable care to notify the owner of the cat. If the tattoo is made, the owner, upon request, may reserve the same city registration number from year to year. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats five months or less of age or to those dogs or cats belonging to visitors to the city. 
(Code 1970, § 4-61; Code 1996, § 90.056; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.057. - Dogs running at large; disposition. 
(a)  No dog, licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large or upon the premises of anyone, other than the owner. If any such dog is found running at large in violation of this section and the owner is unknown, the dog will be taken up and impounded. 
(b)  If a dog is found running at large in violation of this section, and the owner is known, the dog will be taken to the owner and the owner may be issued a citation for failure to keep his dog from running at large. 
(c)  If a dog is found running at large in violation of this section, and the owner is unknown, and the dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain by a policeman or under the supervision of a policeman. 
(Code 1970, § 4-62; Code 1996, § 90.057; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.058. - Muzzling vicious dogs or cats. 
    The animal control officer may order a vicious dog or cat to be kept muzzled or that such dog or cat may be kept within a sufficient enclosure. Failure to keep such animal muzzled or within a sufficient enclosure is deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1970, § 4-63; Code 1996, § 90.058; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.059. - Abandonment; neglect. 
    No person who has within his control, either temporarily or permanently, any dog or cat shall abandon the same in the city, nor shall any person allow any dog or cat to be left without proper food, water and shelter within the city. Failure by an owner to redeem an impounded dog or cat within three days constitutes abandonment. 
(Code 1970, § 4-64; Code 1996, § 90.059; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.060. - Rabies control. 
(a)  Proclamation ordering muzzling; destruction of rabies suspect. 
(1)  Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of rabies, the mayor, if he deems it necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog or cat to confine it securely on his premises unless such dog or cat has a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. 
(2)  All dogs and cats which are noticeably affected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities may be killed under the supervision of any police officer without notice to the owner. 
(b)  Rabies control measures report; quarantine and disposition of rabid or rabies suspect animals. 
(1)  When a dog or cat has been bitten by an animal known to have rabies, the dog or cat shall be quarantined for a period of 180 days at a veterinary facility or destroyed by a veterinarian at the discretion of the owner and at the owner's expense. 
(2)  When a dog or cat has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, and the rabies suspect is captured and is quarantined at a veterinary facility, the animal bitten will also be quarantined for ten days. Disposition of both animals will be determined by the veterinarian having custody of each of the animals. 
(3)  Animal owners shall notify the animal control officer of the fact that his dog or cat has been exposed to rabies and, at his discretion, the animal control officer is empowered to have the dog or cat removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary facility for observation at the owner's expense. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog or cat to have rabies to dispose of such dog or cat without written permission of the animal control officer. 
(5)  Every owner or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog or cat is rabid, shall immediately notify the animal control officer who shall either remove the dog or cat to the animal shelter, if possible, and if not, to summarily have it destroyed. 
(c)  Physician's report. It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the police department the names, addresses and e-mail addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals together with such information necessary to assist the investigation of the bite accident. 
(d)  Controlling animal involved in bite incident. 
(1)  The animal control officer, his deputy, an animal warden or any police officer shall direct the owner of the suspect animal involved in a biting incident to have it examined for rabies by a licensed veterinarian within 24 hours of the incident and submit proof of examination to the police department. 
(2)  Animals involved in a biting incident for which an owner cannot be readily identified and/or contacted expeditiously will be impounded. The animal control officer will ensure that the animal is examined within 24 hours by a veterinarian and proof of the examination is provided to the police department. The animal shall be confined under positive control for a period of ten days. The animal will be isolated from other animals or possible victims. 
(3)  The animal shall be confined for a period of ten days under the care and observation of a veterinarian or, upon the owner's written request and veterinarian's approval, confined under positive control on the owner's premises, isolated from other animals or possible victims. 
(4)  A final examination by the veterinarian at the termination of the ten-day quarantine is required and proof of the examination and release shall be furnished to the police department. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-65-4-68; Code 1996, § 90.060; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
State Law reference- Vaccination of dogs and cats required, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021; vaccination requirement, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.29. 
Sec. 90.061. - Interfering with impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to deliver any unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat upon demand for impounding, or to interfere with or attempt to prevent the animal control officer or any of his deputies, animal wardens or any city policeman for catching or impounding any dog or cat running at large. 
(Code 1970, § 4-69; Code 1996, § 90.061; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
ARTICLE V. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Quarantine and impoundment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.041 et seq.; disposition of domestic animals exposed to rabies, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 169.30. 

Sec. 90.075. - Duty of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, any of his deputies, animal warden or any policeman to pick up and impound, subject to the provisions of this article, all animals, including fowl and other birds, that are in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 4-80; Code 1996, § 90.075; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.076. - Authority to enter property. 
    The animal control officer, his deputy, animal warden or any city policeman, while on duty, is hereby authorized to enter upon any public place, unfenced private property, lot, tract or parcel of land that is not the land of the owner of the animal within the city, whether in the immediate presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise, for the purpose of seizing or impounding any animal running at large thereon. 
(Code 1970, § 4-81; Code 1996, § 90.076; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.077. - Impoundment records. 
    Records of all impounded animals will be kept in accordance with the administrative procedures approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1970, § 4-82; Code 1996, § 90.077; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.078. - Disposition of impounded animals other than dogs and cats. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall proceed to dispose of any impounded animal after first giving three days' public notice by posting notice on the bulletin board at the municipal building. The notice shall describe the animal so taken and impounded. 
(b)  Disposal shall be by public auction, adoption for cash, redemption or by otherwise disposing of such animal in a humane manner. 
(Code 1970, § 4-83; Code 1996, § 90.078; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.079. - Redemption by owner; procedure; fees and proceeds. 
(a)  The owner of any animal which has been impounded in accordance with the provisions of this article may redeem the same prior to the sale of such animal by paying the animal control officer for taking up such animal costs expended on behalf of subject animal. 
(b)  The owner of any such animal may redeem the same within the ten days after the sale by giving the purchaser double the amount paid by him for such animal and any expense, if any, for keeping the same. Ten days after the date of sale, any animal so sold shall become the absolute property of the purchaser at the sale. 
(c)  Whenever the city manager is satisfied that any animal has been willfully released from any enclosure, stable, lot or pen, or driven into prohibited territory by any person other than the owner thereof, he shall order the animal control officer to release such animal so impounded without any city impoundment fee or cost to the owner. 
(d)  After deducting the fee for taking up the animal and other costs incurred on behalf of the animal, the remainder of the sale price, if any, shall be paid to the owner, if known. If the owner is not known, the animal control officer shall deposit the remainder of such money, if any, to the city general fund in accordance with established procedures. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-84, 4-85; Code 1996, § 90.079; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
Sec. 90.080. - Disposition of dogs and cats. 
(a)  All cats and dogs not claimed and released within 72 hours after being impounded shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the city council may so designate. In the case of a sick, injured, diseased or infected animal, the animal control officer or a veterinarian may waive the 72-hour waiting period, when in his professional opinion it would be dangerous, inhumane or likely to cause the spread of the disease to hold such animal for such period. The person allowing the animal to get into such poor, sick, diseased or injured condition is hereby held responsible for such condition and the animal control officer and/or the veterinarian is hereby relieved of responsibility in destroying the animal. In the case of a well-kept animal, with or without collar or harness and license tag, the animal control officer will continue impoundment of the animal for an additional 24 hours to allow additional time for redemption and a call to the city secretary for any special report of a lost animal; however, the final responsibility for location of an impounded animal is that of the owner. The animal control officer shall notify his supervisor of the extended impoundment and thereafter may destroy or otherwise dispose of the animal, and both the animal control officer and the supervisor are hereby relieved of responsibility in destroying the animal. 
(b)  At any time after the period of time for redemption of impounded dogs or cats shall have expired, the animal control officer may, without further notice and without advertising in any manner, sell in private sale or public auction for cash any dog or cat not redeemed or reclaimed. 
(c)  All impounded dogs or cats that remain unredeemed, unclaimed or unsold after the period of time for redemption has expired shall forthwith be disposed of by the animal control officer according to current policies. 
(d)  Whenever the city manager is satisfied that any dog or cat has been willfully released from any enclosure, by any person other than the owner, with the intention of having the same impounded to injure the owner thereof, he shall order the animal control officer to release the dog or cat so impounded without any city impoundment fee or cost to the owner. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-86-4-89; Code 1996, § 90.080; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979; Ord. No. 1986-9, 9-2-1986) 
Sec. 90.081. - Redemption of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner of any licensed dog or cat may redeem such dog or cat at any time prior to sale or adoption, by the payment of an impounding fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time plus any medical or other cost expended on behalf of subject animal. 
(b)  The impounding and boarding fee shall be doubled for any owned dog or cat impounded for a second time within a one-year period, and a warning notice to the owner shall be issued stating that if a third offense occurs within a one-year time period of the second offense, a summons shall be issued. 
(c)  Owners reclaiming such dog or cat for a third time or thereafter shall be charged impounding and boarding fees in accordance with the amount designated in the second offense, and issued a municipal court summons for violation of this chapter. 
(d)  The owner of any impounded unlicensed dog or cat may redeem such dog or cat any time prior to sale or disposition by having such dog or cat duly licensed and paying the impounding fee and fee per day for each day such dog or cat shall have been impounded, plus any medical or other costs expended on behalf of subject animal. License and vaccination requirements are not applicable if the animal is not going to be housed in this city. 
(e)  The money collected shall be deposited in the city's general fund in accordance with current directives. 
(Code 1970, §§ 4-90, 4-91; Code 1996, § 90.081; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979; Ord. No. 2009-03, 11-24-2009) 
Sec. 90.082. - Breaking and entering animal control shelter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open the gate or otherwise enter the city's animal control shelter or in any way damage the animal control shelter or injure animals therein, or to release, drive out or turn loose therefrom or to permit the escape of any animal therein confined. 
(Code 1970, § 4-92; Code 1996, § 90.082; Ord. No. 1979-17, 12-4-1979) 
ARTICLE VI. - VICIOUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq.; local regulation of dangerous dogs, non-breed specific, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.047. 

Sec. 90.095. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control official means any employee in the animal control division of the public works department or any individual designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article. The animal control official must be certified by the state as an animal control officer or be a licensed veterinarian. 
    Enclosure means a house or a building, or in the case of a fence or a structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen must be at least six feet in height. The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children, and must be locked and secured such that a dog cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The enclosure shall be securely locked at all times. The structure/pen must have secure sides to prevent the vicious dog from escaping from the enclosure. The structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the vicious dog. The animal control official shall have the right to require that a secure top and/or a secure bottom be added to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated to prevent the dog from escaping the enclosure. This additional requirement shall be based upon the type of dog to be kept in the enclosure and its anticipated ability to escape. 
    Menacing fashion means the show by a dog of a disposition, determination, or intent to attack or inflict injury or harm to a person or domestic animal. 
    Owner/keeper means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing, harboring, keeping, holding, caring for, having an interest in, or having control or custody of a dog. If the owner/keeper of a dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be responsible for compliance with specifications of this article. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in a wound that breaks the skin or results in broken bones. 
    Unprovoked means, with respect to an attack by a dog, that the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with any object or part of the attacked person's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by the person attacked. 
    Vicious dog means: 
(1)  Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury or death to a person, or bites a person who is on public or private property; 
(2)  Any dog that has killed a domestic animal without provocation; 
(3)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the dog will cause physical injury to that person; or 
(4)  Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or domestic animals. 
(Code 1970, § 4-100; Code 1996, § 90.095; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.096. - Declaration of a vicious dog. 
(a)  A dog shall be automatically declared to be a vicious dog under section 90.095, subsection (1) or (2) of the definition of vicious dog, if the owner or keeper is convicted under section 90.102. 
(b)  An animal control official may find and declare a dog to be a vicious dog if the official has cause to believe that a dog is a vicious dog under section 90.095, subsection (1) or (2) of the definition of vicious dog. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under oath before the municipal judge, setting forth the nature and the date of the act, the location of the event, the owner of the dog, the address and e-mail address of the owner, and the description of the dog doing such act, an animal control official shall investigate the complaint, including discussing the matter with the owner/keeper if that person can be located and may determine if a dog is vicious under section 90.095, subsection (3) or (4) of the definition of vicious dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dog shall have the right to provide such an affidavit or statement concerning his own dog. 
(Code 1970, § 4-101; Code 1996, § 90.096; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.097. - Notification of declaration. 
(a)  Within five working days of declaring a dog vicious, the municipal judge will notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the dog or having custody or control of the dog of its designation as a vicious dog and of the requirements for the owner or the person having custody or control of the vicious dog as set out in section 90.100. 
(b)  If a dog is declared to be vicious under section 90.095, subsection (3) or (4) of the definition of vicious dog, the notice shall inform the owner of the person having custody or control of the dog that a determination hearing may be requested to contest the declaration. The request for a determination hearing must be in writing and must be received by the municipal judge no later than five working days after the receipt by the owner or person having custody or control of the dog. Failure to appeal the declaration of a vicious dog within five working days shall result in the animal control official's declaration as final. 
(Code 1970, § 4-102; Code 1996, § 90.097; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.098. - Determination hearing. 
(a)  Upon written request for a determination hearing, the municipal judge shall schedule such hearing. The determination hearing shall be conducted within ten working days of the request for such hearing. The owner or person having custody or control of the dog shall be notified of the hearing by certified mail return receipt requested. Failure of the owner or person having custody or control of the dog to appear at the determination hearing shall result in the animal control official's declaration as final. Pending the outcome of the determination hearing, the dog must be securely confined in a humane manner in a commercial kennel or with a licensed veterinarian or in the animal control facility's shelter. The cost of securing such dog pending the determination hearing shall be borne by the owner or the person having custody or control of the dog. 
(b)  The municipal judge shall determine whether to declare such dog to be a vicious dog under this article based upon evidence, affidavits and testimony presented at the time of the hearing by the owner or person having custody or control of the dog, witnesses, witnesses to any incident which may be germane to such determination, animal control personnel, police or any other person possessing information pertinent to such determination. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall issue a finding within five working days after the determination hearing. The owner or person having custody or control of the dog found to be vicious by this hearing has the right to appeal the decision to a jury trial before the municipal court by giving notice of appeal within five working days of receiving such decision, during which time and until the final decision of such jury hearing, the dog must be securely confined in a humane manner in a commercial kennel or with a licensed veterinarian or in the animal control facility's shelter. Failure to appeal within the time allotted shall result in the jury's finding as final. The municipal judge shall conduct the appeal as an administrative proceeding before six jurors, qualified to act as jurors in the municipal court, and the decision of such jury shall be final. 
(Code 1970, § 4-103; Code 1996, § 90.098; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.099. - Defense to declaration. 
    It is a defense to the determination of a dog as vicious in the prosecution of the owner of a dog: 
(1)  If the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog; 
(2)  If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; 
(3)  If the person was committing or attempting to commit a crime; 
(4)  If the domestic animal killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; 
(5)  If the dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault; 
(6)  If the dog was injured and responding to pain; or 
(7)  If the dog was protecting her puppies, itself or its kennelmates. 
(Code 1970, § 4-104; Code 1996, § 90.099; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.100. - Requirements of vicious dog owners. 
(a)  An owner of a dog declared to be a vicious dog under this article must comply with the following within 30 days of such final determination; compliance with the requirements will be determined by the police department: 
(1)  The dog must be licensed in accordance with this chapter; 
(2)  The vicious dog shall at all times wear a collar marked with a fluorescent yellow color visible at 50 feet so that the dog can be identified as a vicious dog; 
(3)  The vicious dog must be kept in a proper enclosure; 
(4)  The owner must present to the city secretary a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time to cover any damages caused by the vicious dog. The insurance shall be kept in effect continuously and shall not be canceled unless the dog is no longer kept by the owner; 
(5)  The vicious dog, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the vicious dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal; and the vicious dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 pounds and not to exceed six feet in length; 
(6)  The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition, the animal control department shall design and produce a uniform vicious dog symbol or decal, understandable by small children which shall be made available at cost to the public. Such symbol or decal must be displayed on or above the sign; 
(7)  The owner shall have the vicious dog tattooed on the inside left rear leg with a vicious dog license number issued by the animal control department; and 
(8)  The vicious dog must be spayed or neutered. 
(b)  If the owner of a dog declared to be vicious under this article is unable or unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed above, the dog shall be euthanized by an animal shelter, animal control agency, licensed veterinarian or the animal control department or removed from the city. A dog declared to be vicious under this article shall not be offered for adoption or sale. 
(Code 1970, § 4-105; Code 1996, § 90.100; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.101. - Notification of change of status. 
    The owner/keeper shall notify the animal control official in writing within 24 hours if a vicious dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal, has attacked a person, has died, or has been sold or given away. If the dog has been sold or given away, the owner/keeper shall provide the animal control officer or his designee with the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the new owner/keeper. The new owner/keeper, if he keeps the dog within the city, must sign a sworn statement that he will comply with all of the requirements of owners of vicious dogs within 30 days of acquiring ownership of the vicious dog. 
(Code 1970, § 4-106; Code 1996, § 90.101; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
Sec. 90.102. - Violations. 
(a)  The owner of a dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury or death to a person or bites a person on public or private property, or which kills a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 10.99. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a vicious dog, without provocation, to kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any domestic animal belonging to or in the possession of any person, or for a vicious dog, without provocation, to attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any person or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting, or otherwise injuring any person while out of the enclosure of the owner, whether or not such vicious dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the vicious dog escaped without fault of the owner. The animal control official is empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious dog in an expeditious and humane manner. In addition, the owner shall be subject to a fine as provided by section 10.99. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for the owner of a vicious dog to: 
(1)  Fail to have the vicious dog licensed in accordance with this article; 
(2)  Have a vicious dog outside the enclosure unless muzzled and restrained by a leash or chain as set out in section 90.100; 
(3)  Fail to have a proper enclosure to confine the vicious dog; 
(4)  Fail to post signs around the premises with clear visible warning signs that there is a vicious dog on the premises; 
(5)  Fail to post signs with an appropriate warning symbol which informs small children of a vicious dog on the premises; 
(6)  Fail to secure and maintain public liability insurance of at least the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time; 
(7)  Fail to collar the vicious dog with a collar marked with a yellow fluorescent color visible at 50 feet; 
(8)  Fail to have the vicious dog's inside left rear leg tattooed with a vicious dog license number issued by the animal control department; 
(9)  Fail to have the vicious dog neutered or spayed; 
(10)  Fail to notify the animal control official of a change of status as set out in section 90.101; or 
(11)  Fail to keep the dog confined at no cost to the city. 
If the owner of the vicious dog is found to be in violation of any of the above, the owner shall be subject to a fine provided by section 10.99. 
(d)  Exemptions. The provisions under this section shall not apply to any law enforcement agency where the dog is being used for law enforcement. 
(e)  A rebuttable presumption shall exist that the owner or keeper acted in a criminally negligent manner with regard to any actions brought under subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 4-107; Code 1996, § 90.102; Ord. No. 1988-7, 5-17-1988) 
CHAPTER 91. - FAIR HOUSING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 301. 

Sec. 91.01. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly, and lawful procedures the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(b)  It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1996, § 91.01; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.02. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
    Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions, and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
    Director means the director of the human relations department or authorized assistant. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act which is unlawful under this chapter. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 
    Marital status means an individual's status as a married, divorced, widowed, or separated person. 
    Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of 18 years. 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
    Physical or mental disability means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Physical or mental impairment means and includes: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory including speech organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or 
(2)  Mental retardation, organic brain mental or psychological disorder, syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    Rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
    Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
(Code 1996, § 91.02; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.03. - Interpretation and effect. 
    This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this chapter, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by Federal Court Interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 91.03; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.04. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 91.08, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status parenthood or age. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(Code 1996, § 91.04; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.05. - Discrimination in housing financing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age of such person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1996, § 91.05; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.06. - Discrimination in providing brokerage service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate broker organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(Code 1996, § 91.06; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.07. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this chapter or has exercised in good faith rights under this chapter, or has enjoyed the benefits of this chapter, or because such individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. 
(Code 1996, § 91.07; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.08. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided that: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time; 
b.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
c.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
d.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
e.  The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein: or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to person of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability and marital status. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 91.08; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.09. - Violations. 
    No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 91.09; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this chapter. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. 
(b)  Complaints generally. 
(1)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the "charging party") may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(2)  The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
(3)  All complaints shall be filed within 180 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent") who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(4)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(5)  If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  Investigation and conciliation. 
(1)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the provisions of this chapter. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this chapter, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. 
(2)  If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(3)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this chapter. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(4)  Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the city council must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With such recommendation of the director and the referral of the city council, the director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. 
(Code 1996, § 91.10; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
Sec. 91.11. - Complaint procedures. 
    The following are procedural requirements for responding to complaints concerning the quality of services provided by the city: 
(1)  A recipient who has a comment or complaint about the quality of services funded by a block grant administered by the state department of housing and community affairs may submit such comment or complaint in writing to the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor shall transmit a copy of the comment or complaint to the city manager within two calendar days and request a response to the comments or complaints arising under the state community development program. 
(3)  The city manager shall complete the investigation of the comment or complaint and submit the findings, in writing, to the mayor within seven business days after the date the comment or complaint was received, or notify the mayor within such period, of the date the investigation can be completed. 
(4)  The mayor shall notify the complainant of the city's findings before the 15th business day after the date the comment or complaint was received or shall notify the complainant, within such period, of the date the investigation can be completed. 
(5)  The mayor shall notify the complainant of the status of the complaint at least quarterly and until the final disposition of the complaint, unless the notice would jeopardize an undercover investigation. 
(Code 1996, § 91.11; Ord. No. 1995-13, 9-19-1995) 
CHAPTER 92. - FIRE PREVENTION[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Public safety, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341 et seq.; safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 751 et seq.; home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011; appointment of fire protection, personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.032; fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 791 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 92.01. - Arson reward. 
(a)  The city hereby offers a reward of $250.00 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to properly prepare placards eight inches by 12 inches in size showing the above arson reward and placing them in at least six different public buildings. 
(Code 1970, §§ 8-8, 8-9; Code 1996, § 92.01; Ord. No. 418, 8-7-1962; Ord. No. 1989-14, 9-19-1989) 
State Law reference- Crime of arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; crime stoppers, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414. 
Sec. 92.02. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city as defined in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001(5). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale, within the city any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the sale of any such article by wholesalers to each other or to the sale of any such article at wholesale to merchants conducting business entirely without the city, or to the sale by wholesalers for private or public demonstration as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes, or other signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies, or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application made and permit issued by the fire marshal for such demonstration. The permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the fire marshal after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(Code 1970, §§ 8-11-8-13; Code 1996, § 92.02; Ord. No. 229, 9-6-1950; Ord. No. 304, 10-1-1954) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; state law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fireworks use, displays and regulations, 28 Tex. Admin. Code § 34.801 et seq. 
Sec. 92.03. - Burning of brush and debris. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn brush, debris, or trash within the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 92.03; Ord. No. 1994-01, 2-1-1994) 
Sec. 92.04. - Burning of wood for outdoor cooking. 
    It shall be allowed to burn wood in an open fire for the production of charcoal for outdoor cooking except within the fire district. Within the fire district, production of charcoal for outdoor cooking must be done in a fire box approved by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1996, § 92.04; Ord. No. 1994-01, 2-1-1994) 
Sec. 92.05. - Keeping dangerous premises or appliances. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same where, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of stoves, ranges, or furnaces or other heating apparatus of any kind, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or with storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such buildings, structures or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  No prosecution shall be brought under subsection (a) or (b) of this section until the order provided for in section 92.70(b) is given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with same. 
(d)  Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in this section shall be a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1970, §§ 8-33, 8-35, 8-36; Code 1996, § 92.05; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 92.15. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion a code known as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council save and except such portions that may be in conflict with this Code of Ordinances or such portions that be hereafter modified. 
(Code 1970, § 8-1; Code 1996, § 92.15; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967; Ord. No. 1997-09, 10-21-1997; Ord. No. 2000-03, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 92.16. - Enforcing officer. 
    The fire prevention code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1970, § 8-2; Code 1996, § 92.16; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 92.17. - Definitions. 
    Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean this city. Wherever the term "fire marshal" is used in the fire prevention code, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal of this city, or his duly authorized assistants. 
(Code 1970, § 8-3; Code 1996, § 92.17; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 92.18. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1970, § 8-4; Code 1996, § 92.18; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 92.19. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1970, § 8-6; Code 1996, § 92.19; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967) 
Sec. 92.20. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 10.99. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1970, § 8-5; Code 1996, § 92.20; Ord. No. 1034, 7-11-1967) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 92.65. - Fire marshal. 
    The office of fire marshal is created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments; the fire marshal shall report directly to the city manager. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office, and shall be removed only for cause. He shall receive such salary as fixed by the council. 
(Code 1970, § 8-25; Code 1996, § 92.65; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916; Ord. No. 1973-4, 4-17-1973) 
Sec. 92.66. - Investigations. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall investigate cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. 
(b)  The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1970, §§ 8-26, 8-27; Code 1996, § 92.66; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
Sec. 92.67. - Subpoena power. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1970, § 8-28; Code 1996, § 92.67; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
Sec. 92.68. - Contempt by witness. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contempt during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of the investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1970, § 8-29; Code 1996, § 92.68; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
Sec. 92.69. - Private hearing. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1970, § 8-30; Code 1996, § 92.69; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
Sec. 92.70. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this chapter, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(b)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, quarterly, or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises; provided, however, if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days, appeal to the council, which shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by its authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1970, §§ 8-31, 8-32; Code 1996, § 92.70; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916) 
Sec. 92.71. - Insurance reports. 
    All insurance fire underwriters or their agents in the city shall file with the fire marshal a statement showing all insurance in force in the city showing name of party for which insurance is written, what the policy covers, and amount and term of policy, and thereafter they shall file with the fire marshal a weekly report showing all insurance written during the week, the report to be filed on Monday reporting all business for previous week. 
(Code 1970, § 8-37; Code 1996, § 92.71; Ord. No. 11, 4-19-1916; Ord. No. 65, 6-11-1925) 
CHAPTER 93. - HEALTH AND SANITATION[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Health and safety generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 1 et seq.; health and the safety of food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 431 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 93.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
    Carrion means the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish. 
    Filth means any matter in a putrescent state. 
    Impure or unwholesome matter means any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, objection or object which is or should be objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
    Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means any matter, condition or object which is or should be objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
    Refuse means a heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used up, broken, rejected or worthless materials. 
    Rubbish means trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials and other miscellaneous, useless waste or rejected matter. 
    Weeds means uncultivated vegetation, including, but not limited to, grasses of a height in excess of 12 inches. 
(Code 1970, § 11-1; Code 1996, § 93.01; Ord. No. 2000-5, 6-9-2000) 
Sec. 93.02. - Permitting or allowing objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter on real property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, filth, carrion, weeds, rubbish, brush and refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or sweep any of the above prohibited matter into, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way or vacant lot, or upon any public or private premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 11-2; Code 1996, § 93.02; Ord. No. 1988-1, 1-19-1988) 
Sec. 93.03. - Growth of weeds, brush or vegetation regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit weeds, brush or any objectionable or unsightly vegetation to grow to a greater height than 12 inches within 150 feet of any property line which abuts street rights-of-way, alleys, utility easements or other structures. 
(Code 1970, § 11-3; Code 1996, § 93.03; Ord. No. 2000-5, 6-6-2000) 
Sec. 93.04. - Duty of owner to maintain property. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, referred to in sections 93.02 and 93.03, to remove, drain and/or fill all prohibited matter or conditions and to cut and remove all weeds, brush and other objectionable or unsightly vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with sections 93.02 and 93.03 and to use every precaution to prevent the same from occurring or growing on such premises. 
(Code 1970, § 11-4; Code 1996, § 93.04; Ord. No. 1988-1, 1-19-1988) 
Sec. 93.05. - Notice to owner; abatement by city. 
(a)  Should any owner of such lot or lots that have places thereon where stagnant water may accumulate and/or which are not properly drained, or the owner of any premises or building upon which carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter have been allowed to accumulate, fail and/or refuse to drain and/or fill the lot or lots, or remove such filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter, as the case may be, within ten days after notice to such owner to do so, then, in such event, the city may perform such work or cause same to be done; and the costs or expense thereof shall be assessed against the owner of such lot or lots. 
(b)  Should any owner of any lot or lots within the city allowing weeds over 12 inches in height, rubbish, brush or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to grow or accumulate thereon, fail and/or refuse to cut down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, brush or other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter, as the case may be, within ten days after notice to such owner to do so, then in such event, the city may perform such work or cause the same to be done with a lien being placed on said property. 
(c)  Should the city perform the services required under the provisions of this section, the fee to be charged to the owner of such lot or lots is set at the rate as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time; provided, however, that the minimum charge to be assessed shall be $75.00. 
(d)  The notice to the owner, required to be given under this article, shall be in writing and delivered to the owner of such lot or lots by: 
(1)  Personal service; 
(2)  Depositing same in the postal office of the United States mail, postage prepaid; delivery to the addressee shall be presumed upon such deposit; or 
(3)  Publication one time in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Code 1970, §§ 11-5, 11-6; Code 1996, § 93.05; Ord. No. 1988-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 2012-01, 5-15-2012) 
Sec. 93.06. - City to have privileged lien. 
    The city secretary shall file a statement of such expenses incurred under section 93.05, as the case may be, by giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made with the county clerk; and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or lots or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements; and the amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement was filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city; and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvements. 
(Code 1970, § 11-7; Code 1996, § 93.06; Ord. No. 1988-1, 1-19-1988) 
Sec. 93.07. - Weeds to be cut every 30 days. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the cutting and removal of weeds from any lot or parcel of land at least once every 30 days shall be deemed compliance with this article. 
(Code 1970, § 11-8; Code 1996, § 93.07; Ord. No. 1988-1, 1-19-1988; Ord. No. 2012-01, 5-15-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITOES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Mosquito control on uninhabited residential property, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.019; public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 343.011. 

Sec. 93.20. - Water accumulations prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any premises in the city or the agent of the owner, if the owner is a nonresident or absent from the city, to cause, suffer or permit any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed on such premises, unless such collection of water is treated in the manner prescribed by the health officer so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, and any such collection of water so unlawfully maintained is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  The collections of water to be considered as coming within the terms of this article are those which are contained or may hereafter be contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, basements, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, boxes, bottles, tubes, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, automobile tires, and other similar water containers. 
(Code 1970, §§ 11-35; Code 1996, § 93.20, 11-36; Ord. No. 63, 6-1-1925) 
Sec. 93.21. - Preventive measures. 
    The method of treatment of any such collection of water for the purpose of preventing the breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer, and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch one way, or any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(3)  Using an approved larvicide. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth, and other obstruction, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish; absence of half-grown mosquito larvae to be evidence of compliance with the measure. 
(6)  Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(7)  Proper disposal of tin cans, boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Code 1970, § 11-37; Code 1996, § 93.21; Ord. No. 63, 6-1-1925) 
Sec. 93.22. - Failure to remedy after notice. 
    If any person responsible under the terms of this article for the existence of any condition which gives rise to mosquito breeding refuses to take all necessary measures directed by the health officer to prevent the same in accordance with the terms hereof within 24 hours after notice in writing from the health officer to do so, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 10.99, and each day's failure or refusal to remedy such condition after the expiration of the time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1970, § 11-38; Code 1996, § 93.22; Ord. No. 63, 6-1-1925) 
Sec. 93.23. - Enforcement. 
    The health officer and those working directly under his supervision shall enforce the provisions of this article and for this purpose may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 11-39; Code 1996, § 93.23; Ord. No. 63, 6-1-1925) 
CHAPTER 94. - JUNKED VEHICLES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683. 

Sec. 94.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles, who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a "motor vehicle" as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071. 
(2)  The term "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
a.  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
1.  An unexpired license plate; or 
2.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
b.  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Code 1970, § 15-80; Code 1996, § 94.01; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 2010-01, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 94.02. - Junked vehicles declared to be public nuisance. 
(a)  Findings and statements of fact. A junked vehicle that is left in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the state, city and the public by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Unlawful to maintain public nuisance. A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance, as determined in this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 15-81; Code 1996, § 94.02; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 94.03. - Procedures for abatement of nuisance. 
    The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be followed for the removal of junked vehicles from either public or private property by the enforcement officials: 
(1)  Violation; filing of complaint. Whenever an enforcement officer determines there is a violation under this chapter, he shall file a complaint with the judge of the municipal court, who is hereby designated as the hearing officer by the city council. The complaint shall describe the junked vehicle or part of the junked vehicle with as much certainty as possible, giving the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if such information is available, and its location. If such information is not available to the enforcement officer, he may apply to the municipal court judge for an order to the owner or occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located to examine the vehicle and obtain such information or the part of such information that is available. 
(2)  Notice. The municipal court judge shall cause to be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested, a written notice stating the nature of the nuisance and that the matter will be heard, if requested, at a public hearing before the hearing officer on a date certain which shall be not less than ten days from the date such notice is mailed. Such notice shall be mailed, as herein provided, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, any lienholder of record, the owner or occupant of the public or private premises on which such public nuisance exists and the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way in which the public nuisance exists, if such vehicle is located in a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Public hearing required. If a hearing is requested by a person entitled to a notice, the hearing shall be public and shall be held prior to the removal of the vehicle or part of a vehicle by official action of the enforcement officials. If no hearing is requested, the municipal court judge shall hold a public hearing on the date stated in the notice. The judge may continue the hearing from time to time. 
(4)  Evidence; determination; order for removal. The junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. The municipal court judge shall hear evidence relating to the junked vehicle or part of a vehicle in question from any of the persons entitled to notice under this chapter, from the enforcement officer and from other interested persons. The junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. The municipal court judge shall make a determination whether there is a junked vehicle creating a public nuisance and shall issue an order to abate any such public nuisance determined to exist. Any order of the municipal court judge requiring the removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if such information is available. The order of removal shall specify that the vehicle shall be removed not less than ten days from the date of receipt or, if the notice is returned undelivered, not less than ten days after such return. 
(5)  Removal or disposal by authorized person. Upon the order of the municipal court judge, if the nuisance is not abated and removed and no hearing before the court is requested within the period provided for herein, the removal and disposal shall be accomplished by such person as may by such order be authorized to act. 
(6)  Manner of disposal. Disposal of a junked vehicle or vehicle part shall be by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or other suitable site operated by a commercial concern, as necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, provided that any such disposal shall be for scrap or salvage only. 
(7)  Relocation of junked vehicle. The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in territorial limits of the city after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(8)  Provisions cumulative. The procedures and provisions of this section are cumulative of the remedies otherwise available for the violation of the codes and ordinances of the city, and nothing herein is intended to prohibit the prosecution of such violations as misdemeanor offenses. 
(Code 1970, § 15-82; Code 1996, § 94.03; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 2010-01, 2-16-2010) 
Sec. 94.04. - Vehicles not to be reconstructed. 
    Vehicles seized under the provisions of this chapter shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Permanent disposal of junked vehicles or parts thereof by the city shall conform to this provision. 
(Code 1970, § 15-83; Code 1996, § 94.04; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 94.05. - Notice to state highway department. 
    Notice shall be given to the state highway department by the police department, or other employees designated by the city manager, within five days after the removal of any junked vehicle. The notice shall identify the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 15-84; Code 1996, § 94.05; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 94.06. - Affirmative defense to action. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to action under this chapter that the vehicle or part thereof upon which such action is based: 
(1)  Is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  Is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or 
(3)  Is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 1970, § 15-85; Code 1996, § 94.06; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 94.07. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police department or other regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city that may be designated from time to time by the city manager. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter and the enforcement thereof are declared to be a function of the police power of the city; and the persons authorized under this chapter to enforce the provisions hereof are authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance under the terms of this chapter. The municipal court is hereby authorized and shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this chapter. 
(c)  The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized to issue all orders necessary to enforce the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 15-82; Code 1996, §§ 94.07, 15-86, 15-87; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
Sec. 94.08. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 10.99. On conviction, the court shall order the removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1970, § 15-81; Code 1996, § 94.08; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-18-1987) 
CHAPTER 95. - PARKS AND RECREATION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 331 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 95.01. - Damaging or abusing property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, over or along any roadway in any of the public grounds of the city, which includes all grounds and parks owned by the city, any heavy vehicle for carrying merchandise, or vehicle heavily loaded or otherwise reasonably calculated to injure or deface such roadways or to make their maintenance more expensive; or drive or cause to be driven any vehicle or conveyance of any kind, or drive, or cause to be ridden any animal of any kind over, across, or along any of the footpaths or walks in such grounds or on the turf of such grounds or at any place therein, except on and along the roadways; or cause or permit any horse not being driven to some vehicle or ridden, or any cow, sheep, goat, hog or other animal reasonably calculated to injure the grounds or anything pertaining thereto to go into or remain in any portion of the grounds; or cut, pull, break, bruise, remove, or in anywise injure any tree, or shrub or vegetation of any kind growing thereon; or disturb any birds' nests or eggs; or in anywise injure, deface or in any way interfere with any barbecue pit, chair, bench, seat or hydrant, frame, fence, gate, or structure of any kind therein or thereon or connected therewith; or wash or bathe in or in any way pollute the waters of any lake or pond, or stream therein; or obscenely or indecently expose any part of his person, or do any indecent act thereon. 
(Code 1970, § 17-1; Code 1996, § 95.01; Ord. No. 334, 2-7-1956) 
State Law reference- Criminal mischief, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.03. 
ARTICLE II. - ROB AND BESSIE WELDER PARK 

Sec. 95.10. - Hours park is closed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in Bessie and Rob Welder Park after sunset and before sunrise. This section shall not apply to employees, agents, licensees, and permittees of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 17-22; Code 1996, § 95.10; Ord. No. 366, 9-9-1957; Ord. No. 2003-04, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 95.11. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage within or upon the confines of property within Circle Drive in the Rob and Bessie Welder Park, except that it shall be lawful to possess and consume any alcoholic beverage within the confines of the Lazy V and its fenced-in areas. The term "alcoholic beverage" means alcohol and any beverage containing more than 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
(Code 1970, § 17-23; Code 1996, § 95.11; Ord. No. 333, 2-7-1956; Ord. No. 2006-01, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 95.12. - Reservations. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The fees and deposits as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid in full to the city and a receipt issued before any facility at Rob and Bessie Welder Park shall be deemed reserved. 
(2)  Money received for a reservation of facilities shall not be refunded except under the following conditions: 
a.  Where adverse weather conditions prevent the person or group which has reserved a facility from holding its event or functions on the reserved date and where another alternative date cannot be suitably arranged. 
b.  Where, for any reason, the city is unable to provide the facility on the reserved date to the person or group holding the reservation. The city manager is authorized to determine when such refunds are in order and may make such refunds without prior approval of the council. 
(3)  The city council shall have the authority to waive any fees herein prescribed for any facility where an event is sponsored by the city or for any other event or function in the public interest. 
(4)  The city manager or the park manager shall have the authority to demand a property deposit from any person or group where the city manager or the park manager shall have reason to believe that such reservation will result in damages to the park facilities. 
(5)  The city manager or the park manager shall have the authority to refuse to accept reservations from any person or group where they have reason to believe that such engagement will result in violation of the laws of the state or the city. 
(b)  The Lazy "V" Building rates. 
(1)  The Lazy "V" Building may be reserved for use by any person or group of private or public functions at a day rate from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  It may also be reserved Monday through Thursday for a minimum of three hours for a meeting, etc., for a fee. Any additional hours will be charged at an hourly rate. There shall be no partial hour charges. Any time over the three hours will be charged for the next full hour. This rental will require the same deposit as the daily rentals. 
(3)  A deposit will be required, which will be returned if no damage is found and the key is returned to city hall. If any person or group has a past history of causing damage, then the city manager has the authority to increase the deposit as he sees fit or can deny them rental. 
(4)  A portion of all rates are to be placed in a separate amount for maintenance, replacement and rehabilitation of equipment and/or building. 
(c)  Barbeque pit and table fees. 
(1)  Barbecue pit no. 1 may be reserved for use by any person or groups for private or public functions, Monday through Thursday at an hourly rate, payable in advance. 
(2)  A deposit will be required, which will be returned if no damage is found and the key is returned to city hall. If any person or group has a past history of causing damage, then the city manager has the authority to increase the deposit as he sees fit or deny them rental. 
(3)  A portion of all rates are to be placed in a separate amount for maintenance, replacement and rehabilitation of equipment and/or building. 
(Code 1970, §§ 17-24-17-26; Code 1996, § 95.12; Ord. No. 1125, 5-21-1968; Ord. No. 1992-7, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 1997-05, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1998-02, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 2000-09, 12-5-2000; Ord. No. 2003-01, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2004-05, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 2011-05, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2011-05-A, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 95.13. - Unauthorized persons or vehicles. 
(a)  Hours. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person or vehicle to be on or in any portion of the Rob and Bessie Welder Park after sunset and before sunrise. Nothing in this section shall preclude the opening of the park or any area thereof by the city council or the city manager for special events at hours other than those set out herein. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized person or vehicle means any city employee on city business or vehicle belonging to the city while on city business, the city park caretaker and the personal car of the park caretaker, any employee of or vehicle belonging to the Sinton Municipal Golf Association while on business of the association, persons caring for livestock and other animals or property at the rodeo-arena and their vehicles during the time designated for a rodeo or other similar exhibits, those persons camping in the overnight camping area of the park, or any person authorized by the city council or the city manager to be in the park during the hours of the curfew. The Sinton Municipal Golf Course is specifically included in and is a part of the Rob and Bessie Welder Park, as well as all other areas of the park. 
(c)  Unlawful to encourage or assist a violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage or assist any person to act in violation of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 17-27; Code 1996, § 95.13; Ord. No. 1979-4, 3-6-1979; Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 95.14. - Dry Trap Lake. 
(a)  Lake named. The lake located in the southwest corner of the Rob and Bessie Welder Park is hereby named Dry Trap Lake, and shall hereafter be known as Dry Trap Lake for all purposes. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bathing, swimming, or wading means any entry of a person into the waters of the lake, except as hereinafter specifically provided. 
    Fish means all species of fish designated by the laws of the state to be game fish. 
    Grounds means all of the land owned by the city under, adjacent to and surrounding Dry Trap Lake. 
    Power boats means all boats and craft propelled by motor, sail, and otherwise, except such boats and craft as may be propelled by paddle, oar or other manually operated device. 
    Water skiing means the towing of a person upon skis, surfboard or other device by means of a power boat or other apparatus upon the waters of the lake. 
(c)  Swimming prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, swim or wade in the waters of Dry Trap Lake, except that persons may make necessary entry into such waters to launch or remove any authorized boat or craft. 
(d)  Water skiing prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to water ski in or upon the waters of Dry Trap Lake. 
(e)  Life preservers required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, propel or operate, on or in the waters of Dry Trap Lake, any authorized boat or other craft, unless the same is equipped with and carrying life preservers of approved type equal in number to the full capacity in persons of such boat or other craft. 
(f)  Unsanitary conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, cause to fall upon, or willfully leave any fish, fowl, flesh, fruit, vegetable, fecal, or other organic matter subject to decay, in the waters or upon the grounds of Dry Trap Lake, and it shall be unlawful for any person using the waters of said lake, to in any way pollute or create any unsanitary condition in or about the grounds or waters of the lake, and all persons using the waters for fishing, or for any other purpose, shall do nothing to render unfit and unwholesome the waters of the lake, and shall strictly comply with all sanitary rules and regulations that now exist or may hereafter be promulgated by the state or the city. 
(g)  Hunting; possessing weapons. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt any animal, bird or fowl upon the waters or grounds of Dry Trap Lake, and it shall be unlawful for any person to have any gun, pistol, rifle, shotgun, firearm or any other weapon, used in hunting, about his person or in his possession while upon the waters or grounds of Dry Trap Lake. 
(h)  Taking water. It shall be unlawful for any person to take, possess or use any water from Dry Trap Lake, except with the written consent of the city council. 
(i)  Fishing restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Take, catch, retain or possess in any way or manner, any fish of whatsoever kind or species, from the waters of Dry Trap Lake, owned by the city, for the purpose of sale or barter for any money or thing of value; or to sell or offer for sale, any fish taken or caught from the waters thereof. 
(2)  Take, entrap, ensnare or catch any kind or species of fish in the waters of Dry Trap Lake or minnows therefrom by means of nets, seines, traps, poison, dynamite or in any other manner than with the ordinary hook and line or rod and reel, with live or artificial bait. 
(3)  Have or use any seine, dragnet, trap, trotline or other device of any size or kind in the waters of Dry Trap Lake, or take any such seines, nets, traps, trotlines or devices into the waters of the lake, or have the same in his possession in or on the waters of Dry Trap Lake at any time. 
(4)  Use any kind of fishing bait except live bait or artificial bait or use carp minnows as bait in Dry Trap Lake. 
(j)  State fish protection laws. This section shall be cumulative of all general and special laws of the state relating to the protection of fish and fish life. 
(k)  Boats and watercraft. It shall be lawful for the owner, or any other person with the consent of the owner, to propel, use or operate any rowboat, canoe, or any other craft, which is propelled by oars, paddles or other manually operated device, in or upon the waters of Dry Trap Lake for fishing or any other purpose not prohibited in this section so long as the user or operator complies with subsection (e) of this section, but it shall be unlawful for any person to leave a boat or craft unattended overnight in Dry Trap Lake. 
(Code 1970, §§ 17-32, 17-35-17-43; Code 1996, § 95.14; Ord. No. 359, 6-4-1957) 
Sec. 95.15. - General Rules and Standards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to burn any material (excepting material burned for a cooking fire confined to a barbecue pit or grill) in Rob and Bessie Welder Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or travel on or in an off-road vehicle in Rob and Bessie Welder Park. Off-road vehicle is defined as any motor vehicle (excepting a golf cart) not licensed by the state for highway travel. 
(c)  Park facilities are available on a first-come first-served basis. Do not rope, tape or self-reserve any structure. 
(d)  Littering, dumping of refuse, or emptying wastewater is prohibited in areas other than the appropriate receptacles provided. 
(e)  All glass containers are prohibited. 
(f)  Dogs must be kept on a leash at all times. Persons responsible for pets are required to immediately clean up after the animal. 
(g)  Motorized vehicles and devices (including motorcycles, ATVs, etc.) are prohibited on sidewalks, and grass areas. Use or parking of commercial or freight carrying vehicles on park roads or parking lots is also prohibited. 
(h)  Sale of merchandise, food and beverages, or conducting any type of business or special event is prohibited, except as allowed by permit. 
(i)  Swimming and boating are prohibited in any body of water. 
(j)  Overnight camping is prohibited. 
(k)  Failure to observe posted signs in parks is prohibited. The maximum speed limit for vehicles, bicycles, etc., on park roads is five miles per hour. 
(l)  You will be asked to leave, escorted out, or arrested if park rules or other laws are not followed. 
(m)  Report rules violations to 361-364-2211. If you witness illegal activity immediately call 911. 
(Code 1996, § 95.15; Ord. No. 2003-04, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 2016-03 , 5-17-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - SPECK EAKIN MEMORIAL PARK 

Sec. 95.25. - Area defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, Speck Eakin Memorial Park shall include that land dedicated as a public park located in Block 65 of the original town site and Blocks 25 and 26 of the George H. Paul Addition in the city. Such park area shall also include the designated parking area located adjacent to First Street. 
(Code 1970, § 17-55; Code 1996, § 95.25; Ord. No. 1978-4, 8-1-1978) 
Sec. 95.26. - Hours park is closed. 
    It shall be unlawful, after the effective date of this article, for any person to be in Speck Eakin Memorial Park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This section shall not apply to employees, agents, licensees and permittees of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 17-56; Code 1996, § 95.26; Ord. No. 1978-4, 8-1-1978) 
Sec. 95.27. - Glass containers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful, after the effective date of this article, for any person to consume any beverage, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, in a glass container within the limits of Speck Eakin Memorial Park. 
(Code 1970, § 17-58; Code 1996, § 95.27; Ord. No. 1978-4, 8-1-1978) 
Sec. 95.28. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages, except in the area immediately surrounding the picnic tables and within the pavilion. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in any other area of the park shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 17-58; Code 1996, § 95.28; Ord. No. 1978-4, 8-1-1978) 
CHAPTER 96. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; consent of governing body required for utility use of streets and ways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175; public buildings and grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 281 et seq.; parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 96.001. - Sidewalk area to be left open. 
    Six feet contiguous to the street on all residence lots abutting on any street in the city and ten feet contiguous to the street on all business lots abutting on any street in the city shall be set apart and left unobstructed for sidewalk purposes. 
(Code 1970, § 20-1; Code 1996, § 96.001; Ord. No. 15, 7-15-1916) 
Sec. 96.002. - Reserved. 
Sec. 96.003. - Designation of streets and avenues. 
    All arteries in the city are designated as follows: 
(1)  Those running north and south shall be designated as avenues; and 
(2)  Those running east and west shall be designated as streets. 
(Code 1970, § 20-6; Code 1996, § 96.003; Ord. No. 1972-9, 7-11-1972) 
Sec. 96.004. - Placing material in street prohibited. 
    The placing of kitchen garbage, trash, rubbish or any such article, thing or material, in any street or alley within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1970, § 20-7; Code 1996, § 96.004; Ord. No. 1980-11, 11-6-1980) 
Sec. 96.005. - Use of sidewalk for display and sale of merchandise. 
    Businesses in the commercial area within the city shall be allowed to use an area of its sidewalks, contiguous with its storefront, for the display and sale of merchandise, subject to maintaining a minimum of five feet of unobstructed sidewalk, adjacent to the curb. 
(Code 1996, § 96.005; Ord. No. 2014-03, 7-15-2014) 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 96.020. - Supervision of work by city. 
    Supervision over all sidewalk, curb, curb and gutter construction shall be by the city council or duly designated officer of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-17; Code 1996, § 96.020; Ord. No. 84, 8-17-1928) 
Sec. 96.021. - Contractor or foreman to supervise. 
    The contractor shall give his personal attention to the work, and during his absence shall maintain a competent foreman at the work to whom directions or notices may be given. The notices or directions shall be as binding as if given to the contractor. 
(Code 1970, § 20-18; Code 1996, § 96.021; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.022. - Notice to owner to construct sidewalks. 
    In case sidewalks are to be constructed along any of the streets, the city shall notify the owners of all the abutting or adjacent property on such street in writing, to construct such sidewalk. The notice shall state the kind of sidewalk required to be constructed, together with the approximate location and grade, and the name of the street along which the sidewalk is ordered to be built, and the number of the lots or blocks, or both, belonging to the persons along which they are required to construct the sidewalks. The notice hereby required may be served by delivering the same to the owner of the property, or by leaving the same with any member of the family of such person who is over 14 years of age, or by leaving such notice at the owner's place of business, with any agent or clerk of such person during business hours. If the owner of such property is not a resident of the city, service may be made as above provided on his agent or attorney, or by mailing such notice to the owner's address, postage being prepaid. 
(Code 1970, § 20-19; Code 1996, § 96.022; Ord. No. 84, 8-17-1928) 
Sec. 96.023. - Sidewalk construction by city. 
    Should any person owning any property abutting or adjacent to any street along which any sidewalk shall be required to be constructed, fail or refuse to construct any such sidewalks in front of, or adjacent to his property in the manner required herein, and as directed by the city, within 20 days after notice as herein provided, the city council shall proceed to have the sidewalk constructed, and the cost of constructing the same shall be charged against such owner, and the cost of construction of such sidewalk shall constitute a lien upon the property contiguous or adjacent to the sidewalk. The cost of construction of such sidewalks adjacent to such property, together with the legal interest and the costs of collection, shall constitute a personal claim against such property owner, and be secured by a lien on such property superior to all other liens, claims or titles, except lawful taxes, and such liability and lien may be enforced against such owner by suit in any court having competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1970, § 20-20; Code 1996, § 96.023; Ord. No. 84, 8-17-1928) 
Sec. 96.024. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  The construction of all sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be in accordance with the plans, specifications, grades, profiles, cross sections, lines and levels on file in the office of the city secretary, or as prescribed by the council from time to time; provided, slight deviations may be made by order of the city council in instances where it is shown to be necessary and to the best interest to both the individual and the public, permission for such alteration to be given in writing. 
(b)  The specifications and drawings are intended to be cooperative and to call for a finished piece of work, notwithstanding everything necessary is not specifically mentioned or shown on the drawings. The contractor is not to avail himself of any manifestly unintentional error or omission should such exist. Items shown on drawings together with accompanying notes and dimensions, if any, but not mentioned in the specifications, or conversely, items in the specifications not illustrated by the drawings, are to be supplied as if both were specifically mentioned and shown on the drawings. 
(c)  The city council or duly designated city official shall at all times have the power to interpret all plans, profiles and specifications on any indefinite issue or when the specifications and plans do not correspond. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20-21-20-23; Code 1996, § 96.024; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918; Ord. No. 84, 8-17-1928; Ord. No. 84B, 9-6-1928) 
Sec. 96.025. - Workmanship. 
    The work under this article shall in every respect be executed in a thorough and workmanlike manner, in the fulfillment of the intent of these specifications and to the satisfaction of the authorities of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-24; Code 1996, § 96.025; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.026. - Placing and preserving stakes. 
    The contractor performing construction under this article shall preserve all stakes set for the lines, levels or measurements of the work in their proper places until authorized to remove them by the proper authorities; and any expense incurred in replacing the stakes, which the contractor or his subordinates may have failed to preserve, shall be borne by the contractor. 
(Code 1970, § 20-25; Code 1996, § 96.026; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.027. - Barricades and danger signals. 
    The contractor shall be required to erect barricades and display such danger signals at all times as shall be a proper guard to the public, and he shall be held responsible for all accidents of any description resulting from his negligence in this respect. 
(Code 1970, § 20-26; Code 1996, § 96.027; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.028. - Loss or damage from obstructions. 
    All loss or damage arising from any unforeseen obstruction or difficulties which may be encountered in the prosecution of the work under this article or from any action of the elements, from malicious mischief, or from any other cause, shall be sustained by the contractor. 
(Code 1970, § 20-27; Code 1996, § 96.028; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.029. - Moving utility or franchise owner's equipment. 
    In case it shall be necessary to move the property of any owner of a public utility or franchise, such owner or his representative will, upon proper application by the contractor, be notified to remove such property within a reasonable time, and the contractor shall not interfere with the property until after expiration of the time specified. The right is reserved to the owner of public utilities or franchises to enter upon the work for the purpose of making repairs or changes of their property that may be necessary. 
(Code 1970, § 20-28; Code 1996, § 96.029; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.030. - Right of entry of city. 
    The city shall have the right to enter upon the work for the purpose of making connections for water or sewerage or other necessary operation. 
(Code 1970, § 20-29; Code 1996, § 96.030) 
Sec. 96.031. - Inconvenience to public. 
    The contractor shall not obstruct private driveways or the approaches or dig up or occupy the street more than is necessary for the prosecution of the work, special care being taken to inconvenience the public as little as reasonably possible. 
(Code 1970, § 20-30; Code 1996, § 96.031) 
Sec. 96.032. - Removal of materials. 
    The contractor shall remove all surplus material and rubbish from the work after its completion. The contractor shall not at any time occupy more than one-half the width of the street. 
(Code 1970, § 20-31; Code 1996, § 96.032; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.033. - Misconduct of contractor's employees. 
    Any foreman, superintendent, laborer or any other person employed on the work by the contractor, who shall perform his work in a manner contrary to the specifications, or otherwise misconduct himself, shall be discharged and such a person shall not again be employed on the work without the consent of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-32; Code 1996, § 96.033; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.034. - Inspection and approval; correction of defects. 
    The city shall have power to inspect and approve all work before it shall be paid for. At any time during the progress of the work that the city officer deems same to be unsatisfactory and not in accordance with the intent of the plans and specifications, he shall have the power to stop such work until such defects are remedied. No work which may be defective in its construction or deficient in any of the requirements of the specifications will be considered as accepted in consequence of any officer of the city or inspector connected with the work failing to point out the defects or deficiencies during construction. The contractor shall correct any imperfect work whenever discovered. In all cases, the price named in the contract shall include all labor, tools, material and items of every description in such work. 
(Code 1970, § 20-33; Code 1996, § 96.034; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
Sec. 96.035. - Condemnation and destruction of defective construction. 
    In addition to the penalty prescribed for any other violation of this Code of Ordinances, all construction work herein enumerated not done in accordance with the plans and specifications and approved modifications thereof, shall be condemned by the council or under its direction, and destroyed by the city at the expense of the contractor or person responsible for the failure to comply with such plans and specifications. 
(Code 1970, § 20-34; Code 1996, § 96.035; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918; Ord. No. 28, 1-9-1918) 
Sec. 96.036. - Trees; permission to disturb. 
    Trees shall not be injured, cut down or otherwise disturbed without permission. 
(Code 1970, § 20-35; Code 1996, § 96.036; Ord. No. 26, 1-2-1918) 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 96.050. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, plow, blast, or make cuts, openings or excavations for any purpose in or under any street or alley within the city without first having made application and obtained a permit from the city. The permit fee shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 20-41; Code 1996, § 96.050; Ord. No. 310, 10-7-1954) 
Sec. 96.051. - Application and contents; scope. 
    The application for a permit required herein shall be addressed to the city, stating the extent, character and purpose of the cut, opening or excavation to be made, the exact place the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be completed. Such permit, if issued, shall state the facts as set forth in the application and the time in which the work is to be done and the permit shall be valid only for the work described, and within the time limit set forth, in the permit. 
(Code 1970, § 20-42; Code 1996, § 96.051; Ord. No. 310, 10-7-1954) 
Sec. 96.052. - Backfilling and refinishing. 
    The city, only, shall backfill the cut, or opening or excavation made if a permit is issued under the terms of this article and it shall be unlawful for any person not under the direction of the city to backfill the cut, opening or excavation made. 
(Code 1970, § 20-43; Code 1996, § 96.052; Ord. No. 310, 10-7-1954) 
Sec. 96.053. - Exception. 
    There is excepted from this article the complete underground crossing of streets which is regulated by § 96.070 through 96.072. 
(Code 1970, § 20-44; Code 1996, § 96.053; Ord. No. 310, 10-7-1954) 
ARTICLE IV. - UNDERGROUND CROSSINGS 

Sec. 96.070. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install any pipe, conduit, cable, tubing, duct, tunnel or other structure that goes across and under any street within the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city, which shall set forth the location and depth of the crossing. The term "crossing" as used herein means the complete traversal of the street from one side to the other. 
(b)  The fee for the permit mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, plus a performance bond, which will be retained by the city. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20-50, 20-51; Code 1996, § 96.070; Ord. No. 308, 10-1-1954; Ord. No. 1997-06, 8-5-1997) 
Sec. 96.071. - Boring. 
    In the event the crossing is under gravel or shell or caliche topped streets, or under what is commonly called an all weather street, the crossing must be done by boring by the permittee under the supervision and direction of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-52; Code 1996, § 96.071; Ord. No. 308, 10-1-1954) 
Sec. 96.072. - Excavating. 
    In the event the crossing is under a dirt street, the crossing may be done by cutting and excavating the street by the permittee, under the supervision and direction of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-53; Code 1996, § 96.072) 
ARTICLE V. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 96.085. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curbline means the boundary of that portion of any street which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Fence means any enclosing barrier, movable or immovable, constructed of wood, metal or any other material, regardless of its use or purpose. 
    Object means every sign, advertisement, container or display item of any type or form, whether movable or immovable, which is not authorized by state law or city ordinance. 
    Plant means any hedge, bush, shrub, vine, palm or other vegetation, except trees. 
    Property line means the boundary line of any street, which line marks the division between the street area and the property abutting upon the same. 
    Street means the entire width of every way or place of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, riders of animals, the drivers of vehicles, etc., while using any street or sidewalk for the purpose of travel. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power. 
(Code 1970, § 20-61; Code 1996, § 96.085; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 96.086. - Obstructions prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any obstruction whatever in any street, alley or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-2; Code 1996, § 96.086; Ord. No. 15, 7-15-1916) 
Sec. 96.087. - Plants, objects or vehicles higher than three feet prohibited near street corners and in sidewalk areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained any plant, object or vehicle having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street, on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the curblines, or pavement at points 25 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines at present lines. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained any plant, object or vehicle having a height greater than three feet above the level of the nearest abutting street on or in that area which lies between the property lines of any corner lot and the curblines or pavement lines of any street in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-62; Code 1996, § 96.087; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 96.088. - Trees near street corners to be trimmed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tree on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of that lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the curblines or pavement lines 25 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines or pavement lines unless all limbs, branches and foliage on the tree are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum clearance of 12 feet above the street level at the nearest curbline or to such clearance as will provide an unobstructed view of traffic signs and controls to oncoming traffic. 
(Code 1970, § 20-63; Code 1996, § 96.088; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982; Ord. No. 1998-5, 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 96.089. - Placing and maintaining objects in sidewalk area so as to prohibit free passage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tree, plant, object or vehicle on or in the area between the property line of any lot and the curbline or pavement line of any street abutting such property line in such a way as to obstruct the free passage on and use of that area by the public. 
(Code 1970, § 20-64; Code 1996, § 96.089; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 96.090. - Minimum clearance of trees in sidewalk areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the city to maintain or permit limbs of trees growing thereon to overhang or grow above the area between his property line and the curbline of any abutting street, unless such limbs and all branches and foliage thereon are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum clearance of 12 feet above the street level at the nearest curbline, or property line or to such clearance as will provide an unobstructed view of traffic signs and controls to oncoming traffic. 
(Code 1970, § 20-65; Code 1996, § 96.090; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982; Ord. No. 1998-6, 7-7-1998) 
Sec. 96.091. - Certain fences prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or replace, or cause to be constructed or replaced, any fence having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the curblines or property lines at points 25 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines; provided this section shall not apply to any fence authorized by law. 
(Code 1970, § 20-66; Code 1996, § 96.091; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 96.092. - Placing obstruction near fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained on any property, any tree, plant or object within 15 feet of any fire hydrant in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-67; Code 1996, § 96.092; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982) 
Sec. 96.093. - Correction of violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause a written notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any property upon which any violation of this section exists to correct such condition as constitutes a violation of this section within ten days after serving such notice; and if such condition is not corrected or remedied by such person by the end of such ten days, the chief of police is authorized and directed to cause a complaint to be issued against such owner or occupant, stating the offense with which he is charged. 
(b)  The chief of police is authorized to remove or cause to be removed any tree, plant or object found between the opposite curblines, in any street in the city, and to trim branches, limbs or foliage of any tree or plant which overhangs or grows above the area which lies between the opposite curblines of any street, so as to provide a minimum clearance of 12 feet above the street level at the curbline and so as to be graduated toward the center level at the center of the street. 
(Code 1970, § 20-68; Code 1996, § 96.093; Ord. No. 1982-7, 7-1-1982; Ord. No. 1998-7, 7-7-1998) 
ARTICLE VI. - STREET NAMES, SIGNS AND HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 96.105. - Street naming. 
(a)  Street names are declared public property. Street names shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  An alphabetized master street name list may be maintained by the commissioners' court and appraisal district. 
(2)  The name of the new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street within the county. 
(3)  The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name even if in different jurisdictions and even though it may change directions. 
(4)  New street names shall be no more than 20 characters in length. 
(5)  Street name abbreviations shall follow the guideline as set by the United States Postal Service. 
(6)  Street prefixes of "N," "E," "S," and "W" indicate direction and are to be used only with streets in two or more of the north, east, south, or west quadrants. 
(7)  Street suffixes "Street," "Road," "Lane," "Boulevard," "Drive," "Parkway," "Avenue," "Place," "Court," "Cove," "Trail," "North," "East," "South," and "West" for new streets shall be used based upon the discretion of the city council. 
(8)  Street suffixes "Circle," "Loop," and "Cul-de-sac," if used in conjunction with the street name, shall be used only for streets which actually form a circle, loop, or cul-de-sac. 
(9)  Streets in new subdivisions shall comply with subsection (a)(1) through (8) of this section. The subdivider/developer shall provide a plat to the cities/county/appraisal/office at a scale of one to 400 with proposed names of streets and house numbers. The house numbering shall be on the basis of one number for every individually buildable lot. The house numbers shall conform to standards in this article. The subdivider shall provide street signs, meeting city specifications at the intersection of all streets. 
(b)  All houses, buildings or addresses shall be numbered from the base line of the street's origin to the terminus of the street, in regular order, the even numbers on the right and the odd numbers on the left of each street. 
(c)  As the blocks progress in distance from the base line, the beginning number shall be raised 100 with each block. 
(Code 1970, § 20-76; Code 1996, § 96.105; Ord. No. 1991-05, 9-3-1991) 
Sec. 96.106. - Street signs. 
    Street signs are declared public property. Street signs shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  Location. Street signs shall be installed at the intersection of all streets and highways and at such other locations as may be determined to be necessary by the director of public works/county road engineer. 
(2)  Plates. Extruded, aluminum, 0.080-inch thickness, six inches high by 24 inches, 30 inches or 36 inches wide as necessary. Thermo-setting acrylic baked enamel green background with reflectorized copy. 
(3)  Copy. Four-inch standard alphabet "B" series. Prefix and suffix abbreviations are two inches alphabet "C" series. Block numbers, which are required in order to indicate address range, must be two inches copy of top of suffix. All copy shall be white in order to contrast with green background. 
(4)  Hardware. Smooth finish, diecast of high strength aluminum alloy number 380 under 400 tons pressure with minimum tensile strength of 45,000 psi. Special sawtooth heat treated plated steel fasteners secure sign blades against removal by vandals, and minimize fatigue, and secure sign blades against resulting from wind vibration. For 2- 3/8 O.D. galvanized tubular sign posts. 
(5)  Height. Street signs shall be erected with a minimum height of seven feet from the level of the near edge of the pavement to the bottom of the sign. If, however, a traffic-control sign is mounted below a street sign, the bottom of the street sign shall be at least nine feet and the bottom of the traffic control sign at least six feet above the level of the pavement edge. 
(Code 1970, § 20-77; Code 1996, § 96.106; Ord. No. 1991-05, 9-3-1991) 
Sec. 96.107. - House/address numbering. 
    House numbers are declared public property. Assigned house numbers shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  The appraisal district shall assign the proper number for houses upon application. 
(2)  A complete, current record of the numbering of all houses, buildings, and addresses shall be maintained at the appraisal office as a public record. 
(3)  The owner or occupant of every house, building or address shall place the number assigned by the appraisal office in a conspicuous place on or near such house, building or address so that it may be plainly seen from the street. It shall be the owner or occupant's responsibility to purchase the numbers wherever they desire. 
(4)  House numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be of a contrasting color to the background. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any number placed on any property except for repair or replacement of such numbers. 
(6)  No building permit shall be issued for any building until the owner or developer has procured from the appraisal office of the county the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any building erected or repaired after the effective date of this article/court order shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements. 
(7)  House/address numbers for apartments, trailer parks, and motels shall use the primary number assigned into the private driveway or main entrance office followed by a suffix number or letter to designate the specific building or lot. 
(8)  Condominiums developed on named streets shall be treated as individual residences for the purposes of addressing. Those complexes which are not on named streets shall be treated the same as apartments and motels in the preceding paragraph. 
(Code 1970, § 20-78; Code 1996, § 96.107; Ord. No. 1991-05, 9-3-1991) 
ARTICLE VII. - USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 11 et seq.; management of public right-of-way used by telecommunications provider in municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283. 

Sec. 96.119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access line. 
(1)  The term "access line" means a unit of measurement representing: 
a.  Each switched transmission path of the transmission media that is physically within a public right-of-way extended to the end-use customer's premises within the municipality, that allows the delivery of local exchange telephone services within a municipality, and that is provided by means of owned facilities, unbundled network elements or leased facilities, or resale; 
b.  Each termination point or points of a nonswitched telephone or other circuit consisting of transmission media located within a public right-of-way connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end-use customer for delivery of nonswitched telecommunications services within the municipality; 
c.  Each switched transmission path within a public right-of-way used to provide central office-based PBX-type services for systems of any number of stations within the municipality, and in that instance, one path shall be counted for every 10 stations served; or 
d.  Any other line not described in subsection (1)a, b or c of this definition that provides voice service delivered by means of owned facilities, unbundled network elements or leased facilities, or resale. 
(2)  The term "access line" may not be construed to include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-use customer's premises or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access line rates on the provision of a single service. 
    Cable service means "cable service" as that term is defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 USC 532 et seq. 
    Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
    Facilities means any and all of the duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated transmission media used for the provision of telecommunications service. 
    Fee means a monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the city as a rights-of-way fee. 
    Permit holder means any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
    Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
    Public utility means a "public utility" as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.004, including municipally owned and/or operated utilities. 
    Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term "right-of-way" does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Rights-of-way fee means the total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
    Telecommunications service means the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes (inter-LATA and intra-LATA) or any wireless service as defined by law. 
    Telecommunications service provider means any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value. 
    Telecommunications utility means "telecommunications utility" as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002(11). 
    Transmission media means any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or placed by a permit holder to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
    Use and occupancy means the permit holder's acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 2, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.120. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of the rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers; 
(3)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 1, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.121. - Requirement for permit and granting clause. 
    Any person that owns, places, or maintains facilities within the rights-of-way shall first obtain a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city, under this article, shall issue permits to telecommunications service providers for the purpose of regulating the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way in the city for the provision of access lines. By acceptance of the permit, the permit holder agrees to abide by the reasonable terms of this article in all its operations within the city, including all operations and facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of access lines in any newly annexed areas as specified in section 96.123(c). 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 3, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.122. - General terms of the ordinance. 
(a)  No rights agreed to in this article by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(b)  A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this article, but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. 
(c)  The initial term of each permit issued under this article shall be three years from the date of issuance, unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At the expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than 90 days prior to the termination of the then current period by the city to the permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period. 
(d)  The rights granted by this article inure to the benefit of the permit holder licensed hereunder. The article rights granted by permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder without the express written consent of the city. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with the permit holder. Any such consent by the city shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 4, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.123. - Compensation. 
(a)  Rights-of-way fee. The permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate line fee to each access line owned, placed, or maintained by permit holder that is activated for use by an end-user or for another telecommunications service provider that uses permit holder's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service within the city. The line fee to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(b)  Number of access lines. Subject to city's agreement not to disclose this information, each permit holder must provide annually, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of each type of access line owned or placed and maintained by the permit holder within the city that are activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications service providers at month's end for each of the preceding 12 months. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying the number of the permit holder's access lines within the city that are activated for end-user customers and telecommunications service providers. Upon written request, the permit holder shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, produce to the city and permit inspection by the city of all non-customer-specific records and documents reasonably calculated to verify the information. For purposes of payment of fees for use of the rights-of-way, lines terminating at customer's premises that are billed as "lifeline," "tel-assistance," or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated. 
(c)  Annexation and disannexation. Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish the permit holder written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this article, a permit holder shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the permit holder's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the comptroller of public accounts of the state for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than 30 days from the date the permit holder is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation. 
(d)  Confidential records. If the permit holder notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information, reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the permit holder's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the permit holder of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings and will furnish the permit holder with copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the permit holder's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(e)  No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the permit holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of the permit holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in the calculation of the rights-of-way fee. 
(f)  Timing of payment. The permit holder shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis. The payment shall be due on the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated. 
(g)  Uncollectibles. The permit holder has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines for which revenues remain uncollectible. 
(h)  Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate line fee, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, to each access line created by rebundling services or facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the services for resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rights-of-way fee imposed herein can be applied on a non-discriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications services, if the telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to the city. If the permit holder provides a copy of the signed statement to the city, then the permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the telecommunications service, unbundled network elements, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications service for sale within the city. 
(i)  Fee application to leased facilities. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.206, a permit holder may collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this article through a pro rata charge to the customers in the boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes it does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. If a person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, permit holders may bill the person on the basis of the information provided. The permit holder shall provide to the city any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as the city first obtains written permission of such other person for permit holder to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, however, a permit holder shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses the permit holder's service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 5, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.124. - Construction and maintenance of facilities. 
(a)  The location and route of all facilities and transmission media placed and constructed in the rights-of-way shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement in the permit holder's facilities of any electric light or power wires or communications facilities or other systems not owned by the permit holder. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires, communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a further separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this article shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a telecommunications utility or authorized to offer cable service within the city. 
(c)  The surface of the rights-of-way disturbed by the permit holder in the construction or maintenance of its telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The permit holder shall endeavor to minimize disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance and/or repair work. 
(d)  Upon request, the permit holder shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The permit holder shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements. 
(e)  The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 6, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.125. - Relocation and removal of facilities. 
(a)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.203(c), upon 30 days' notice by the city, a permit holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the widening or straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for the permit holder's facilities along the rights-of-way. 
(b)  The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such instances to assure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such relocation itself. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 7, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.126. - Indemnification. 
    The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit holder shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the benefit of the permit holder and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 8, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.127. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights and obligations of this article, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(b)  Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal Communications Commission or the state public utility commission shall be provided to the city upon specific request. 
(c)  After reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city may establish, to the extent permitted by law, such reasonable and non-discriminatory rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this article and the construction of the permit holder's facilities in the rights-of-way, so long as those rules and regulations are competitively neutral. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 9, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.128. - Future contingency. 
    In the event this article or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee provided for in this article becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the city and all permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the authority's decision. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new compensation arrangement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this article, as long as that compensation is recoverable by permit holders in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 10, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.129. - Governing law. 
    This article shall be construed in accordance with this Code in effect on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the extent that such Code is not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 11, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.130. - Non-discrimination and competitive neutrality. 
    The city hereby recognizes that it has the legal duty to obligate, on a going-forward basis, all permit holders to abide by the same terms and conditions imposed by this article, including, but not limited to, the payment of the line fee, and to apply substantively same requirements governing their use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 12, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.131. - Permit. 
    Any telecommunications service provider that owns facilities already located within the rights-of-way on the date this article is enacted is hereby granted a permit hereunder; however, within 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all such telecommunications service providers shall provide to the city a notice of pre-existing facilities. All prospective permit holders shall file a permit application form at least 30 days before placing any facilities in the rights-of-way. A permit application form will not be accepted and a permit granted unless the applicant provides on that form the name and address of the person to whom notices hereunder are to be sent, the date on which the applicant expects to begin providing service within the city, a 24-hour per day contact number for the applicant, and the certificate number of the applicant's certificate issued by the state public utility commission or a notarized statement from a principal or officer of the applicant that no certification by the public utility commission is required for the type of service to be offered by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 13, 3-2-1999) 
Sec. 96.132. - Issuance and effective date of permit. 
(a)  The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of this article to the permit holder, along with a permit hereunder, within 14 days after receipt of the notice of pre-existing facilities or the permit application form. 
(b)  The effective date for any permit shall be the date of issuance, however, the assessment of the line fee shall not begin until the first day of the second month after the date of issuance of the permit. Permit holders with pre-existing facilities may continue the pre-existing compensation arrangement until the first day of the second month following the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1999-01, § 14, 3-2-1999) 
Secs. 96.133-96.140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WIRELESS SERVICES (SMALL CELLS) DESIGN MANUAL 

Sec. 96.141. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city encourages the deployment of state-of-the-art small cell wireless technology within the city for the many benefits it promises the citizens of Sinton including increased connectivity and reliable networks and services. 
(b)  The standards and procedures provided in this Wireless Services Design Manual are adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by minimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the city's right-of-way and to minimize and reduce impacts to the city, its residents and visitors; and for the general health and welfare of the public. 
(c)  The city has adopted this Wireless Services Design Manual to provide technical criteria and details necessary for providers seeking to install and construct network nodes and node support poles in the city's right-of-way. 
(d)  Providers shall adhere to the requirements of this Wireless Services Design Manual for the placement of their facilities within the city's right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
Sec. 96.142. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Wireless Services Design Manual the following terms shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely permissive. 
    Abandon and its derivatives means the network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof, that have been left by provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120 consecutive days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof, has the ability to provide communications. 
    City means the City of Sinton, Texas and the city's officers and employees. 
    Network node means provider's equipment as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    Node support pole means a pole as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
    Park means the various properties under the direction, control and supervision of the city's director of parks and recreation department pursuant to the authority granted by city council and the City Code of Ordinances. 
    Permit means a document issued by the city authorizing installation, removal, modification and other work for provider's network nodes or node support poles in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
    Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include a private easement or the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Underground utility district means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
Sec. 96.143. - Permitting. 
(a)  Attachment to existing poles. Prior to installation or modification of a network node or node support pole, provider shall complete and submit the permit application, along with standard required documents and the following items: 
(1)  Permit fee. 
(2)  Aerial map showing the location of the existing pole to which the network node is proposed to be attached, and a street view image. 
(3)  Plans and drawings prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas that has evaluated the existing pole or infrastructure for structural stability to carry proposed network nodes and can bear the wind load without pole modification or whether the installation will require pole re-enforcement. If pole re-enforcement is necessary, provider shall provide engineering design and specification drawings for the proposed alteration to the existing pole. Any pole re-enforcement or replacement shall be at provider's sole cost. All re-enforcement or replacement poles shall match the character of the pre-existing pole in order to blend into the surrounding environment and be visually unobtrusive. City reserves the right to deny a certain type of pole due to its differences. 
(4)  Scaled dimensioned drawings or pictures of the proposed attachments of the network node to the existing poles or structures as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposal, indicating the spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, and other existing light poles and any other poles or appurtenances. This shall include a before-and-after image of the pole and all proposed attachments and associated standalone equipment. 
(5)  Scaled dimensioned construction plans indicating the current right-of-way line and showing the proposed underground conduit and equipment, and its spacing from existing utilities. The drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the right-of-way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts. 
(6)  The applicant needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other communications components. It shall be the responsibility of the provider to evaluate, prior to making the application for the permit, the compatibility between the existing city infrastructure and the provider's proposed infrastructure. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. 
(7)  A traffic control plan, SWPPP, and trench safety plan may also be required based on the proposed scope of work. 
(8)  Providers/applicants are responsible for obtaining permission on non-city-owned infrastructure. If the project lies within the state right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the state. 
(9)  Notification to adjacent residential developments/neighborhoods within 300 feet is required on all node attachments on city infrastructure. 
(b)  The proposal shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Any facilities located off pole must remain in cabinetry or enclosed structure underground, except for the electric meter pedestal. Facilities on pole shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. There shall be no external cables or electric wire/cables on pole or structures or aerial wires or cables extending from the pole or structure. 
(2)  The electrical meter shall not be mounted on a city's metal pole or structure. Provider shall use 240 voltage when connecting to any city infrastructure and provide key to meter upon inspection. 
(3)  All attachments to a pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on the ground, shall comply with Texas Accessibility Standards-TAS, ADA and shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. 
(4)  All proposed projecting attachments to the pole shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet. If any attachments are projecting towards the street side, it shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet. 
(5)  The color of the network nodes shall match the existing pole color such that the network nodes blend with the color of the pole to the extent possible. City reserves the right to deny a certain style of node due to its difference in color to pole. 
(6)  There shall be no other pole, with small cell attachments permitted/under application review, within 300 feet of the subject pole. 
(c)  Installation of new poles. Prior to installation or modification of a node support pole, provider shall complete and submit to the city a commercial building permit application for the new pole. Along with standard required documents, the following items will also be required for the permit application: 
(1)  Permit fee. 
(2)  Map showing intended location of the node support pole. Aerial map showing the location of the proposed new pole, and a street view image. 
(3)  The applicant will need to provide analysis showing that the proposed new node support pole is spaced at least 300 linear feet from another existing pole that is capable of supporting network nodes along the proposed location, unless otherwise approved by the city in writing. 
(4)  Scaled dimensioned drawings or pictures of the proposed node support pole as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposal, indicating the spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, light poles, and any other poles or appurtenances. This shall include a before-and-after street view image. The after-image needs to include the proposed pole and all proposed attachments and associated standalone equipment. 
(5)  Scaled dimensioned construction plans indicating the current right-of-way line and showing the proposed underground conduit and equipment, its spacing from existing lines. The drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the right-of-way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts. 
(6)  A traffic control plan, SWPPP, and trench safety plan may also be required based on the proposed scope of work. 
(7)  The applicant needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other communications components. It shall be the responsibility of provider to evaluate, prior to making application for permit, the compatibility between the existing city infrastructure and provider's proposed infrastructure. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's public safety radio infrastructure. 
(8)  If the project lies within the state right-of-way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the state. 
(9)  Notification to adjacent residential developments/neighborhoods within 300 feet is required on all node support poles owned by provider. 
(d)  The proposal shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Any facilities located off pole must remain in cabinetry or enclosed structure underground. Facilities on pole shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. There shall be no external cables or electric wire/cables on pole or structures or aerial wires or cables extending from the pole or structure. Shrouded poles, as shown in the image, are encouraged. 
(2)  The electrical meter shall not be mounted on city's poles or structures. Provider shall coordinate voltage and provide electrical wiring diagrams along with the building permit or electrical permit when connecting to any city infrastructure and provide key to meter upon inspection. 
(3)  The pole and all attachments to the pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on the ground shall comply with Texas Accessibility Standards-TAS, ADA and shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. 
(4)  All attachments for the network nodes shall also match the color of the network support pole. All network support poles shall match the existing poles in the surrounding block or district in which the network support pole is located in order to blend into the surrounding environment and be visually unobtrusive. City reserves the right to deny a certain type of pole due to its differences. 
(5)  Upon approval of the permit, the provider shall call for locates. If city water utility locates are needed, provider is required to contact Sinton City Hall at 361-364-2381. 
(e)  Electrical permit. 
(1)  Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the network nodes and node support poles or structures. Provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the city and must match city infrastructure voltage. 
(2)  Provider shall provide city with the electrical permit and provide sealed engineered drawings for conduit size, circuit size, calculations for amp, distances running, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
Sec. 96.144. - Network node and node support pole requirements. 
(a)  Installation. Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the network nodes and node support poles in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the Wireless Services Design Manual and all other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, the state, and the United States ("laws"), as such may be amended from time to time. Provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and direction of the city. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the network nodes and node support poles shall be in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(b)  Inspections. The city may perform visual inspections of any network nodes and node support poles located in the right-of-way as the city deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the network nodes or node support poles, the city shall provide written notice to the provider within five business days of the planned inspection. Provider may have a representative present during such inspection. In the event of an emergency situation, the city may, but is not required to, notify provider of an inspection. The city may take action necessary to remediate the emergency situation and the city shall notify provider as soon as practically possible after remediation is complete. 
(c)  Placement. 
(1)  Parks. Placement of network nodes and node support poles in any parks, park roads, sidewalk, or property is prohibited unless such falls within the definition of public right-of-way in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 and the placement complies with applicable laws, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions on the use of the park. 
(2)  City infrastructure. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles on any city property that falls outside the definition of public right-of-way in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(3)  Residential streets. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles in right-of-way that is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is not more than 50 feet wide and adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(4)  Historic district. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles in right-of-way that is within a historic district as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, unless approved by the city in writing. 
(5)  Decorative poles. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes on a decorative pole as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, unless approved by the city in writing. The city may only entertain proposals, if they are stealth. 
(6)  Poles. Wireless facilities on a node support poles shall be installed at least eight feet above the ground. If any attachments are projecting towards the street side, it shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet. 
(7)  Right-of-way. Node support poles and ground equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, within two feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line. Node support poles and ground equipment or network nodes shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. If a node support pole and ground equipment or network node is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then provider shall remove the node support poles, ground equipment or network nodes. 
(d)  Fiber connection. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining access and connection to fiber optic lines or other backhaul solutions that may be required for its node support poles or network nodes. 
(e)  Generators. Provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way. 
(f)  Equipment dimensions. Provider's node support poles and network nodes shall comply with the dimensions set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(g)  Tree maintenance. Provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the city before trimming trees hanging over its node support poles and network nodes to prevent branches of such trees from contacting node support poles and network nodes. When directed by the city, provider shall trim under the supervision and direction of the public works director. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from provider's actions under this section. 
(h)  Signage. 
(1)  Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four inches × six inches, unless otherwise required by law or the city. 
(2)  Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility pole. 
(i)  Overhead lines prohibited. Provider shall neither allow nor install overhead lines connecting to node support poles. All overhead lines connecting to the node support pole where other overhead telecommunications or utility lines are or planned to be buried below ground as part of a project shall be buried below ground. 
(j)  Repair. Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation of the node support poles or network nodes, or any portion thereof is required and such installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any property of the city to be damaged or to have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation of any laws, provider, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return such property to its original condition. If provider does not repair such property or perform such work as described in this paragraph, then the city shall have the option, upon 15 days' prior written notice to provider or immediately if there is an imminent danger to the public, to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf of provider and to charge provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city. Provider shall reimburse the city for the costs. 
(k)  Graffiti abatement. As soon as practical, but not later than 14 days from the date provider receives notice thereof, provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its node support poles and network nodes located in the right-of-way. 
(l)  Inventory. Provider shall maintain a list of its network nodes and node support poles and provide city an inventory of locations within ten days of installation. The inventory of network nodes and node support poles shall include GIS coordinates, date of installation, type of pole used for installation, pole owner, and description/type of installation for each network node and node support pole installation. Upon city's written request, provider shall provide a cumulative inventory within 30 days of city's request. Concerning network nodes and node support poles that become inactive, the inventory shall include the same information as active installations in addition to the date the network node and/or node support pole was deactivated and the date the network node and/or node support pole was removed from the right-of-way. The City may compare the inventory to its records to identify any discrepancies. 
(m)  Reservation of rights. 
(1)  The city reserves the right to install, and permit others to install, utility facilities in the rights-of-way. In permitting such work to be done by others, the city shall not be liable to provider for any damage caused by those persons or entities. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove city traffic signal poles in the manner that best enables the operation of its traffic signal system and protect public safety. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove any city pole or structure located within the right-of-way in the manner that best enables the city's operations. 
(n)  Coordination of traffic signal maintenance activities and emergency response. Provider will provide city a key to each meter box at the time of inspection and have the ability to temporarily cut-off electricity to its facilities for the safety of maintenance personnel. In the event of failure of components of the traffic signal system for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious attacks, city will respond to restore traffic signal operations as a matter of public safety. Should the events that result in damage or failure of the traffic signal system also affect provider's network nodes, provider shall have the sole responsibility to repair or replace its network nodes and shall coordinate its own emergency efforts with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
Sec. 96.145. - Interference with operations. 
(a)  No liability. 
(1)  The city shall not be liable to provider for any damage caused by other providers with wireless facilities sharing the same pole or for failure of provider's network nodes for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious attacks. 
(2)  The city shall not be liable to provider by reason of inconvenience, annoyance or injury to the network nodes or node support poles or activities conducted by provider therefrom, arising from the necessity of repairing any portion of the right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary alteration or improvements, in, or to, any portion of the right-of-way, or in, or to, city's fixtures, appurtenances or equipment. The city will use reasonable efforts not to cause material interference to provider's operation of its network nodes or node support poles. 
(b)  Signal interference with city's communications infrastructure prohibited. 
(1)  No interference. In the event that provider's network nodes interferes with the city's traffic signal system, public safety radio system, or other city communications infrastructure operating on spectrum where the city is legally authorized to operate, provider shall promptly cease operation of the network nodes causing said interference upon receiving notice from the city and refrain from operating. Provider shall respond to the city's request to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 24 hours of receiving notice. 
(2)  Protocol for responding to event of interference. The protocol for responding to events of interference will require provider to provide the city an interference remediation report that includes the following items: 
a.  Remediation plan. Devise a remediation plan to stop the event of inference; 
b.  Time frame for execution. Provide the expected time frame for execution of the remediation plan; and 
c.  Additional information. Include any additional information relevant to the execution of the remediation plan. 
In the event that interference with city facilities cannot be eliminated, provider shall shut down the network nodes and remove or relocate the network node that is the source of the interference as soon as possible to a suitable alternative location made available by city. 
(3)  Following installation or modification of a network node, the city may require provider to test the network node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm it does not interfere with the city's operations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
Sec. 96.146. - Abandonment, relocation and removal. 
(a)  Abandonment of obsolete network nodes and node support poles. Provider shall remove network nodes and node support poles when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the city. Unless the city sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of 90 days of the network nodes and node support poles being abandoned or within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. When provider removes or abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the provider shall notify the city in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the city the location and description of each network node or node support pole removed or abandoned. The city may require the provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Relocation and removal at provider's expense. 
(1)  Provider shall remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its own expense to an alternative location not later than 120 days after receiving written notice that removal, relocation, and/or alteration of the network nodes and/or node support poles is necessary due to: 
a.  Construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project or other public improvement project; or 
b.  Maintenance, upgrade, expansion, replacement, removal or relocation of the city's pole or structure upon which provider's network nodes are attached; or 
c.  The network node or node support pole, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of traffic signals, streetlights or other city property; 
d.  Closure of a street or sale of city property; or 
e.  Projects and programs undertaken to protect or preserve the public health or safety; or 
f.  Activities undertaken to eliminate a public nuisance; or 
g.  Provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its network nodes or node support poles; or 
h.  Duty otherwise arising from applicable law. 
(2)  Provider's duty to remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its expense is not contingent on the availability of an alternative location acceptable for relocation. City will make reasonable efforts to provide an alternative location within the right-of-way for relocation, but regardless of the availability of an alternative site acceptable to provider, provider shall comply with the notice to remove its network nodes and node support poles as instructed. 
(3)  The city may remove the network node and/or node support pole if provider does not remove such within 120 days. In such case, provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual cost of removal of its network nodes and node support poles within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(c)  Removal or relocation by provider. 
(1)  If the provider removes or relocates at its own discretion, it shall notify the city in writing not less than ten business days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its network nodes and node support poles prior to relocation or removal. 
(2)  The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by provider for network nodes and node support poles that have been removed. 
(d)  Restoration. Provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of provider's activities hereunder) within ten days following the date of such removal or relocation, at provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date provider was granted a permit for the applicable location, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city. 
(e)  Provider responsible. Provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub lessees, and subcontractors in connection with the performance of activities within the city's right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were provider's acts or omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-31-2017) 
CHAPTER 97. - AMBULANCE SERVICE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-04, adopted March 17, 2015 repealed ch. 97, §§ 97-001-97-003 and enacted a new ch. 97, §§ 97-01-97-12 as set out herein. Former ch. 97 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted March 14, 2013. 
State Law reference- Texas Emergency Medical Services Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 773. 

Sec. 97.01. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specified, the term: 
    Ambulance means any privately owned motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients. 
    Applicant means any person who has the duty of performing or other operator that makes application to obtain a permit to operate within the city limits. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, this definition will include all officers or partners. 
    Basic life support (BLS) means a level of medical care which is used for victims of life threatening illnesses or injuries until they can be given full medical care at a hospital. 
    Certification means that which meets the requirements of the Texas Department of State Health. 
    City means the City of Sinton. 
    Director means the EMS Director of the City of Sinton EMS. 
    Driver's License means the license issued by the Department of Public Safety, State of Texas. 
    Emergency means any circumstance that calls for immediate response (emergency lights and siren) in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Said circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness. 
    Emergency call means any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency requiring immediate ambulance service. 
    Emergency medical service (EMS) means the provider contracted by the City of Sinton. 
    Medical director means any licensed physician who serves in an advisory capacity to any ambulance for the purpose of providing medical direction under the terms of the Medical Practice Act (Article 4495b, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) and rules promulgated by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners pursuant to terms of the Medical Practice Act. 
    Non-emergency transfer means any request for ambulance service response (no emergency lights and/or siren) that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are or have been represented to be of a non-emergent nature requiring non-emergent service. 
    Patient means any person desiring transportation to an appropriate medical facility either on an emergency or transfer (non-emergent basis) basis. 
    Permit means a permit issued by the City of Sinton pursuant to this chapter. 
    Texas Department of State Health Services is a state agency of Texas. The department was created by House Bill 2292 of the 78th Texas Legislature in 2003 through the merging of four state agencies: the Texas Department of Health, Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation, Texas Health Care Information Council, and Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse. The DSHS Professional Licensing and Certification Unit consist of 23 regulatory programs. The programs evaluate and issue credentials, administer examinations, monitor continuing education activities, conduct complaint investigations, impose disciplinary sanctions, and otherwise regulate a variety of health professions and related facilities in the State of Texas. 
    Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle constructed, equipped, and used for transferring the sick or injured under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.02. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, officer or medical employee shall operate, conduct, maintain or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business of ambulance service upon the streets, alleys or any public way in the city unless the company holds and displays a valid and current ambulance company permit from the city the ambulance vehicle to be operated holds and displays a current valid city permit. 
(b)  Ambulance vehicle permits, ambulance company permits shall be issued for one year or any part thereof during which an ambulance service is maintained. Permit fees of $1,000.00 per company; $200.00 per ambulance unit or $2,000.00 per fleet of ten or more vehicles. The permit period shall be from January 1 st to the 31 st day of December. Permit fees are due at time of permit issuance. Fees for permits issued for less than a full year shall not be prorated. 
(c)  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not assignable or transferable and remain the property of the city. 
(d)  No official entry made upon a permit may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(e)  All permits shall be available for inspection by any officer of the city at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 2, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.03. - Application for ambulance permit. 
(a)  Application for an ambulance company license and an ambulance vehicle license shall be made upon a form furnished by the EMS director who shall issue such license to an applicant only upon proof by the applicant that the applicant has satisfied all provisions and conditions provided for and has given complete and truthful information to all requirements stated herein. 
The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and owner of the ambulance; 
(2)  Trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business; 
(3)  Proof of good standing with Texas Department of State Health Services; 
(4)  A report showing the applicant business has paid all city taxes if applicable; 
(5)  Business address and medical license number of applicant services medical director; 
(6)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number (VIN), motor vehicle registration, current Texas Department of State Health Services license number and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant's ambulance; 
(7)  Verification of certification by DSHS for all personnel to be performing patient care or transportation within the city; 
(8)  Any such other information as may be applicable; 
(9)  No application will be considered before it is complete; 
(10)  Falsification of information on applications will be grounds for revocation of license. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 3, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.04. - Standards for ambulance permit. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such, be suitable for the transportation of patients from the standpoint of health, sanitation and safety. 
(b)  Minimum equipment requirements for each ambulance shall be those established by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(c)  When an ambulance permit is issued or renewed under provisions of this chapter, the director will issue a permit which indicates the vehicle meets all requirements established by this chapter, 
(d)  The director shall cause all ambulances to be inspected before being placed in service and shall thereafter inspect such ambulances no less than once each year. All permitted ambulances and or vehicles are subject to spot inspections with no notice. In the event an ambulance or vehicle fails to pass inspection, the director shall notify the ambulance operator to correct the defect(s) noted in the inspection and, after such notification, the director shall cause such ambulance to be re-inspected within five business days. If upon such re-inspection the defects noted in the original inspection have not been corrected, the permit shall be removed from the ambulance or vehicle and shall only be returned to such ambulance or vehicle after the defects have been corrected. The replaced permit shall be considered new and fees for permitting shall be due the city. 
(e)  Every ambulance must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  All emergency medical calls that originate in the city will be responded to by the city's EMS. In the event that a private ambulance service receives a direct call requesting an ambulance that originates within the city, it is the duty of the private ambulance service to immediately refer the emergency medical call to the San Patricio County 911 dispatch. 
(g)  Private ambulances will not run emergency traffic within the city, unless they are driving through to an emergency call in another city or delivering a patient to the hospital ER that did not originate in the city. 
(h)  Non-emergency or transfer ambulances must use colors that are different and distinctive from the color of ambulances operated by the Sinton EMS. Each non-emergency or transfer ambulance must bear markings which identify the licensee's name and vehicle number. The name designation must be placed on both sides and the rear of the ambulance and shall not include the word "Sinton." 
(i)  Personnel must use attire whose color is different and distinctive from the color of Sinton EMS personnel attire. 
(j)  Maintain a daily log on which is recorded the date, time of service requested, time of dispatch, time of arrival on the scene, time of arrival at the ultimate destination, patient reference number, and fees and charges assessed for each trip. Said records and books must, at all reasonable times, be made available for purposes of audit by the director. 
(k)  Licensee shall provide the director with copies of DSHS findings and results of all DSHS inspections and site visits any time the licensee, vehicles, and personnel are inspected. 
(l)  Licensee shall provide the director with notification of any administrative penalties, suspensions, probations, reprimands, revocations, change in status of license and/or personnel, or any like disciplinary action stemming from DSHS rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 4, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.05. - Requirements for business location. 
    If the business location of the ambulance service, firm or organization is located within the city limits, the building must be in compliance with all city ordinances, state and federal laws. No ambulance service, firm or organization may operate its main place of business or a storage facility in a private residence. The director has the right to inspect such locations as often as he deems necessary to verify compliance with this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, corporation or business entity to refuse to allow the director or his designee to inspect business office premises at any time. Refusal of any privately owned ambulance service provided with a business office located within the city limits to allow the director to inspect such premise shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 5, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.06. - Insurance requirements. 
    No ambulance permit shall be issued under this chapter, nor shall such permit be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated for any reason in the city limits, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant permitted providing for the payment of damages: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in [an] accident resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent, under like circumstances, in the following sums: Not less than $300,000.00 for each person, $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $85,000.00 for uninsured motorist. A written statement from an authorized agent of the ambulance operator(s) insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such instance shall be filed with the director before any permit may be issued. All such verifications of insurance shall provide for immediate notification of cancellation to the director; 
(2)  For the loss of/or damages to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in the following sums: Not less than $100,000.00 for each person, $300,000.00 for each accident and $50,000.00 for property damage. A written statement from an authorized agent of the ambulance operator(s)' insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the director before any permit may be issued. All such verifications shall provide for immediate notification of cancellation to the director; 
(3)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability there under to the full amount thereof not withstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured, in that until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or admission of the named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any judgments up to the limits of said policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, by his agent or employee, who may operate the same with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 6, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.07. - Renewal of permits. 
    Renewal of any permit hereunder, upon expiration or after revocation, shall require conformance with all requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing, to include all fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 7, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.08. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The director may, and is hereby authorized to, suspend or revoke a permit issued hereunder for failure of the permitted entity to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for a violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this chapter, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws or ordinances, but only after one warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the director. Any applicant denied a permit or any permitted entity whose permit is suspended or revoked shall have the right of appeal to the director. Such appeal shall be submitted to the director in writing within ten days of the action being appealed. The director shall, within ten days after an appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support and render a decision. Should the applicant not agree with the ruling they have the option to appeal to the city manager in writing within ten days of the director ruling. The city manager, within ten days of receipt of appeal, shall render a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the ruling of the director. 
(b)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance permit hereunder, such ambulance shall cease operation as such and no person shall permit such ambulance to continue operations as such. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of attendant's or driver's permit hereunder, such attendant or driver shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance and no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend an ambulance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 8, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.09. - Medical director to serve in an advisory capacity. 
(a)  Any ambulance whose attendant receives physicians' orders either by voice communications or written standing orders must have, in an advisory capacity, a physician, licensed in the State of Texas, to serve as medical director. 
(b)  Any ambulance permitted under this chapter must maintain with the director a statement of their current medical director including his or her name, business address, business telephone number, and Texas medical license number; and the federal narcotics license number if any drugs or supplies are prescribed by this physician. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 9, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.10. - Central emergency dispatching system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an ambulance to respond to an emergency call within the city unless specifically requested by the city EMS and dispatched through the county central dispatch system. 
(b)  If any person receives any request for an ambulance service response on an emergency basis other than through the county central dispatch system; it is the obligation of that service to immediately report the same request to the county central dispatch system at which time an emergency medical service (EMS) unit representing the city will be dispatched to respond. 
(c)  It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a permitted ambulance in the city, upon responding to a direct call for non-emergency ambulance service, to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions. Notifying the county central dispatch is not required for non-emergency ambulance responses. 
(d)  In the event that the paramedic attendant-driver makes the determination that a true emergency exists upon arrival, the paramedic attendant-driver, may then proceed in an emergency status (lights and siren) to the closest appropriate hospital facility only upon notification to the county central dispatch system. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 10, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.11. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for the conviction of a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 11, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 97.12. - Permitting not required. 
    A permit is not required for the following criteria: 
(1)  The person transports a sick or injured person in a multiple casualty situation that exceeds the capacity of the city's emergency medical services; 
(2)  The person is a member of an organization and the person's function is to transport members of that same organization to an appropriate medical facility at no charge to the individual being transferred; and that same organization does not solicit business outside itself or provide service to any other organization except in a multiple casualty situation; 
(3)  The vehicle or person is moving through the city on a call that neither originates nor ends within the city; 
(4)  The organization is principally an air transport system; 
(5)  The organization or vehicle is licensed by the state as a "specialized emergency medical services vehicle" and is designed to provide patients with special needs not easily met by other transport services. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 12, 3-17-2015) 
Title XI - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; home rule municipality may license any lawful business subject to police power, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 

CHAPTER 110. - GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS 

Sec. 110.01. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied upon every person within the corporate limits of the city pursuing a business, profession, or occupation, a tax equal to one-half of the tax imposed by the state upon such business, profession or occupation and a tax or fee charge of one-half of any fee so charged by the state which under the statutes and the constitution of the state may be imposed by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 13-1; Code 1996, § 110.01; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy one-half of state occupation tax, Tex. Const. art. 8, § 1. 
Sec. 110.02. - Partial payment prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful on the part of the tax assessor-collector to receive partial payment on account of occupation taxes, but the same shall be received by him only for the full periods authorized by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1970, § 13-2; Code 1996, § 110.02; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
Sec. 110.03. - Issuance of license. 
    Before any person shall engage in any pursuit, vocation, occupation or calling which is subject to the occupation tax provided for in section 110.01, the amount of such tax shall be paid to the city tax assessor-collector, who shall give a receipt therefor upon forms furnished by the city manager, and shall issue to the person applying therefor a license signed by the city manager, attested to by the tax assessor-collector, and sealed with the seal of the city, to pursue for the time named in such license, the occupation, pursuit, vocation, or calling named in such license. 
(Code 1970, § 13-3; Code 1996, § 110.03; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
Sec. 110.04. - Posting of license. 
    Each occupation license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place at his place of business. 
(Code 1970, § 13-4; Code 1996, § 110.04; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
Sec. 110.05. - Lien for arrearages. 
    All arrearages of occupation taxes, which may be due by reason of business having been carried on without the payment of such tax shall be a lien upon all stock and fixtures owned or used in or making part of any business or vocation liable to such tax, which lien shall authorize the tax assessor-collector to seize and sell, after ten days' notice, so much of the stock or other personal property of any person owing such taxes as will satisfy such claims for taxes and all costs incurred by such proceedings. 
(Code 1970, § 13-5; Code 1996, § 110.05; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
CHAPTER 111. - ADVERTISING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216. 

Sec. 111.01. - Freestanding advertising signs, billboards and similar structures. 
(a)  Erection or maintenance restrictions in city. No freestanding advertising sign, billboard or similar structure which exceeds a height of 50 feet above the surface of the ground shall be erected or maintained in the city within 150 feet of the east right-of-way line of the U.S. Highway 77 bypass on the western side of the city, and no freestanding advertising sign, billboard or similar structure which exceeds a height of 30 feet above the surface of the ground shall be erected or maintained elsewhere in the city. 
(b)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued by the city, for the erection of any freestanding advertising sign, billboard or similar structure which exceeds the height limitation provided in this section 
(c)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or maintain any freestanding advertising sign, billboard or similar structure which exceeds the height limitation provided in this section. 
(Code 1970, § 21/2-1; Code 1996, § 111.01; Ord. No. 1198, 2-18-1969; Ord. No. 1998-08, 8-4-1998) 
Sec. 111.02. - Signs and placards prohibited on public property. 
(a)  Putting up signs, and the like, in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, tack, nail, tie, glue, paste or maintain any placard, poster, banner or any other material anywhere on the streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signal light posts or bases, street light posts or bases, telephone poles or electric posts in the city or to cause the same to be done. 
(b)  Defense. This section shall not apply to any officer of the city, the state or the United States who may place upon such objects, by tying with string or ties, any posters or placards in the interest of public health and safety. 
(c)  Painting on or defacing public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or write pictures, characters, signs or advertisements or use any other paint or material of any kind upon any of the sidewalks, streets, curbs or pavements of the city or upon any ornamental balustrade, fountain, stairway or other improvements belonging to the city, and it shall also be unlawful to paint or to write in any manner thereon or to carve thereon or in any way to mutilate, deface or destroy the same; provided, however, the city secretary is hereby authorized to issue a permit for limited periods of time, not exceeding 90 days, listed in the permit, authorizing the permittee to paint or print street numbers on the curb showing the correct street number of abutting property but such permit shall be expressly conditioned upon the permittee obtaining the consent of the abutting property owner before painting house number applicable to such abutting property and be revocable by the city secretary upon violation of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 21/2-2; Code 1996, § 111.02; Ord. No. 1984-12, 6-19-1984; Ord. No. 1987-12, 8-18-1987) 
CHAPTER 112. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.71 et seq. 

Sec. 112.01. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04 shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(Code 1970, § 3-1; Code 1996, § 112.01; Ord. No. 996, 4-11-1967; Ord. No. 997, 4-11-1967) 
State Law reference- Similar definition, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
Sec. 112.02. - Hours of sale. 
    A person may sell, offer for sale, or deliver beer between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday, he may sell beer between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight, except that permittees or licensees authorized to sell for on-premises consumption may sell beer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon if the beer is served to a customer during the service of food to the customer. 
(Code 1970, § 3-3; Code 1996, § 112.02; Ord. No. 997, 4-11-1967) 
State Law reference- Hours of sale for beer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05. 
Sec. 112.03. - Persons to whom sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage within the city, or within any city park, to anyone under the age of 21 years or an intoxicated person or an habitual drunkard or an insane person. 
(Code 1970, § 3-4; Code 1996, § 112.03; Ord. No. 305, 10-1-1954) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 101.63, 106.03. 
Sec. 112.04. - Sale near churches, schools and hospitals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the place of business of any dealer in beer to be located within 300 feet of any church, school or other educational institution, or public hospital, or for any person to sell beer within 300 feet of any church, school, or other educational institution, or public hospital in the city. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(Code 1970, § 3-5; Code 1996, § 112.04; Ord. No. 96, 9-11-1933) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
Sec. 112.05. - License fee. 
    A license fee of one-half of the state fee is levied and imposed upon all persons licensed by the state alcoholic beverage commission for each license issued for premises located within the city, excepting those exempted or excepted from the local fee by state law. 
(Code 1970, § 3-6; Code 1996, § 112.05; Ord. No. 96, 9-11-1933; Ord. No. 1996-01, 1-16-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy alcoholic beverage fees, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36. 
Secs. 112.06-112.08. - Reserved. 
Sec. 112.09. - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon the payment of the applicable tax or fee herein prescribed to the tax assessor-collector and exhibition to him of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such tax or fee, the tax assessor-collector shall in the name of the city issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit to engage in business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as such permit from the state remains in force. 
(Code 1970, § 3-8; Code 1996, § 112.09; Ord. No. 99, 2-2-1936) 
Sec. 112.10. - Disturbances on premises of alcoholic beverage permit holder. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "disturbance" includes any actual fight where an exchange of blows has occurred, any loud arguments, whether or not actual blows were exchanged or not, any person in or found in an intoxicated condition, any pulling or shoving by any person resulting from or in an argument, or exchange of profanity. 
(b)  Prohibition. Any holder of an alcoholic beverage permit is required to report immediately to the police any disturbance, as hereinabove defined, which may occur on the premises or any disturbance of which he may have knowledge. 
(c)  Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and the person found guilty upon complaint filed in the corporation court of the city may be fined an amount not to exceed $200.00 for each such occurrence. 
(Code 1970, § 3-10; Code 1996, § 112.10; Ord. No. 1975-14, 10-7-1975) 
Sec. 112.11. - Consuming alcoholic beverages in central business district prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central business district means a compact and contiguous area of the city in which at least 90 percent used or zoned for commercial purposes and historically has been the location where business has been transacted. The area is shown on a map approved by the state alcoholic beverage commission and is on file with the city secretary. 
    Open container means any alcoholic beverage container that is no longer sealed. 
(b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or be in possession of an open container as defined by this section within the central business district, except inside a building or a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 112.11; Ord. No. 1993-15, 1-4-1994) 
Sec. 112.99. - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as provided in section 10.99. 
(b)  A licensee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid a fee commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $200.00. 
(c)  A person violating section 112.11 shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Code 1996, § 112.99; Ord. No. 1993-15, 1-4-1994) 
CHAPTER 113. - AMUSEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Sports, amusements and entertainment, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2151 et seq. 

Sec. 113.01. - Circuses and carnivals to be held on show grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any circus, carnival, outdoor show or similar exhibition or show operating under a tent or in a temporary building or structure within the corporate limits of the city, unless the same is operated on the county show grounds. This section shall apply to traveling shows, carnivals, fairs and exhibitions which operate and use temporary structures or tents in connection with such shows, carnivals and similar exhibitions. This section shall not apply to local shows or amusements held in established theaters, auditoriums, or other pertinent buildings in the city, nor to exhibitions of any nature sponsored by the city or approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1970, § 15-7; Code 1996, § 113.01; Ord. No. 34, 2-2-1921; Ord. No. 1981-19, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 1998-12, 12-1-1998) 
State Law reference- Regulation of circuses, carnivals and zoos, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2152. 
CHAPTER 114. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2153. 

Sec. 114.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner, coin-operated machine, and service, coin-operated machine, shall have the same meanings the terms are given to them in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.002. 
(Code 1970, § 13-17; Code 1996, § 114.01; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967; Ord. No. 1994-09, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 114.02. - Applicability of tax. 
    Every owner, save an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any coin-operated machine shall pay, and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated machine, except as are exempt in this chapter, an annual occupation tax as provided for in section 114.04. 
(Code 1970, § 13-18; Code 1996, § 114.02; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967; Ord. No. 1994-09, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 114.03. - Exempt machines. 
    Those machines exempted by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.402 are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein. 
(Code 1970, § 13-19; Code 1996, § 114.03; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967; Ord. No. 1994-09, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 114.04. - Tax levy; due date. 
    The tax shall be in the amount of one-fourth of the state tax levied by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2153.401. The tax shall be due and payable annually to the city tax assessor-collector on the first regular day of business following January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1970, § 13-20; Code 1996, § 114.04; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967; Ord. No. 1994-09, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 114.05. - Payment receipt. 
    Upon payment of the tax required by section 114.04 the tax assessor-collector shall issue a receipt showing payment of the tax thereon for the coming year. The receipt shall be issued for one year. 
(Code 1970, § 13-21; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967) 
Sec. 114.06. - Receipt attached to machines. 
    The receipt issued by the tax assessor-collector to evidence the payment of the tax levied herein shall be securely attached to the machine in a manner that will require continued application of steam and water to remove the same. 
(Code 1970, § 13-22; Code 1996, § 114.06; Ord. No. 1093, 12-19-1967; Ord. No. 1994-09, 5-17-1994) 
Sec. 114.07. - Operating eight-liner machines. 
(a)  Definition. The term "eight-liner" means a type of electronic slot machine that is coin-operated, is designed for bona fide amusement purposes and that by operation of chance or a combination of skill and chance, affords the user an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, novelties or a representation of value redeemable for those items. 
(b)  Location. An eight-liner can only be located in Commercial District (C) within the city. No eight-liner machine can be located in the Central Business District (CB) which is from the railroad crossing at East Sinton Street to San Patricio Avenue and from West Fulton Street to West Merriman Street. 
(c)  Fee. An owner, operator or lessee of premises on which an eight-liner machine is made available to others shall be required to secure a permit by paying the city an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine premises permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Upon paying for this permission permit, a sticky tag will be issued and placed on each machine by the inspector with the year of expiration placed on it. The lessee shall provide the city inspector with each machine's serial identification number (ID). 
(d)  Expiration and renewal. Annual eight-liner permits issued by the city shall automatically expire on December 31. The city shall not refund any portion of the permit fee, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the city. 
(e)  Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a permit, and within 30 days thereafter, the person making the machine available to others shall obtain a renewal thereof in the same manner as an original permit if he wished to continue operating premises on which a machine is made available to others. Failure by a person to pay this fee within 30 days will require such person to pay an additional late fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Persons under 21 years prohibited. The presence of person under 21 years of age on premises subject to an eight-liner permit is prohibited. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages prohibited. The presence of alcoholic beverages on premises subject to an eight-liner permit is prohibited. 
(h)  Certifying or sanctioning machine installation or use. By issuing the required permit, the city is not certifying the installation or use of the amusement redemption machines or implying in any way that such machines comply with applicable law. In applying for a permit, the applicant shall acknowledge that the city is not certifying or sanctioning the installation or use of such machines. In the event the installation and/or use of such machines are found to violate any law, the applicant shall acknowledge that any permit fee paid belongs to the city and will not be refunded. 
(Code 1996, § 114.07; Ord. No. 2010-02, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 2011-06, 9-20-2011) 
CHAPTER 115. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 431; food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 437; public health measures relating to food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 438; municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 

Sec. 115.01. - Adoption of state food establishment rules; definitions. 
(a)  The city council adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the executive commissioner of the health and human services commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
    Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
    Municipality of Sinton in this chapter shall be understood to refer to the City of Sinton. 
    Regulatory authority means the county department of public health, having jurisdiction over food establishments. 
    State rules means the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § I, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.02. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferrable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this chapter. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this chapter, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § II, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.03. - Application for permits and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  The retail food service establishment fee schedule will be adopted by the county commissioner's court. These fees will be payable to the county. The fees collected will be expended to defray the cost of issuance of permits and inspections of facilities regulated under this chapter. The county agrees to give a 90-day notice of any changes in fees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § III, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 3, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.04. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § IV, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 4, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.05. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § V, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 5, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.06. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § VI, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 6, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.07. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § VII, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 7, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.08. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $500.00. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § VIII, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 9, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.09. - Education requirements. 
(a)  Employees of food establishments, mobile food units, roadside food vendors, temporary events, and employees of food services within a retail food store who handle open exposed foods shall attend a two-hour food service sanitation course offered under the supervision of the regulatory authority. Upon completion of the course the regulatory authority will issue food handlers permit valid for a period of two years. A food handler certificate will be obtained by new employees within 30 days after being hired. An employee's card may be revoked at any time by the regulatory authority if an employee demonstrates unsanitary work habits. 
(b)  Any classroom or online food handler training programs accredited by the Texas Department of State Health Services (TXDSHS) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) certified will also be acceptable. 
(c)  The permit holder or designated person in charge is required to obtain food manager certification status. A food manager certification is a document obtained by the permit holder or person in charge who demonstrates knowledge by being a food protection manager that is certified by a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by a conference for food recognized accrediting agency as conforming to the conference for food protection standards for accreditation of food manager certification programs. Suitable certificates issued for passing an approved examination must be presented to the regulatory authority. Furthermore, each permitted establishment must have "during all hours of operation" a certified food manager on duty. The certified food manager on duty shall have supervisor/management responsibilities with the authority to direct and control food preparation and service. Food manager certificates may be revoked if inspection reveals inadequate sanitation practices. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § IX, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 8, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 115.10. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
    The authorized agent or employee may examine food as often as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and the state laws and rules. The authority agent may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food, which it believes is in violation of any state laws. A written notice must specify the reason for the hold order. The authorized agent will tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to the hold order will be used, served or moved from the establishment. The authorized agent will permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction will be ordered and accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § X, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 115.11. - Retail food establishment inspection report. 
    The city adopts the regulatory authority's retail food establishment inspection report, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, § XI, 11-18-2008) 
CHAPTER 116. - OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq.; lease of municipal oil, gas or mineral land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.005; disposition of the public domain, oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 52; municipal regulation of exploration and development of mineral interests, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 92.007. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 116.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
    Area regulated means the city and within 467 feet of the city limits. 
    City block means any platted tract of land within the city which has for its exterior boundary lines as so platted public streets, railway rights-of-way, United States government property lines, state property lines, a platted addition or subdivision, unplatted tracts of land, the corporate limits of the city, or any combination of the aforedesignated boundaries. 
    Drilling block means an area designated by a permittee based upon the spacing rules of the state railroad commission and approved by the city council. 
    Permittee means the person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a well under this chapter, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors or assigns. 
    Well means any hole or bore to any sand, formation, strata or depth, which is drilled, bored, sunk, dug or put down for the purpose of either exploring for or ascertaining the existence of any oil, gas, or liquid hydrocarbon, or for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, or liquid hydrocarbon. 
(Code 1970, § 16-1; Code 1996, § 116.01; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.02. - Purpose and scope. 
    The city council recognizes that commercial oil and gas deposits underlie areas of the city and that there is a need to allow for the development of these natural resources in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the public by establishing regulations pertinent to the exploration, drilling and production of hydrocarbons in a metropolitan environment. To this end, this chapter shall govern the exploration, drilling and production of hydrocarbons and matters incident thereto, including unitization in all areas of the city and areas outside of the city that are less than 467 feet from the city limits, whether surface or subsurface, unless the surface location is within the city limits of any other incorporated city wherein nothing in this chapter shall apply except pertinent requirements for unitization. 
(Code 1970, § 16-7; Code 1996, § 116.02; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.03. - Other regulations not affected. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as repealing, altering, or otherwise affecting the validity and binding force of any provision of this Code or any ordinance pertaining to fire prevention, health, sanitation, or safety of persons or property enacted by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 16-3; Code 1996, § 116.03; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.04. - More restrictive regulation applies. 
    If in this chapter restrictions, prohibitions, or provisions conflict, and if restrictions, prohibitions or provisions in this chapter conflict with the laws of the state, or with regulations of the railroad commission of the state, in each such instance the more restrictive restriction, prohibition or provision shall apply. 
(Code 1970, § 16-4; Code 1996, § 116.04; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.05. - Regulations may be modified. 
    This chapter may be changed, altered, modified, or repealed, in whole or in part, at any time by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 16-4; Code 1996, § 116.05; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.06. - Violation of state or federal laws. 
    Any violation of the laws of the state or any rules, regulations, or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining or abandoning, an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in reference to fire walls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or property, shall also be a violation of this chapter, and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1970, § 16-6; Code 1996, § 116.06; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 116.20. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, to drill, or to operate any well within the city or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well, or to commence any operation other than staking the proposed location without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 16-33; Code 1996, § 116.20; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.21. - Application and fee. 
(a)  Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in writing, signed and sworn to before a notary public by the applicant or some representative of the applicant having due and legal authority to enter into contracts binding upon the applicant; and it shall be filed with the city secretary and be accompanied with a filing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. No application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one well. The applicant shall clearly identify the proposed drilling block and the exact lot and location thereon of the well location where it is proposed the well be drilled; and there shall be attached thereto either certified or photostatic copies of all leases and contracts with the owners of minerals under such proposed drilling block which are controlled or owned by the applicant and of all requisite permissions from the owners of the surface and improvements thereon; to the end that the application will show what specific part of the proposed drilling block the applicant holds under lease or contract with the owners, what specific part of the drilling block the applicant does not hold under the lease or contract with the owners and that he owns or controls the interests in the proposed drilling block and the permission from the owners of the surface and improvements required by this chapter. The application shall include two attachments: 
(1)  A traffic circulation plan having the following major components: 
a.  Site parking; 
b.  Vehicular site ingress and egress; 
c.  On-site circulation. 
(2)  A plan for noise abatement addressing the following major components: 
a.  Engine noise; 
b.  Tripping noise; 
c.  Time of noise producing operations. 
(b)  The application shall state the depth to which it is proposed that the well be drilled, the applicant's proposed complete casing program, mud program, and an itemized schedule of the applicant's then best belief as to the costs of drilling the well, and the costs of completing and equipping the well if the same is a producer. If the proposed depth is deeper than 10,000 feet, a special permit with specific requirements will be required. There shall be attached to the application a map or plat showing the exact and correct acreage or square feet in the proposed drilling block and in each lot or tract comprising a part of the proposed drilling block (each calculated to the center of the streets and alleys adjoining the same), the exact location of the proposed well, showing distance to buildings, water, sewer and gas lines, the areas within the proposed drilling block owned or controlled by the applicant, the areas within the proposed drilling block not owned or controlled by the applicant, the distances from the well location to the exterior boundary lines of the proposed drilling block, and the distances from the well location to all residences, structures and commercial buildings situated within 400 feet of the well location. A completion program shall be submitted after the well is drilled. 
(Code 1996, § 116.21; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987; Ord. No. 1989, 12-19-1989) 
Sec. 116.22. - Hearing. 
(a)  Upon filing of an application for a permit to drill and operate a well, the city secretary shall set a date for a hearing on such application, which hearing date shall be not less than ten days subsequent to the date of the filing of such application. Notice of the filing of such application and the date of the hearing thereon shall be given by the city secretary at the applicant's expense by publication in one issue of a newspaper published in the city at least five days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall be in substantial compliance with the following form: 
Notice is hereby given that ___________, as applicant, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 116 of the Code of Ordinances, Oil and Gas Operations, did on the _____ day of ________ 20___ file with the City Secretary an application for a permit to drill and operate a well in an area designated by the applicant based upon the spacing rules of the Railroad Commission of Texas and subject to the approval of the City Council. The application and map showing the lands comprising the proposed Drilling Block and the exterior boundaries thereof are on file in the office of the City Secretary and are at the office subject to the examination of all persons during regular office hours. A hearing upon such application will be held at the city hall by the Council on the _____ day of 20___, at ___ o'clock ___.M., and at such continued hearing or hearings, if any, as the City Council may in its discretion designate. 
(b)  Proof of publication of such notice shall be made by the printer or publisher of the newspaper publishing the same by affidavit filed with the city secretary, and such affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
(c)  A hearing open to the public shall be held by the city council on every application filed under the provisions of this chapter for a permit to drill and operate a well at the particular time and date designated in the published notice. In the event a majority of the members of the city council are not present at the hearing, or at the discretion of the members of the city council if a majority of the members thereof are present at the hearing, the hearing may be continued to a designated time and date. 
(Code 1970, §§ 16-35, 16-36; Code 1996, § 116.22; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.23. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  If, after such hearing, an application filed pursuant to this chapter is found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this chapter, and the drilling and operation of a well on such drilling block is not prohibited by the terms of this chapter, and the city council does not elect to refuse the application as authorized by section 116.32, then the city council shall determine the amount of the principal of the bond provided for in section 116.24, which shall not be less than an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and after such determination shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for. 
(b)  The city council may pursuant to the provisions of section 116.32 refuse to issue a permit for the particular drilling location on the drilling block as applied for by the applicant and, in lieu thereof, designate as the drilling location a different drilling site on the drilling block subject to the applicant obtaining all requisite leases, contracts, and surface permissions, for the designated substituted drilling site. 
(c)  Each permit issued under this chapter shall by reference have incorporated therein all provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim in the permit; specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available correct legal description; contain and specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of 90 days from the date of the permit with the provision that the permit may be extended for up to one year, and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in continuous drilling operations or oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well drilling pursuant to such permit; provided, if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities should cease the term shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within 90 days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well; contain and specify such conditions as are by this chapter authorized; specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled, not exceeding the projected depth; and contain and specify that no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the city council and conditioned as specified in section 116.24. 
(d)  The permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the mayor, and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee, with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee and, when so signed, shall constitute the permittee's drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, and such bond, and this chapter. If the permit for the well is refused, or if the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he wishes to withdraw his application, then upon the happening of any of the events the cash deposit provided to be filed with the application shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time as a processing fee. 
(Code 1970, § 16-37; Code 1996, § 116.23; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.24. - Bond. 
(a)  In the event a permit is issued by the city council under the terms of this chapter for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city secretary a bond, and obtain written approval thereof by the mayor, duly executed by the applicant as principal, and by a reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the well; that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter with reference to the payments herein provided to be paid to the owners of minerals and land in the drilling block on which the permittee does not hold oil and gas leases or contracts; that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations to their former condition; that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling or producing operations, and will grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as near as possible, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced; and that the permittee will promptly pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages on account of injury to property, either public or private, or bodily injury, including death, received or suffered by any person whomsoever and resulting from the drilling, operation, production or maintenance of the well, equipment, facilities, or appurtenances thereto; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. The bond shall be in the principal sum of the number of dollars as has been so determined by the city council. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city secretary, and remain in force and effect for at least a period of two years subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued. The bond shall accrue to the benefit of any person with reference to the conditions above stated and may be sued upon by him. If at any time the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to file a new bond, and upon the new bond being filed the sureties on the bond being replaced shall thereupon be discharged. 
(b)  At any time after the above-mentioned bond has been in force and effect for a period of one year, the holder of a permit covered by such bond on a drilling block on which a well for the discovery of oil and gas has been placed on production by virtue of the authority granted in such permit, may, upon written application to the city council apply for a reduction in the bond, and the city council may, upon such written application, within its discretion, reduce the principal amount of such bond to a sum not less than an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the city council to reduce the principal amount of such bond required under this section in the amount set forth in section 116.23 until such bond has been in full force and effect for a period of one year and until the well for the discovery of oil and gas, under any drilling permit issued by the city shall have been drilled and placed on production or properly plugged and abandoned as a dry hole. In the event the city council should, in its discretion, reduce the amount of the required bond, as provided for herein, the original bond provided for in this section in the amount provided for in section 116.23 shall remain in full force and effect until such reduced bond is furnished to the city council and approved by it; whereupon, the original bond shall be redelivered to the holder of the permit and may thereafter be canceled. The reduced bond, if permitted, shall be for a period of not less than one year and shall be renewed each year thereafter and filed with the city for so long as a producing well is maintained under any permit. The bond shall be duly executed by the then holder of the drilling permit for the drilling and operating of a well within the drilling block to which it is applicable, and shall be signed by a reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state and approved by the city council. 
(c)  Where it appears to the city council that the holder of any permit for the drilling of an oil and gas well under this chapter is the owner of more than one such permit issued by the city under this chapter, upon application by such permittee, the city council, in its discretion, may require no more than one such bond to cover all such permits and the liabilities thereunder and imposed thereon by this chapter. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the city council from increasing any bond so filed with it under this section and shall not be precluded at any time from requiring the holder of a permit from the city to file a separate bond for each permit. 
(e)  The city may accept a properly assigned letter of credit from an approved commercial bank in lieu of a bond. 
(Code 1970, § 16-38; Code 1996, § 116.24; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 257, 1-8-1952; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.25. - Supplemental permit for deeper drilling. 
(a)  Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper depth than reached in the prior drilling operations without the permittee as to such well obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental application with the city secretary specifying the then condition of the well and the casing therein; the depth to which it is proposed such well to be deepened, not to exceed in any event a total depth from the surface in excess of 10,000 feet; the proposed casing program to be used in connection with the proposed deepening operations; evidence of adequate current test showing that the casing strings in the well currently pass the same tests as are in this chapter provided for in the case of the drilling of the original well; and workover procedure along with the current status and condition of the wells. In the event the city council is satisfied that the well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued without additional filing fee to the permit fee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for, not exceeding in any event a total depth from a surface in excess of 10,000 feet. In any deeper drilling or any deeper completion, or any deeper production operations, the permittee shall comply with all other provisions contained in this chapter, and applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well or wells. 
(b)  Once any well which has theretofore been a producer of oil or gas or both of them has ceased to produce to the extent that the owner thereof has abandoned same and his leases in the drilling block in which the well is located have expired or been released, and someone other than such operator has acquired new leases from the owners of 51 percent or more of the area embraced in the drilling block, including the lot, tract or parcel upon which the well is located, and has, in addition thereto, acquired the casing, tubing and all equipment in connection with such abandoned well and desires to attempt to put such well back on production by some method other than deepening or reworking or some other method which, in the opinion of the city council, would create a hazardous condition by reason thereof, and if the casing in the well is in a condition to meet the requirements of this chapter and such person shall make application to the city secretary, signed on oath before a notary public specifying: 
(1)  That he has leases from the owners of 51 percent or more of the land in the drilling block in which the well is located including the lot, tract or parcel on which the well is located, with certified or photostatic copies of all such leases attached to the application. 
(2)  That the following tests have taken place: Before drilling the cement plug in the producing string of casing of any well, the casing shall be tested at a pressure in pounds per square inch calculated by multiplying the length of the producing string by two-tenths with the maximum test pressure required, unless otherwise ordered by the commission, not to exceed 1,500 pounds per square inch. If, at the end of 30 minutes, pressure shows a drop of ten percent or more of the above required test pressure, the casing shall be condemned. After corrective operation the casing shall again be tested in the same manner. A swab test may be used by reducing the fluid level in the hold to a point at least midway between the calculated top and bottom of the cement columns on the outside of the string being tested. After such swabbing test, the casing shall set 12 hours before the cement plug is drilled. If fluid level shows a rise equivalent to two percent of the swabbed distance, the casing shall be retested. If a second similar test shows leaky condition, the casing shall be condemned until condition is corrected. These tests shall be witnessed by a city representative. 
(3)  The proposed method of getting the well back on production. 
(4)  Evidence that he is the owner of the casing and other equipment in and on the well. 
(5)  And a statement of the cost to him of the casing and other equipment in and on the well with proof thereof and an estimate of the cost of the other equipment and the services and labor required in getting the well back on production. 
(c)  If the city council is satisfied that all of the things set out in the application are true and correct and that the operation outlined in the application will not create a dangerous or hazardous condition they may, in their discretion, issue a supplemental permit to such applicant for such operation and for the production of the well, same to remain in force and effect as long as such operations are carried on and if they result in production, as long as such production continues, conditioned that the permittee shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter except as specifically set out herein. 
(d)  Notice of the hearing for such application shall not be required and, if the well which the applicant desires to attempt to get back on production has been completed for more than one year prior to the date of such supplemental permit, the amount of bond may be set at whatever amount is deemed suitable by the city council, not less than an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. There shall be no filing fee for such application and no fee for the supplemental permit. The provisions of sections 116.28 and 116.29 providing for payments to non-leasing owners in the drilling block and for the right to acquire an interest in the well shall apply in the same manner as if such supplemental permit was for the purpose of and provided for the drilling of a well. 
(e)  In the event the well was outside the corporate limits of the city when the well was originally drilled, the city council shall have the authority to waive drilling block requirements. 
(Code 1970, § 16-39; Code 1996, § 116.25; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 364, 8-6-1957; Ord. No. 1976-3, 3-16-1976; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.26. - Number per drilling block. 
    There shall not be more than one well drilled within any drilling block for each producing sand area within such drilling block, whether such well is proposed on publicly or privately owned lands, it being intended that no single drilling block will have more than one well within such drilling block producing from the same producing sand. Where more than one producing sand is found within a drilling block, a separate permit may be issued to the permittee within such drilling block, if any, or his assigns, granting the right to such permittee or his assigns to drill an additional well to each of the separate producing sands. When practicable, wells discovering more than one sand shall be completed as dual-producing wells, using two strings of tubing, it being intended to minimize the number of drilling operations conducted in any one drilling block. 
(Code 1970, § 16-41; Code 1996, § 116.26; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.27. - Lease or contract requirements. 
    No permit shall be granted for the drilling and operation of any well except upon land held by the applicant under oil and gas leases, or drilling contracts, from the owners of the mineral leasehold estate covering at least 51 percent of the total number of square feet of land contained in the drilling block, giving to the applicant the owner's permission to drill the well. 
(Code 1970, § 16-42; Code 1996, § 116.27; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.28. - Conditions of permit where no lease or contract. 
(a)  In the event a permit for the drilling and operation of a well is issued to any person not holding oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with all of the owners of the mineral leasehold estate covering 100 percent of the total square feet of land contained in the drilling block, it shall be a condition of the permit that the permittee shall pay and deliver to the credit of each of such owners whose land shall not be under lease to the permittee and who do not elect to share in the ownership of the well as provided in section 116.29 within 30 days from the date of the issuance of the permit, a sum in cash equal to the highest cash bonus paid by the permittee or his predecessor in title for a lease covering lands within the drilling block in the proportion or ratio as the square feet of land owned by such highest bonus was paid, and his proportionate share, determined by the proportion or ratio that the square feet of land owned by such non-leasing owner (calculated to the center of the streets and alleys adjoining the same) bears to the total square feet of land contained in such drilling block, of the following interests in the production from the well on such drilling block for which the permit is issued, payable monthly in the same manner as other royalties are paid and in conformance with the standard pipeline practices: 
(1)  On crude oil, the proceeds realized from the sale of the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee of that produced and saved, less the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee, pro rata part of production and severance taxes applicable thereto and actually paid thereon by permittee. 
(2)  On gas (including casinghead gas) sold at the well, or from the outlet side of a separator, or on residue gas sold at the discharge side of a processing plant, the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee of the price received by the permittee for such gas, less the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee part of production, severance, gathering and similar taxes applicable thereto and actually paid thereon by permittee, and less the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee part of dehydration and compression costs, if any, actually paid by permittee. 
(3)  On condensate and other liquid hydrocarbons recovered by means of a mechanical separator or from processing in a processing plant, the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee of 100 percent of that value of that portion of the condensate and other liquid hydrocarbons that accrues to the permittee, less the highest percentage of royalty negotiated by lessee pro rata part of production and severance taxes applicable thereto and actually paid thereon by permittee. 
(b)  Where the owner of the mineral leasehold estate has theretofore executed an oil, gas and mineral lease covering such leasehold estate to some person (other than the permittee), permittee shall, within 30 days from the date of the issuance of the permit, pay and deliver to the credit of the holder of such oil, gas and mineral lease, for a full and unrestricted assignment of such oil, gas and mineral lease, a sum in cash equal to the highest cash bonus paid by the permittee or his predecessor in title for a lease covering lands within the drilling block, in the proportion or ratio as the square feet of land owned by such owner of the leasehold estate bears to the square feet of land upon which such highest bonus was paid. In the event such oil, gas and mineral lease provides for royalties in excess of the royalties above provided in this section, the payment or tender shall be made jointly to the owner of the leasehold estate of the existing oil, gas and mineral lease, and to the holder of the excess royalty interests over and above the royalty interests above provided, it being intended that the permittee shall pay for and receive upon such payment, in compliance with this provision, the full mineral estate on such lands, other than the royalty interests above provided for. The payments above provided for may be made by the permittee, or may be tendered by the permittee either directly to the owner of such mineral leasehold estate or may be paid and delivered to the city secretary, who shall serve as trustee for the owner of the leasehold estate and shall safely keep such cash bonus until accepted by and receipted for by the owner of such leasehold estate. Upon compliance with the above provisions, the permittee shall thereafter be the owner of the full leasehold estate in and to such land and may pool such land with other lands within the drilling block in the same manner as provided in the pooling provisions of the usual and customary oil, gas and mineral lease, and as is contemplated by this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 16-43; Code 1996, § 116.28; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.29. - Sharing ownership by permittee. 
(a)  In the event a permit is issued to a person who does not hold leases, or drilling contracts, from the owners of the mineral leasehold estate under all of the lands within the drilling block, any person owning mineral under, or holding oil and gas leases on land in the drilling block, shall have the right, subject to all the terms and conditions of the permit and subject to paying his pro rata part of any payments due under the provisions of section 116.28, to share in the ownership, benefits and production of the well in the proportion that the area attributable to his mineral interest or his leases, calculated to the center of the streets and alleys adjoining the same, bears to the whole area of the drilling block, provided that within 20 days after the date of the issuance of the drilling and operating permit he shall file with the city secretary his election in writing to pay to the permittee a like proportion of the total cost and expense of drilling, completing, equipping and operating the well, and shall sign and execute a mutually agreeable joint operating agreement with the permittee, and shall within the time make and file with the city secretary for the benefit of the permittee a bond duly executed by him as principal, and by a reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and in an amount representing that portion of the estimated maximum cost of drilling, completing and equipping such well that the area attributable to his mineral interest or his lease or leases bears to the whole area of the drilling block, conditioned that the principal in the bond will currently, from time to time, pay to the permittee his proportion of costs of drilling, completing, equipping and operating the well, including all costs incurred by permittee in fulfilling the terms and conditions of the permit, such bond to be approved by the mayor and held by the city secretary, for the benefit of the permittee. 
(b)  In the event any person owning minerals under, or holding oil and gas leases on land within a drilling block shall, under this provision, elect to participate in the ownership of any well drilled on any such drilling block, and complies with this section, such owner having once elected to participate in the ownership of the well shall abide by the joint operating agreement and shall not thereafter be permitted to withdraw from such ownership in any such well drilled within such drilling block, though such owner shall at all times have the right and privilege of selling or of otherwise disposing of his interest in such well; provided, in the event of such sale or other manner of disposing of such interest, such shall not be binding on the operator of such well until the operator of such well has been furnished with a certified copy of a recorded instrument conveying or disposing of such interest. Any such instrument purporting to dispose of or convey any interest in such well shall carry with it all of the rights and obligations imposed by this section. 
(Code 1970, § 16-44; Code 1996, § 116.29; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.30. - Effect of chapter on surface owner's rights. 
    Neither this chapter nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter upon, use or occupy in any respect to the drilling or operation of any well, any surface land except by the written contract of the surface owner; nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of any owner to contract for the amount of damages, rights or privileges with respect to his own land and property. 
(Code 1970, § 16-45; Code 1996, § 116.30; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.31. - Obstructing or closing streets or alleys. 
    No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location, within a drilling block, which location is within any of the streets or alleys of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation, except by special permit by order of the city council, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1970, § 16-46; Code 1996, § 116.31; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.32. - Well location. 
(a)  No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location within a drilling block, which location is nearer than 400 feet from the exterior boundary line of any drilling block; no well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location, within a drilling block, which location is nearer than 400 feet of any residence, building or structure without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owners and persons in control thereof; no well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location, within a drilling block, which location is nearer than 300 feet to any exterior property line boundary of lands utilized for a public or parochial school, a college, a university, a hospital, a church or a public building; no well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location, within a drilling block, where the lands within such drilling block have been principally dedicated for cemetery purposes or within 200 feet if cemetery is at the border of the drilling block; no well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location, within a drilling block, which location is a part of a city block as to which there is of public record restrictions or covenants prohibiting the drilling of any oil or gas well in the city block. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority, to refuse any application for a permit to drill and operate any well at any particular location within any drilling block where, by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular location in question, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for school, college, university, hospital, or civic purposes, or for health reasons, or for safety reasons, or any of them, the drilling or operation of such well on such particular location might be injurious or a disadvantage to the city, or to its inhabitants as a whole, or to a substantial number of its inhabitants or visitors as a group. 
(c)  The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority, to refuse any application for a permit to drill and operate any well on any drilling block where, by reason of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the block in question, or adjacent thereto, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for school, college, university, hospital, or civic purposes, or for health reasons, or for safety reasons, or any of them, the drilling or operation of such well on such drilling block might be injurious or a disadvantage to the city or its inhabitants as a whole, or to a substantial number of its inhabitants or visitors as a group. 
(Code 1970, §§ 16-47-16-49; Code 1996, § 116.32; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 235, 12-1-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987; Ord. No. 1989-18, 12-19-1989) 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 116.45. - Maximum well depth. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a well within the city to a depth in excess of 10,000 feet without a special permit. The special permit will set forth additional requirements. 
(Code 1970, § 16-55; Code 1996, § 116.45; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.46. - High pressure wells prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to complete or to operate any well in a sand or horizon which would result in a surface shut-in pressure in excess of 5,000 pounds per square inch; and no drilling and operating permit shall be granted for the completion or operation of any well in any sand or horizon which would result in a surface shut-in pressure in excess of 5,000 pounds per square inch. If, in the drilling of any well, the permittee or operator encounters any sand or horizon which would result in a surface shut-in pressure in excess of 5,000 pounds per square inch, it shall be the duty and obligation of such permittee and operator to properly and adequately seal and shut off such sand and horizon in keeping with the then best known practice of the industry. If permit is issued for depth below 10,000 feet, the maximum surface pressure will change to 6,000 pounds per square inch. 
(Code 1996, § 116.46; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.47. - Derrick material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig; or to use as fuel in any drilling rig or in any drilling, reworking or production operations, any butane, propane or other liquefied petroleum gas; or to permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 30 days after completion or abandonment of the well. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, or a mast, or a gin pole, until the well is abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as herein provided, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times. In all cases the noise level shall be kept to a minimum. 
(Code 1970, § 16-57; Code 1996, § 116.47; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.48. - Pit. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with any drilling or reworking operations within the city any earthen slush, mud or reserve pit, or to use any pits except steel pits, which steel pits and their contents shall be promptly removed from the premises and drilling site as soon as the well is either completed for production or abandoned as a dry hole. Where adequate surface area exists, with the land owners' and surface tenants' permission and abiding by requirements in section 116.57, a reserve pit permit may be issued for the purpose of spreading the pit at completion or abandonment. 
(Code 1996, § 116.48; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.49. - Casing. 
(a)  No person engaged in the drilling or operation of any oil or gas well within the city shall use, set or place in any well any used or reconditioned casing, pipe or tubing. All casing (other than conductor), including surface, protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel or equivalent quality oil well casing. Each production string of casing must comply with at least the following minimum internal pressure yield strength, computed in accordance with API standards: 
Depth of String in Feet Internal Pressure Rating 
(psi) 0'-6,000' 4,500 lbs. 6,000'-7,000' 5,000 lbs. 7,000'-8,000' 6,000 lbs. 8,000'-9,000' 7,000 lbs. 9,000'-10,000' 8,000 lbs. Below 10,000' As set forth in special permit  
(b)  Each joint and length of each particular casing string (other than conductor) shall have, prior to setting, unconditionally passed a complete internal and external inspection, with such inspection having been at least comparable to the complete inspection service available by either The Tubescope Company, Houston Oil Field Material Company, Inc., or Western Inspection Company. The type and method of tubular inspection shall be reviewed and approved by the oil and gas officer. 
(c)  No well shall be drilled within the city without properly setting conductor casing to a minimum depth of 20 feet; and without properly setting surface casing to a minimum depth of 1,000 feet; in any well having a total well depth not exceeding 6,000 feet, or to a minimum depth of 1,500 feet in a well having a total depth in excess of 6,000 feet but not exceeding 7,000 feet, or to a minimum depth of 2,000 feet in a well having a total well depth in excess of 7,000 feet. No well shall be drilled within the city limits to a depth exceeding 8,000 feet without properly setting a protection string of casing at a depth between 7,900 feet and 8,000 feet. However, the operator may present a well prognosis showing the depth and pressures expected and the maximum mud weight to be used in lieu of setting pipe for review in the application for the permit. No well shall be drilled within the city without cementing the conductor casing and the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil- or gas-bearing horizon; or 1,000 feet above the production zone or total depth of protective casing, whichever is greater; and in the event a protection string of casing be required under the terms of this chapter, without cementing the protection string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil- or gas-bearing horizon. 
(Code 1970, §§ 16-59, 16-60; Code 1996, § 116.49; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.50. - Valves and blowout preventers. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly equipping the conductor casing when set with at least one blowout preventer; and without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at least one annular-type preventer and at least two ram-type blowout preventers; and without properly equipping the production casing during completion operations and workover operations with at least one annular-type preventer and at least two ram-type blowout preventers. On each well drilled, a valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. All blowout preventers shall be checked by opening and closing every eight hours. All preventers shall be pressure tested prior to spud and once every seven days until completion of the well. Also, the blowout preventers shall be tested after each casing string is set to 100 percent of working pressure (annular type shall be tested to at least 50 percent of working pressure). All tests are to be recorded in the IADC drilling report on the rig. 
(Code 1970, § 16-61; Code 1996, § 116.50; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.51. - Drilling fluid. 
    No well shall be drilled or reworked within the city limits without using mud as the drilling fluid at all times. Prior to the time the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil- or gas-bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at not less than ten pounds per gallon. After the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil- or gas-bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud laden drilling fluid shall at all times be maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than 500 pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. 
(Code 1970, § 16-62; Code 1996, § 116.51; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.52. - Drill stem tests. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in connection with the drilling or reworking operations of any well within the city to take and to complete any drill stem test except during daylight hours, and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Code 1970, § 16-63; Code 1996, § 116.52; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.53. - Tubing. 
    All tubing used in any well within the city shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of 7,000 pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding 7,000 feet, or less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of 10,000 pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth in excess of 7,000 feet. 
(Code 1970, § 16-64; Code 1996, § 116.53; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.54. - Bradenhead. 
    Each well drilled within the city shall be equipped with a bradenhead with a test pressure of not less than 6,000 pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be set above ground level, or may, at the election of the operator of such well, be set beneath the surface in a reinforced concrete box or cellar setting entirely below or partially below the surface of the ground, in which event the same shall be covered with a sheet iron cover not less than one-fourth inch thick, and shall be equipped with fittings having a test pressure rating of not less than 6,000 pounds per square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each calendar month and if excess pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be immediately taken to eliminate the source and the existence of the excess pressure. 
(Code 1970, § 16-65; Code 1996, § 116.54; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951) 
Sec. 116.55. - Christmas tree and wellhead connections. 
    The Christmas tree and all wellhead connections on each well drilled within the city shall be new, and shall be set above ground level or may, at the election of the operator of such well, be set beneath the surface in a reinforced concrete box or cellar setting entirely below or partially below the surface of the ground, in which event the same shall be covered with a sheet iron or steel cover not less than one-fourth inch in thickness and such cellar shall be installed in accordance with good practices as followed in the oil industry; and on all wells completed at a depth above 7,000 feet the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 6,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed below a depth of 7,000 feet the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 5,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 10,000 pounds per square inch. All pipe and fittings connecting the wellhead to an oil and gas separator shall have at least the same minimum working pressure and minimum test pressure as hereinabove specified for Christmas tree and wellhead connections. In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city exceeds 2,000 pounds per square inch, the flow wing of the Christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. 
(Code 1970, § 16-66; Code 1996, § 116.55; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951) 
Sec. 116.56. - Storage tanks and separators. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, construct or operate in connection with any producing well within the city any crude oil storage tanks except to the extent of two steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding 500 barrels capacity each, and so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight, and each surrounded with an earthen fire wall at such distance from the tanks as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least 11/2 times the maximum capacity of such tank. A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator, and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil, with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to be vaportight. Each oil and gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head that vents into a storage tank. All tanks shall be equipped with vents that can be closed at ground level. 
(Code 1970, § 16-67; Code 1996, § 116.56; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.57. - Fence and warning signs. 
    Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose the well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks, by a substantial smooth net wire fence sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure, with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure. The permittee shall attach to the outside of each directional panel of the enclosure signs bearing the markings "Danger-Keep Out" and "No Smoking or Open Lights." It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain all surface equipment and the wire fence enclosure in first class condition. All surface equipment shall be painted annually. 
(Code 1970, § 16-68; Code 1996, § 116.57; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.58. - Stopping production during hurricanes. 
    No well shall be permitted to produce oil or gas at any time during a hurricane; and it shall be the duty of all persons owning or operating such wells to shut off all production during such hurricanes. 
(Code 1970, § 16-69; Code 1996, § 116.58; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.59. - Flaring and burning gas. 
    No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air where such gas is produced in sufficient quantity to be flared or burned, unless the gas is flared or burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe, or any other burning device, within the city must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any property; and the location of the torch, pipe, or other burning device, the construction thereof, the maintenance thereof, and the operation thereof, shall at all times be in full compliance with such regulations as may from time to time be issued by the fire marshal or the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 16-70; Code 1996, § 116.59; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951) 
Sec. 116.60. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a cast iron bridge plug in the top of all the remaining completion and protection casing sections and a 100-foot cement plug pumped below and above each such bridge plug; and to set a cast iron bridge plug as low as possible in the surface casing and a 100-foot cement plug pumped below and above such bridge plug. No surface string or conductor string of casing may be pulled and removed from a well. The production string of casing may be removed from a point 100 feet or more above the shoe of the protection string. The protection string of casing may be removed from a point 100 feet or more above the shoe of the surface string of casing. Whenever any such well is abandoned and plugged, it shall be the further obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to cut the surface casing off at least six feet below the surface of the ground to place at least a 25-foot cement plug in the top of the casing, and to weld the top of the casing completely shut, with the resulting hole being completely filled to the surface of the ground and duly tamped. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the railroad commission of the state in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. 
(Code 1970, § 16-71; Code 1996, § 116.60; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.61. - Pipelines. 
    No person shall make any excavations or construct any pipelines or lines for the conveyance of fuel, water, oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbons, or minerals, on, under or through the streets or alleys of the city without the express written permission and grant of the city council, and then only in strict compliance with this chapter and the ordinances of the city; and all pipelines transporting oil or gas shall conform to the American Standards Association code with reference to inside refinery limits. 
(Code 1970, § 16-72; Code 1996, § 116.61; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.62. - Fire and explosion hazards. 
    No person engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil or gas well, or engaged in the operation of any loading rack, storage, or other facility or equipment used in the production, storage, transportation, sale, or shipment of crude oil or any other inflammable petroleum product, within the city shall permit or allow any crude oil, gas or any other inflammable petroleum product to spill over, overflow, leak, drain out, escape, or accumulate in or about the premises, or on any surface, or in any open surface ditch, or any other exposed surface conduit, in any such manner or amount so as to create a potential fire hazard or a potential explosion hazard. 
(Code 1970, § 16-73; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950) 
Sec. 116.63. - Seismic operation. 
    No seismic survey shall be permitted within the city or within 467 feet of the city limits without a special permit. 
(Code 1970, § 16-74; Code 1996, § 116.63; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 116.75. - Oil and gas officer. 
(a)  The office of oil and gas officer in and for the city is hereby created, which office shall be filled by appointment by the city council. The person chosen to fill the office shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability, training and experience as is required for the performance of his duties of enforcing this chapter or other ordinances or amendments dealing with the subject of oil or gas within the city. 
(b)  The oil and gas officer shall receive such compensation and serve for such term as may be fixed by the governing body; and shall execute and deliver to the city a surety bond in the principal amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, conditioned upon the diligent and honest performance of his duties required of him by this chapter or any other related ordinance or law. The bond premium shall be paid by the city and the bond shall be satisfactory to the governing body. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the oil and gas officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance in force concerning the exploration for, drilling of wells for, or production of oil and gas within the city. 
(d)  The oil and gas officer shall decide and bring to the attention of the city manager and the city council all questions not provided for in this chapter or in any other ordinance pertaining to the exploration for, the drilling of wells for, or the production of oil and gas within the city. 
(e)  The oil and gas officer is authorized, in case of fire or other emergency, to shut in any oil or gas wells or pipelines or to halt any oil or gas operations within the city where necessary for safety of persons or property. 
(Code 1970, §§ 16-16-16-20; Code 1996, § 116.75; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.76. - Right of entry. 
    The oil and gas officer shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building, or upon any premises in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any test or inspection of same or any appurtenance thereto, and for that purpose he shall be given prompt access to all buildings, private or public, and to premises on application to the company or individual owning or in charge or control of same. 
(Code 1970, § 16-19; Code 1996, § 116.76; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957) 
Sec. 116.77. - Tests and inspections. 
    The oil and gas officer shall, upon the request and under the direction of the governing body of the city, make all tests and inspections regarding all oil and gas operations of persons operating within the city, and shall enforce the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or law pertaining to oil or gas operations within the city within 467 feet of the city limits. 
(Code 1970, § 16-21; Code 1996, § 116.77; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.78. - Interfering with city officials. 
    No person shall interfere with the oil and gas officer or any person lawfully deputized to assist him as herein provided while in the performance of their duties, and each such interference shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense within the intent and leaning of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 16-23; Code 1996, § 116.78; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957) 
State Law reference- Interference with public duties, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.15. 
Sec. 116.79. - Records and reports. 
    The oil and gas officer shall keep a full and complete record of all work done, tests made, examinations made or other official work performed as required by this chapter and shall make full and detailed reports thereof to the governing body of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 16-24; Code 1996, § 116.79; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957) 
Sec. 116.80. - Continued liability of others for damage. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person engaged in oil or gas operations within the city for damage to anyone injured thereby, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of the inspections authorized herein or tests made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 16-25; Code 1996, § 116.80; Ord. No. 367, 9-9-1957) 
Sec. 116.81. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision hereof whether or not the wording of each section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. 
(b)  The city council at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may, after ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of the permit, the bond, or this chapter. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the violation causes imminent peril of life or property, the permit shall be suspended until the hearing on revocation is held. In the event the permit is revoked, the permittee may make application to the city council for a reissuance of such permit, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. 
(Code 1970, § 16-5; Code 1996, § 116.81; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
Sec. 116.99. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this chapter, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, on conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 10.99, and the violation of each separate provision of this chapter, and of the permit, and of the bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1970, § 16-5; Code 1996, § 116.99; Ord. No. 222, 6-6-1950; Ord. No. 242, 4-30-1951; Ord. No. 1987-4, 2-17-1987) 
CHAPTER 117. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; regulation of sales and solicitation, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1801 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 117.01. - Purposes of chapter. 
    This is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and citizens thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 18-1; Code 1996, § 117.01; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS' AND SOLICITORS' PERMITS 

Sec. 117.15. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place within the city peddling, selling, soliciting, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for any services, goods, merchandise, including photographs, magazines or books without first obtaining a permit so to do. 
(Code 1970, § 18-24; Code 1996, § 117.15; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.16. - Application. 
    Each applicant for a permit required by this article shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the city manager. Required information shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant with his permanent address and local address, plus the e-mail address, if any. 
(2)  The age and sex of the applicant. 
(3)  The name, address and e-mail address of the person, firm, or corporation the applicant represents. 
(4)  The nature of the services, goods, or merchandise the applicant intends to sell or offer for sale. 
(5)  The names of any cities where the applicant has worked in the previous 30 days. 
(6)  The license number of the vehicle, if any, which the applicant intends to use in the course of his work while in the city. 
(7)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(8)  Whether the applicant, upon sale or order, shall demand, receive, or accept payment or deposit in advance of final delivery. 
(Code 1970, § 18-25; Code 1996, § 117.16; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.17. - Investigation; fee. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant under this article and to make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of such permit. An application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be paid by each applicant which shall not be prorated or returned to the applicant. The fee shall be paid at the time application is made. 
(Code 1970, § 18-26; Code 1996, § 117.17; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.18. - Performance bond. 
    If the application shows that the applicant intends to demand, receive, or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, such applicant shall accompany his application with a bond in the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, executed by such applicant as principal and by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, or a cash bond in the same amount. Where two or more applicants represent the same person, firm, or corporation, one bond in the same sum executed by such applicants as principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the state, or a cash bond of the same amount shall be sufficient. 
(Code 1970, § 18-27; Code 1996, § 117.18; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.19. - Issuance or denial; fee schedule. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue a permit applied for under this article not later than two weeks from the time the application is filed and bond, if required, is received. 
(b)  (1)  If the city manager shall approve the application, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for more than one year or before all fees, as required by this article, have been paid. 
(c)  Charitable organizations and their representatives shall obtain permits as provided in this article but shall not be required to pay the fees as set out in sections 117.17 and subsection (b) of this section, as well as exempting the city chamber of commerce on Market Days up to four times a year. 
(Code 1970, §§ 18-28-18-30; Code 1996, § 117.19; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.20. - Carrying permit on person. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity for which a permit is required by this article without carrying such permit on his person while so engaged. 
(Code 1970, § 18-31; Code 1996, § 117.20; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.21. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of their business nor shall this article apply to insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state. 
(Code 1970, § 18-32; Code 1996, § 117.21; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
ARTICLE III. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS' PERMITS 

Sec. 117.35. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation as well as agents, or employees thereof, who or which engages in the temporary or transient business of selling, exhibiting, or offering for sale in the city any goods, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, or other things of value, or exhibits same for the purpose of taking orders thereof, and who or which, for the purpose of carrying on such temporary or transient business, either rents, leases, or occupies without renting or leasing, any room or space in any building or structure or in any space, enclosed or unenclosed, upon any private premises within the city. 
    Temporary business means any business as described in the definition of "itinerant merchant" as transacted or conducted in the city, in, upon, or through or from any private premises or space upon any private premises for which no definite arrangement for legal right of occupancy therefor has been made in advance of such use and occupancy. 
    Transient business means any such business as described in the definition of "itinerant merchant" as may be conducted or operated by any person, or his agents or employees, who resides away from the city or who has a fixed place of business headquarters outside the city, or who moves stocks of goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value into the city, or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of six months. 
(Code 1970, § 18-39; Code 1996, § 117.35; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.36. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant, or for any agent or employee thereof to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of selling or the taking of orders for the sale thereof, any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or any other thing of value without having a permit so to do. 
(Code 1970, § 18-40; Code 1996, § 117.36; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.37. - Application; fee. 
    Any person desiring a permit as required by this article shall make written application therefor on forms to be furnished by the city manager. Such application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, permanent address and e-mail address of the person, firm or corporation applying for a permit. 
(2)  The nature of the goods, merchandise, services or things of value which the applicant proposes to sell or offer for sale. 
(3)  Whether or not the applicant, upon sale or order, shall demand, receive, or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, it shall file with its application a certified copy of its charter, and if it is not incorporated under state law, it shall file a certified copy of its present permit to do business in the state. 
(5)  Each application shall be accompanied with an application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, which is not returnable and may not be prorated. 
(Code 1970, § 18-41; Code 1996, § 117.37; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.38. - Performance bond. 
    If the application shall show that the applicant intends to demand, receive, or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, the applicant shall accompany his application with a surety bond in the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. The bond shall be executed with the applicant as principal and by a surety company licensed to do business in the state. A cash bond may be posted in lieu of a surety bond. 
(Code 1970, § 18-42; Code 1996, § 117.38; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.39. - Investigation. 
    Upon completion of the application, it shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to investigate the applicant to determine if the applicant is a bona fide person, firm, or corporation licensed to do business in the state and if the applicant is a reputable person, firm or corporation. The chief of police shall make a report to the city manager of his findings thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 18-43; Code 1996, § 117.39; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.40. - Issuance; fee. 
    The city manager shall issue to any applicant who has complied with all the requirements of this article, a permit authorizing such applicant to engage in the business of an itinerant merchant. Such permit shall be issued after the applicant has paid, in advance, a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each agent or employee engaged in the business of the applicant. 
(Code 1970, § 18-44; Code 1996, § 117.40; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.41. - Nontransferable and nonassignable. 
    A permit issued under this article shall not be transferable or assignable and shall give no other person any authority to transact any business in the city as an itinerant merchant, or to act as the agent or employee thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 18-45; Code 1996, § 117.41; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
Sec. 117.42. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial agents dealing with local business establishments, vendors of farm produce or agricultural products when such produce or products are produced by the vendor himself, the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value by charitable organizations. 
(Code 1970, § 18-46; Code 1996, § 117.42; Ord. No. 1105, 2-20-1968) 
CHAPTER 118. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 118.01. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of section 118.23 are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243, as they apply to nude model studios and sexual encounter centers only. It is the intent of the city council that any other provisions of this chapter are promulgated pursuant to this Code of Ordinances and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq., and the pertinent provisions applicable thereto contained in the Local Government Code. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-1; Code 1996, § 118.01; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.02. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment means: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    Residential district means a single-family or multifamily zoning district as defined in this Code of Ordinances. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multifamily, or mobile home park use as defined in this Code of Ordinances. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-2; Code 1996, § 118.02; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.03. - Classification of businesses. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-3; Code 1996, § 118.03; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.04. - Display of sexually explicitly material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-4; Code 1996, § 118.04; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 118.15. - License required; application; fees. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 118.39 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 118.39. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 118.16, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a theater license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter as well as the requirements and provisions of this Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1970, §§ 193/4-11, 193/4-13; Code 1996, § 118.15; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.16. - Issuance; posting required. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the collector of taxes to an applicant within 30 days after the receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for the information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances. 
(6)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(7)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(8)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with section 118.04, 118.17, 118.22, 118.23, or 118.35 through 118.39. 
(9)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful materials to minor; 
(vi)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Employment harmful to minors; 
(ix)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(9)a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(9)b of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-12; Code 1996, § 118.16; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.17. - Inspection requirements. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, and building inspection department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time such business is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police, fire, health, and building inspection departments at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-14; Code 1996, § 118.17; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.18. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 118.15. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date such denial became final. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-15; Code 1996, § 118.18; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.19. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with section 118.04, 118.17, 118.22, 118.23, or 118.35 through 118.39; 
(2)  Been convicted of public intoxication while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated the inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-16; Code 1996, § 118.19; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.20. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 118.19 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 118.16(a)(9)a for which the time period required in section 118.16(a)(9)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 118.16(a)(9)a for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, assessments, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 118.16(a)(9)b has elapsed. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-17; Code 1996, § 118.20; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.21. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
    If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in denying, suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-18; Code 1996, § 118.21; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.22. - Transfer. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-19; Code 1996, § 118.22; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.23. - Location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A public park adjacent to a residential district. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 500 feet of: 
(1)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(2)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  For the purpose of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structures used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(g)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, that is in violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and continually operating at a particular location, the earlier-established business is the conforming use, and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(i)  The measurements referred to in subsections (a), (b), (d), (e) and (g) of this section shall be certified by a registered public surveyor licensed by the state, whose fee shall be paid by the applicant or licensee. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-20; Code 1996, § 118.23; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.24. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 118.23, then the applicant may not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 118.23. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the city council may consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received to coincide with a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(c)  A hearing by the city council may proceed if a quorum is present. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The city council may in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 118.23 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this Code of Ordinances; 
(3)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed. 
(e)  The city council may grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in a denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council is final. 
(f)  If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the city council's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 118.23 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the city council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions of section 118.23. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-21; Code 1996, § 118.24; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 118.35. - Escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-31; Code 1996, § 118.35; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.36. - Nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or person of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-32; Code 1996, § 118.36; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.37. - Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense, if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-33; Code 1996, § 118.37; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.38. - Adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined herein. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-34; Code 1996, § 118.38; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.39. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, this application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this section must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1) through (8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-35; Code 1996, § 118.39; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 118.50. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 118.23 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-42; Code 1996, § 118.50; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 118.99. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 118.23, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 118.15 or 118.23 is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this chapter, other than section 118.23, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 118.15(a), 118.23, or 118.36(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 118.15(a) or 118.23 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1970, § 193/4-41; Code 1996, § 118.99; Ord. No. 1988-16, 12-6-1988) 
CHAPTER 119. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - PASSENGER VEHICLES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 

Sec. 119.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public vehicle means any motor vehicle operated within the city for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, except motor buses as hereinafter provided. 
    Street means any street, alley, avenue, land, public place or highway, within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 24-11; Code 1996, § 119.01; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.02. - Permit required. 
    No public vehicle shall operate within the city without a permit issued by the city secretary. 
(Code 1970, § 24-12; Code 1996, § 119.02; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.03. - Application for permit. 
    Every person desiring to operate one or more public vehicles within the city shall make application to the city secretary for a permit, which application shall set forth the name, address and e-mail address of the applicant; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate; the make; and the motor and serial or permanent identification numbers of each such vehicle. The application shall be made on a form to be prescribed by the city secretary. 
(Code 1970, § 24-13; Code 1996, § 119.03; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.04. - Issuance. 
    If the city secretary finds that such applicant has complied with all of the provisions and requirements of this article, he shall issue a permit to such applicant on such form as he may prescribe. A duplicate copy of such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle described in the application, which permit shall be effective as long as the applicant operates a public vehicle and strictly complies with all of the terms, conditions and requirements of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 24-14; Code 1996, § 119.04; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.05. - Permit fee. 
    Every person operating one or more public vehicles in the city shall pay to the city the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time as a permit fee for the permit required in this article, such amount to be payable in advance before any such person shall be authorized to operate a public vehicle within the city. The payment of such permit fee shall not relieve such person of the payment of the ad valorem tax or any other legal tax now required or that may hereafter be required to be paid on any vehicle operated under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 24-15; Code 1996, § 119.05; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.06. - Exhibiting permit. 
    A copy of the city permit required by this article shall be prominently exhibited in each public vehicle operated within the city. No public vehicle shall be permitted or so operated without such permit. All such vehicles shall be subject to inspection by the city officers to determine that such permit is exhibited as required. 
(Code 1970, § 24-16; Code 1996, § 119.06; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.07. - Suspension. 
    In the event of failure of the holder of a permit under this article issued by the city to continually comply with all of the requirements of this article, including the payment of all fees herein required, the permit issued to such person shall be immediately suspended and the permit together with all duplicate copies of the same shall immediately be returned to the city secretary. In the event of failure of such person to return such permit and all duplicate copies thereof upon notice of such suspension to the holder of such permit or to any person driving a public vehicle under such permit, any police officer of the city shall be authorized to obtain possession of such permit and all duplicate copies thereof and return the same to the city secretary and in order to do so such police officer shall have the right to enter any such public vehicle and obtain from it the permit or duplicate copy thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 24-17; Code 1996, § 119.07; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.08. - Revocation. 
    In the event the holder of such permit fails to comply with all requirements of this chapter within ten days after such suspension, or in the event the holder of any such permit has such permit suspended three times, the city council upon hearing may permanently revoke and cancel such permit. Prior to such hearing, a notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the holder of such permit at least five days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and notice provided for herein shall be served either by delivering a copy to the holder of the permit personally, or by leaving a copy at the place of business of the holder of such permit, or by mailing a copy of the notice to the holder of such permit at his business address as set forth in his application for a permit, and service of such notice under any of said three methods shall constitute full and complete notice hereunder. 
(Code 1970, § 24-18; Code 1996, § 119.08; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.09. - Liability insurance. 
    No permit shall be issued under this article unless the applicant shall have secured and deposited with the city secretary a policy or policies of public liability insurance covering each vehicle to be operated, issued by a solvent insurance company authorized by the state to write such policies of insurance, which policies shall cover personal injuries and property damage claims against the operator of the vehicles in such amounts and under such other terms or requirements as may be specified in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act and located at V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601, and as the same may be amended from time to time. Such applicant shall furnish the city secretary evidence that the premiums on such policies have been paid and shall from time to time continuously furnish the city secretary with evidence that such policy or policies have been renewed and renewal premiums paid prior to the expiration of any policies. Such policies shall be accompanied by a letter from the insurance company, issuing the same, binding such company to notify the city secretary in writing prior to the cancellation of any such policy. 
(Code 1970, § 24-19; Code 1996, § 119.09; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.10. - Liability of city and permittee. 
    The city shall not be deemed to have assumed any pecuniary responsibility for the solvency of any insurance company, or in any manner to have become liable for any sum on account of any claim against the applicant, driver of any public vehicle, or insurance company, or on account of any act or omission of any officer or employee of the city in connection with any matter relating to such vehicles, nor shall the lawful liability of the owner or operator be in any manner either limited or enlarged, by anything in connection with this article or such permit or requirement of insurance, by persons having any cause of action secured thereby. Such persons shall be authorized to sue upon such insurance policy without impleading the city. 
(Code 1970, § 24-20; Code 1996, § 119.10; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.11. - Chauffeur's license required. 
    Every person driving a public vehicle shall be required to hold a valid chauffeur's license issued by the state department of public safety. 
(Code 1970, § 24-21; Code 1996, § 119.11; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.12. - Vehicle inspection. 
    Every motor vehicle to be operated under the terms of this chapter shall be inspected annually by the chief of police, and shall not be permitted to operate unless such vehicle is found to comply with all safety standards established by the state department of public safety. In the event the chief of police has reason to believe that any public vehicle does not meet safety standards, he shall have the right to inspect such vehicle at any time and if such vehicle is found not to meet such safety standards, it shall not be operated until such deficiencies are corrected. 
(Code 1970, § 24-22; Code 1996, § 119.12; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
Sec. 119.13. - Buses excluded. 
    This article shall not affect motor buses operating upon fixed routes and schedules of time and fare, nor shall it affect specially chartered buses, sightseeing buses or motor buses owned and operated by any person under authority of the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1970, § 24-23; Code 1996, § 119.13; Ord. No. 519, 9-21-1964) 
ARTICLE II. - TOWING COMPANIES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Towing and Booting Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2308; tow truck regulation by political subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2308.201 et seq.; vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303; accidents and accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 550; authority of governor to have wreckage removed in disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.023; unlawful interception, use or disclosure of wire or oral communications, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 16.02; theft of wrecked motor vehicle, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.03; motor carrier registration, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 643; salvage vehicle dealers, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2302. 

Sec. 119.25. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of a towing company except as provided for in this article within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit from the city for each tow truck operated within the city. A permit is not required for towing company whose place of business is outside the city and only performs consent tows within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 24-31; Code 1996, § 119.25; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.26. - Requirements and regulations. 
    All applicants for a towing company permit must furnish the chief of police with the following: 
(1)  A written application stating the location of applicant's storage facility where all damaged, inoperative and abandoned vehicles will be taken for safekeeping. 
(2)  All towing companies shall carry insurance in limits of not less than the sums as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and shall furnish to the chief of police a certificate of insurance indicating the coverages and amounts. The policies shall contain a clause naming the city as an additional insured and providing for 30 days' notice to the chief of police in the event of any material change or cancellation of the policy. 
(3)  The written application for a permit shall state the names, drivers license numbers, addresses, e-mail addresses and telephone numbers of those persons who will operate the applicant's tow trucks and have access to the applicant's storage area. 
(4)  The written application for a permit must contain a statement of the applicant's fees for towing and storage. 
(5)  The chief of police shall issue the permits to all applicants complying with the provisions of this article after the applications have been completed and filed in his office, the permit fees paid, and after the chief of police or his duly authorized representative has inspected each such tow truck and determined that the tow truck complies with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Each tow truck shall not be less than one ton in size. 
b.  Each tow truck shall be equipped with a winch, winch line and boom, with a factory-rated capacity of not less than 5,000 pounds single capacity. 
c.  Each tow truck shall carry as standard equipment a tow bar, safety chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecking bar, broom, axe, shovel, flags and flares. 
d.  Each tow truck shall have inscribed on each side thereof in letters not less than three inches in height the name and address of the operator. 
e.  Each tow truck shall be equipped with two-way radio or cell phone for communication with the police department. 
(6)  Such permit fee shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for each tow truck on which a permit is desired. All permits issued shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are issued. In any permit year, the fee shall be paid pro rata for the balance of the year and any portion of the month shall be considered as an entire month in calculating the fee to be charged. The term "month" means a permit month, that is, from the first day of one month to the end of that same month. 
(7)  All permits shall visibly be displayed on each tow truck operated in the city. 
(8)  Any tow truck that is permitted or licensed by the ordinance of any other municipality in this state shall be allowed to enter the city to pick up a disabled vehicle at any place and transport the vehicle out of the city or transport into or through the city such a disabled vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 24-32; Code 1996, § 119.26; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 1984-10, 6-5-1984) 
Sec. 119.27. - Placement on rotation list; requirements. 
    All towing companies desiring to be called for service by the police department shall request in writing to be placed on the tow truck rotation list maintained by the police department and, in addition to meeting the above requirements, shall certify that all cars towed from within the city limits shall be stored in facilities located in the city limits or within five miles of the city limits. Such storage facilities located in the city must be in a properly zoned area. At least one approved tow truck shall be maintained and operated within the city limits or within five miles of the city limits at all times. The towing company shall have capabilities for auxiliary storage of personal effects inside a locked building. 
(Code 1970, § 24-33; Code 1996, § 119.27; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.28. - Vehicle storage facilities legal liability insurance. 
    Towing companies desiring to be placed on the tow truck rotation list shall carry vehicle storage facilities legal liability insurance, either comprehensive or bailee form to cover towed automobiles to cover the maximum number of customers' automobiles for damage due to fire, explosion, theft, riot, vandalism and collision. A minimum of coverage shall be required as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. A cash escrow bond or an acceptable fidelity bond insuring and naming the city as an additional insured against physical damage loss to stored vehicles may be furnished in lieu of legal liability insurance. 
(Code 1970, § 24-34; Code 1996, § 119.28; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 1984-10, 6-5-1984) 
Sec. 119.29. - Use of rotation list. 
(a)  The tow truck rotation list shall be used for all vehicles on which a pull is requested by the police department. 
(b)  When a peace officer investigating an accident determines that any vehicle which has been involved in a collision or accident or incident upon a public street is unable to proceed safely under its own power, or when the owner thereof is physically unable to drive such vehicle, the officer shall request the owner to designate the towing company the owner desires to remove that vehicle. Each officer shall carry a list of companies which have obtained valid permits for the owners benefit. The officer in charge at the scene of the accident may authorize use of a company which does not have a permit if requested by the individual in need of service and if it will result in no unnecessary delay in clearing the scene of the accident, but if the owner desires to designate an unlicensed or unpermitted tow truck he shall do so at his own risk. 
(c)  In the event the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident, incident or collision is physically unable to designate the towing company desired, or refuses to designate one, the investigating officer shall communicate that fact immediately to the police department headquarters. The police department shall maintain a rotation list in alphabetical order which shall contain the names and addresses of each towing company that complies with the provisions of sections 119.27 and 119.28 in order that the company might be called upon for service by the police department. The officer receiving a call for towing service at the police dispatch office shall call the first towing company on the list to tow the disabled vehicle or move the same from the public streets of the city. All permitted towing companies shall serve on a rotating basis of one each week. 
(d)  In the event a towing company is requested by the police department to make a call and the company agrees to make the call, then the company shall proceed immediately to the scene where it is directed and shall be given a reasonable length of time, not to exceed 15 minutes, in which to reach the location. If the company answering the call has not reached the location within a reasonable length of time, then the officer at the scene may proceed to call the next towing company on the list and that company shall have priority over that particular call. 
(Code 1970, § 24-35; Code 1996, § 119.29; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.30. - Notification of vehicle removal required. 
    No damaged or inoperative motor vehicle or trailer shall be removed by the owner or a tow truck operator from the scene of a collision or vehicle accident without notification to the police department. 
(Code 1970, § 24-36; Code 1996, § 119.30; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.31. - Only summoned tow truck allowed at scene of accident. 
    No person shall drive a tow truck to or near the scene of an accident within the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the owner of the vehicle or his authorized representative or by the police department. Each such operator, when called by the owner of a disabled vehicle or his authorized representative, shall notify the police dispatcher before proceeding to the scene of the disabled vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 24-37; Code 1996, § 119.31; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.32. - Solicitation of tow truck business prohibited. 
    No persons shall solicit any tow truck business in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city at or near the scene of an accident or of wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
(Code 1970, § 24-38; Code 1996, § 119.32; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.33. - Debris at accident scene to be removed. 
    Each towing company called to the scene of an accident shall completely remove from the street all resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, before leaving the site. 
(Code 1970, § 24-39; Code 1996, § 119.33; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.34. - City employees prohibited from influencing choice of towing company. 
    No employee of the city shall recommend to any person, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, the name of any particular person or firm engaged in the towing business, nor shall any city employee influence or attempt to influence in any manner a decision of a person in choosing or selecting a towing company. 
(Code 1970, § 24-40; Code 1996, § 119.34; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.35. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police or his authorized representative shall enforce this article and make such inspection of facilities as deemed necessary. Upon complaint against any permittee by any person or upon motion of the police chief, charging a violation of any city ordinance, the regulations governing towing company permits or any state law, the city manager after giving five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the permittee against whom the complaint is made, shall hold a hearing at which all persons with relevant information regarding the complaint shall be heard. 
(Code 1970, § 24-41; Code 1996, § 119.35; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.36. - Suspension of permit; removal from rotation list. 
    The city manager may suspend the towing company permit issued to any company or any or all tow trucks belonging to the company or remove a company from the rotation list for a period of not more than 90 days for violation of any of the provisions of this article or of the state law. 
(Code 1970, § 24-42; Code 1996, § 119.36; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.37. - Appeal from suspension. 
    Any person whose permit has been suspended may file an appeal to the city council. The appeal must be filed within ten days from the date of notice of suspension. The city council shall have authority upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the suspension. 
(Code 1970, § 24-43; Code 1996, § 119.37; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.38. - Tow trucks to observe speed regulations. 
    All tow trucks shall be driven at posted speeds unless otherwise directed by the officer in charge at the scene of the accident. 
(Code 1970, § 24-44; Code 1996, § 119.38; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.39. - Towing company to furnish information to police department when owner of vehicle unknown. 
    The towing company shall furnish the police department with the description and registration number of any vehicles for which the company has been unable to locate the owner. This information shall be furnished within ten days from the date the company took custody of the vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 24-45; Code 1996, § 119.39; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.40. - Police department must authorize release of vehicles on hold. 
    In the event a hold is placed on a vehicle by the police department, no release shall be granted without authorization from the police department. 
(Code 1970, § 24-46; Code 1996, § 119.40; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984) 
Sec. 119.41. - Violations. 
    No person, firm or corporation or agent shall operate a tow truck without a permit, or while a permit is under suspension in violation of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 119.41; Ord. No. 1984-6, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 1987-12, 8-18-1987) 
CHAPTER 120. - FUNERAL HOMES 

Sec. 120.00. - Placement on rotations list; requirements. 
(a)  All funeral homes desiring to be called for assistance by the police department shall request in writing to be placed on the rotation list maintained by the police department. 
(b)  All funeral home vehicles shall be driven at posted speeds unless otherwise directed by the police officer in charge. 
(Code 1996, § 120.00; Ord. No. 2011-03, 7-19-2011) 
Title XIII - GENERAL OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 131. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY 

Sec. 131.01. - Disturbing the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go into or near any private house, within the city, and use loud and vociferous, or obscene, vulgar or indecent language or swear or curse or yell or shriek or expose his person, or rudely display any pistol or deadly weapon, in a manner calculated to disturb the persons present at such place. 
(Code 1970, § 15-26; Code 1996, § 131.01; Ord. No. 303, 10-1-1954) 
Sec. 131.02. - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
    Daytime hours shall mean the hours from 7:00 a.m. on one day and 10:00 p.m. the same day. 
    dB(A) shall mean the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels. 
    Emergency shall mean any work performed for the purpose of (i) preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency, (ii) restoring property to a safe condition following a fire, accident, or natural disaster, (iii) protecting persons or property from exposure to danger, or (iv) restoring public utilities. 
    Nighttime hours shall mean the hours between 10:01 p.m. on one day and 6:59 a.m. the following day. 
    Nonresidential property shall mean any real property that is not included in the definition of residential property as defined in this section. Without limitation, the term includes properties that have been developed other than as residential properties, properties that are undeveloped, and properties that are devoted to public purposes, such as public streets and parks. 
    Property line shall mean, with respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical extension that separates the real property owned, leased, or occupied by one person from that owned, leased, or occupied by another person. With respect to shared occupancy properties the term shall mean the imaginary line that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any person who owns, leases or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy from that of other occupants. 
    Public right-of-way shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, alley or any other property which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Residential property shall mean any real property developed and used for human habitation that contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, unless such premises are actually occupied and used primarily for purposes other than human habitation. 
    Sound nuisance shall mean any sound that either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 131.02(f) of this Code, or for purposes of sections 131.02(c)-(e) of this Code, otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others. 
(b)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise that annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. In determining whether a noise is loud, unnecessary or unusual, the following factors shall be considered: time of day; proximity to residential structures; whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; the volume and intensity; whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic or mechanical means; and whether the noise is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued, or permit the continuance of any sound that either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 131-02(f) of this Code or, for purposes of sections 131.02(c)-(e) of this Code, otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. 
(3)  The acts enumerated in the following sections of this chapter, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(c)  Noisy vehicles generally. The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, modified or so noisy that it creates any loud and unreasonable grating, grinding, rattling or any other loud and unreasonable sound is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful. 
(d)  Amplified sound from a motor vehicle. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued or permit the continuance of any sound using any sound amplifier that is part of or connected to any speaker system, radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, microphone or any other sound source, when operated; (i) in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or (ii) at any time with louder volume that is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the vehicle or within the property or premises in which such sound amplifier is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from a vehicle shall be presumed to be in violation of this section. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner that bass sounds are plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the property or premises in which the amplification is located shall be presumed to be in violation of this section. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the sound source is a motor vehicle and that (i) the motor vehicle is a mobile sound stage or studio that is being used on a stationary basis at a location not situated upon any street for the purpose of providing sound, during daytime hours, for an event or function and (ii) the use is in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to, section 131.02(h) of this Code, if applicable. 
(e)  Noisy animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that causes or makes frequent or long and continued sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of ordinary, reasonable persons or normal sensibilities and ordinary tastes, habits and modes of living who reside in the vicinity thereof is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful as a sound nuisance in violation of this chapter, regardless of whether the sound so created by said animal or bird is within the permissible levels specified in section 131.02(f) of this Code. 
(f)  Maximum permissible sound levels. In addition to the violations established by the preceding sections of this chapter, no person shall conduct, permit or allow any activity or sound source to produce a sound discernable at any location beyond the property lines of the property on which the sound is being generated that when measured as provided in section 131.02(f) of this Code exceeds the applicable dB(A) level listed below for the property on which the sound is received: 
Property Daytime Nighttime Residential 65dB(A) 58dB(A) Nonresidential 68dB(A) 68dB(A)  
    Any sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels set forth in this section under the conditions and measurement criteria set forth in this chapter is a violation of this chapter. Evidence that an activity or sound source produces a sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence of a sound nuisance that unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Method of sound measurement. Whenever portions of this chapter prohibit sound over a certain decibel limit, measurement shall be made with a Type 1 or Type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as specified by the American National Standards Institute (A.N.S.I. S1.4-1984/85A). Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. The microphone of the meter shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used. Measurements of sound generated shall be taken from the property line of the nonresidential property or residential property were the sound is received to the source of the sound. 
(h)  Defenses. The following defenses shall apply to any offense established in this chapter: 
(1)  The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime. 
(2)  The sound was produced by an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(3)  The sound was produced by emergency work. 
(4)  The sound was generated: 
a.  At a lawfully scheduled stadium event; 
b.  By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a lawful parade; 
c.  By spectators and participants at a lawfully scheduled amphitheater event; 
d.  By patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle reenactments for which a pyrotechnic permit was obtained and the explosives were inspected by the fire marshal; 
e.  By a pyrotechnic display that was inspected and approved by the fire marshal; or 
f.  By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta or concert that was in full compliance with a permit issued by the city. 
(5)  The sound was produced by the erection, excavation, construction or demolition of any building or structure, including the use of any necessary tools or equipment, conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., which activity did not produce a sound exceeding 85 dB(A) when measured from the property line of the residential property where the sound is being received. 
(6)  The sound was produced by aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport, or railroad equipment in operation on railroad rights-of-way. 
(7)  The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower or any other similar device used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided the device did not produce a sound exceeding 85 dB(A) when measured from the property line of the nearest residential property where the sound is being received and was used for the maintenance or upkeep of the property on which it was operated. 
(8)  The sound was produced by the operation of any air conditioning unit that did not produce a sound exceeding 65 dB(A) on residential property or 75 dB(A) on nonresidential property, when measured at or near 15 feet from the air conditioning unit producing the sound being measured. 
(9)  The sound was produced by church bells or church chimes. 
(10)  The sound was produced during daytime hours by activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events. 
(i)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Administrative stop order. 
a.  The police officer or duly authorized code compliance official or his/her designee may issue an order to any person having possession or control over noise-generating property to immediately halt any sound which is prohibited by this article. Within five days following the issuance of such an order, the police officer, code compliance official or his/her duly authorized representative may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to replace the administrative stop order. 
b.  No stop order shall be issued if the only person exposed to sound levels in excess of those allowed are exposed as a result of: 
1.  Trespass; or 
2.  Invitation upon private property or into a vehicle by the person causing or permitting the sound. 
(2)  Identification of violator. Any person who engages in the conduct prescribed in this article shall be guilty of violation thereof and these persons shall be identified as follows: 
a.  At private residences. Any adult present at the time of the offense with the ability to control the level of noise at the time of the offense shall be responsible. 
b.  At business locations. If the noise is generated on property owned or operated by any business, the owner, operator, manager, or employee in charge shall be responsible. 
c.  In motor vehicle. The operator of the motor vehicle. If the operator cannot be identified, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible. It shall be an affirmative defense against prosecution under this section that the vehicle was being operated without the owner's effective consent. 
d.  At any location with an unattended noise nuisance producing machine, device, instrument, child, animal or combination of same. 
Any person who leaves unattended any machine, instrument, device, child, animal or any combination of same, which thereafter commences producing noise in violation of this article. 
(3)  Seizure of noise-producing property. Any police officer, code enforcement official or their duly appointed representative is hereby authorized to apply to any appropriate magistrate or judge for a search warrant for the purpose of entering private property to investigate and identify noise nuisance producing devices, machines, instruments, or objects; and such identified property shall be seized to summarily abate the noise nuisance if: 
a.  Any of the identified violators have been convicted of a previous violation of this article within the preceding 12 months; or 
b.  The location of the noise has been declared a habitual noise nuisance source pursuant to section 131-02(i)(6). 
Any seizures pursuant to this section (c) shall be for the purpose of assuring continued cessation of the noise nuisance after the departure of the officer by securing the instrumentality of the noise nuisance temporarily. The noise producing device, machine, instrument, or object shall be returned to the owner or person proving the right of possession, or to his/her authorized agent, not sooner than 24 hours after seizure. Any disputed ownership or right of possession shall be resolved at a property disposition hearing before a magistrate or judge of the city. Seizure of noise nuisance producing property shall be accomplished in addition to and not in lieu of municipal court prosecution and/or civil suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties. 
(4)  Impoundment of noise nuisance animals. Upon the determination by the code compliance official that any animal(s) at an identified address or location within the city has produced noise on two occasions of a nature and intensity that violates the standards established by this article, the official shall notify the resident occupant that: 
a.  The animal(s) are producing a noise nuisance; 
b.  An administrative hearing shall be held before a magistrate or judge for the purpose of determining if the animal(s) constitute a noise nuisance. 
If the magistrate or judge determines that the animal(s) constitute a noise nuisance, the animal(s) shall be impounded by the city unless the owner or person from whom the animal was seized provides written consent of another person to provide shelter and care for the animal(s) outside of the city limits. 
(5)  Declaration of habitual noise nuisance producer. Any person who violates this article on three separate days within a twelve-month period shall be given notice of an administrative hearing before a municipal court magistrate or judge for the purpose of determining whether or not such person is an "habitual noise nuisance producer," and if the magistrate or judge so finds, a written declaration of said finding shall be signed by the magistrate or judge and kept on file by the city secretary for a period of one year. 
(6)  Declaration of habitual noise nuisance source. After the production of noise in excess of that allowed by this article by anyone at the same address or property location or same vehicle on three or more separate days within a twelve-month period, the owner or lessee or person in possession shall be given notice of an administrative hearing before a municipal court magistrate or judge for the purpose of determining whether or not the location or vehicle is an "habitual noise nuisance source," and if the magistrate or judge so finds, a written declaration of said finding shall be signed by the magistrate and shall be kept on file by the city secretary for a period of one year. 
(7)  Seizure. If the magistrate or judge determines that the noise producer is an "habitual noise nuisance producer" or that the location is an "habitual noise nuisance source," the habitual noise nuisance source or any other personal property used by the habitual noise nuisance producer may be immediately seized at the time of a subsequent violation of this article. At the time of such seizure, a written notice of the right to an immediate administrative hearing before a municipal court magistrate or judge shall be issued to the habitual noise producer or owner or person in possession of the habitual noise nuisance source. The hearing shall be for the purpose of determining if a noise nuisance actually occurred on which the police officer or code official based his/her seizure, and to voice any complaints about the manner of the seizure. If the noise produced is determined by the magistrate or judge not to constitute a noise nuisance, the subject property shall be immediately delivered over to the person from whom it was seized. 
(j)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall be convicted of violating any part of this article may be fined up to $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(2)  In addition to, or in lieu of, proceeding under authority of subsection (1) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitle under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person violating this article. 
(Code 1996, § 131.02; Ord. No. 1994-14, 8-16-1994; Ord. No. 2019-01, § II, 5-14-2019) 
State Law reference- Presumption of unlawful noise, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01(c). 
Sec. 131.03. - Loudspeakers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who has not obtained a permit for its use to use or operate a mechanical loudspeaker or amplifier of sound of any kind, except within an occupied building, on police and emergency vehicles, and at events sponsored or approved by a governmental body. 
(b)  A permit may be granted for the use or operation of a mechanical loudspeaker or amplifier when the use of such equipment will serve a purpose found to be beneficial to the community. A permit may be granted upon such terms and under such conditions as found necessary by the city manager to ensure that such does not disturb the peace and good of the neighborhood or of persons owning, using, or occupying adjacent property. The decision of the city manager on an application for a permit may be appealed by anyone aggrieved by it to the city council who may order the permit granted or denied. 
(Code 1970, § 15-55; Code 1996, § 131.03; Ord. No. 342, 4-24-1956; Ord. No. 1984-8, 5-15-1984; Ord. No. 1998-11, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 131.04. - Drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to get drunk or be found in a state of intoxication at any private home except his own, within the city, and he is a danger to himself or another. 
(Code 1970, § 15-31; Code 1996, § 131.04; Ord. No. 306, 10-1-1954) 
Sec. 131.05. - Reserved. 
Sec. 131.06. - Carrying weapons; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his person, or in his portfolio or purse, any pistol, dirk, dagger, slingshot, blackjack, hand chain, nightstick, pipe stick, sword cane, spear or knuckles made of any metal or any hard substance, bowie knife or any other knife manufactured or sold for the purposes of offense or defense, within the city, or within the limits of any city park. With the exception of subsection (b) of this section, this section applies to a person carrying a pistol only in a: 
(1)  Public park; 
(2)  Public meeting of a municipality, county, or other governmental body; 
(3)  Political rally, parade, or official political meeting; or 
(4)  Non-firearms-related school, college, or professional athletic event; 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a person in actual service as a militiaman, nor to any peace officer in the actual discharge of his official duty, nor to the carrying of arms on one's own premises or place of business, nor to persons traveling through two or more counties, nor to license holders lawfully carrying a concealed handgun under the authority of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 411.171 et seq. 
(Code 1970, §§ 15-68, 15-69; Code 1996, § 131.06; Ord. No. 301, 10-1-1954; Ord. No. 1996-07, 6-18-1996) 
State Law reference- Unlawful carrying of weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 46.02; places where weapons prohibited, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 46.03; trespass by concealed handgun license holder, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.06; municipal authority to regulate carrying of firearms in certain locations or at certain events, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b). 
Sec. 131.07. - Discharging firearms or air rifles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, on or across any public square, street or alley within the city, or within or near any business house or private residence, or in or near a city park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge within the city any air gun or air rifle by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or other means is capable of shooting or discharging any pellet, missile or projectile a distance greater than 30 feet. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a person in actual service as a militiaman, nor to any peace officer in the actual discharge of his official duty, nor to any animal control officer in the actual discharge of his official duty, nor to any game warden in the actual discharge of his official duty, nor to a person lawfully defending his person or property or the person or property of another as provided by state law. 
(Code 1970, § 15-70; Code 1996, § 131.07; Ord. No. 304, 10-1-1954; Ord. No. 1996-06, 6-18-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001. 
Sec. 131.08. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions As used in this section, the term "public place" means any theater, carnival, show, store, restaurant, drink stand, hotel lobby, park, sidewalk, plaza or square, or any other place to which the public is admitted, whether with or without the payment of any consideration for such admission. 
(b)  Hours. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be on or in any public sidewalk, street, alley or public place in the city at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day from Sunday through Thursday inclusive and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day on Friday and Saturday; provided, however, it shall be a defense to any proceeding hereunder that such person was on or in such public sidewalk, street, alley or public place in pursuance of the duties of lawful employment, or in the company of his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor, or as an incident of attendance at a school or church meeting or entertainment, with the permission of his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor. 
(c)  Adult's responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or adult person having the care and custody of any person under the age of 18 years to knowingly allow such person under the age of 18 years to do any act in violation of this section. 
(d)  Inducing violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to induce, encourage or assist any person under the age of 18 years to do any act in violation of this section. 
(e)  Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 131.99; provided, any such person falling within the age classification of a delinquent child under the laws of this state shall be proceeded against as a delinquent child. 
(Code 1970, §§ 15-11-15-15; Code 1996, § 131.08; Ord. No. 737, 12-14-1965) 
State Law reference- General authority for juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; county juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.903. 
Sec. 131.09. - Daytime curfew for minors subject to compulsory school attendance. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; provided, however, the hours defined in this paragraph shall not be considered as curfew hours for minors not subject to compulsory school attendance pursuant to V.T.C.A., Education Code § 25.085, nor shall the hours defined in this definition be considered as curfew hours during periods in which the school where the applicable minor is enrolled is closed or classes for which the applicable minor is enrolled have been canceled under the order and direction of officials authorized to issue such orders and directives. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person subject to compulsory school attendance. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody for a limited time for a specific purpose of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means: 
(1)  To linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly or acting with criminal negligence permits, or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly or acting with criminal negligence allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
c.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
d.  Involved in an emergency; 
e.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
f.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
g.  Married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) of this section is present. 
(Code 1996, § 131.09; Ord. No. 1994-17, 11-15-1994) 
Sec. 131.99. - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished as provided in section 10.99. 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of section 131.09 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction is punishable by fine not to exceed $500.00. When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, the municipal count shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 131.09(b)(1) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Code 1996, § 131.99; Ord. No. 1994-17, 11-15-1994) 
CHAPTER 132. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sex offender registration program, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 62.001 et seq. 

Sec. 132.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Child care facility means a facility licensed, certified, or registered by the department to provide assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
    Community swimming pool means a manmade permanently installed or non-portable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The pool may be either publicly or privately owned. The term "community swimming pool" does not include a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool. 
    Database means the state department of public safety's sex offender database. 
    Day care center means a child care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner, or operator of the child care facility for seven or more children under the age of 14 for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week. 
    Minor means a person younger than 17 years of age. 
    Park means any public or private land designed for, and used by the public as, a park, recreation area, or wildlife refuge. 
    Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Code 1996, § 132.01; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 132.02. - Sex offender residency prohibition. 
(a)  If a person is required to register on the department of public safety's sex offender database because of a violation involving a victim who was less than 16 years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134. It shall be prima facie evidence that this chapter applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 16 years of age. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. A map generally depicting the prohibited area is attached to this ordinance for representation purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 132.02; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 132.03. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the state's child safety ban. A person residing within 1,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state. 
(4)  The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this chapter would not apply to the person. 
(Code 1996, § 132.03; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 132.04. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sex offender. 
    It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134. 
(Code 1996, § 132.04; Ord. No. 2015-03, 2-17-2015) 
Title XV - LAND USE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 

CHAPTER 150. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 150.01. - Short title. 
    This article is and shall be known and may be cited as the "Building Code of the City of Sinton." 
(Code 1970, § 5-11; Code 1996, § 150.01; Ord. No. 1979-10, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 150.02. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
    The International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by International Code Council, Inc. which one copy is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the "Building Code of the City of Sinton," subject to and included by reference such amendments as herein shall appear. 
(Code 1970, § 5-12; Code 1996, § 150.02; Ord. No. 1979-10, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1985-13, 10-1-1985; Ord. No. 1989-10, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 1997-12, 10-21-1997; Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 2014-06, 9-16-2014) 
State Law reference- International Building Code as the commercial building code in this state, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.216. 
Sec. 150.03. - Amendments. 
(a)  Board of appeals. Section 113 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read: 
The board of adjustment created by the city council of the City of Sinton is hereby empowered to hear and rule on all appeals filed under this article. 
(b)  Permits. Section 105 Permits of the International Building Code is amended to read: 
105.1 A person, firm or corporation shall not erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure in the applicable jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a building permit for such building or structure from the building official. However, ordinary repairs, and normal periodic maintenance may be done without a permit, provided that such repairs do not violate any of the provisions of this code. Such repairs include, but are not limited to, replacement of roofing material with material of a similar nature, painting, paneling, reglazing, or application of cosmetic or preservative surface treatment that do not require structural changes. 
(c)  Building permit fees. Section 109.2 of the International Building Code shall be amended to read: 
Permit fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
Where work for which a permit is required by the building code, and the work is started or proceeded prior to obtaining a permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $1,000.00, a plan and specifications are required to be submitted to the building official for examination before any work is done. 
(Code 1970, §§ 5-13, 5-20; Code 1996, § 150.03; Ord. No. 1979-10, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1985-13, 10-1-1985; Ord. No. 1989-10, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 2011-09, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 150.04. - Bond. 
    In accordance with the International Building Code, the city council hereby establishes the amount of bond required to be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 5-14; Code 1996, § 150.04; Ord. No. 1979-10, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1989-10, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 150.05. - Driveway restriction. 
    Driveways in non-curbed streets are limited to two single drives of 12-foot width each separated by five feet or one double drive of 24-foot width. 
(Code 1970, § 5-17; Code 1996, § 150.05; Ord. No. 1985-13, 10-1-1985) 
Sec. 150.06. - Elevation requirements in Zone B. 
    All construction in Zone B areas shall have a minimum floor elevation of 24 inches above the center of the nearest street or right-of-way or the site grade (the natural elevation of the site), whichever is the lower. 
(Code 1970, § 5-18; Code 1996, § 150.06; Ord. No. 1985-13, 10-1-1985; Ord. No. 1986-3, 3-18-1986) 
Sec. 150.07. - Reserved. 
Sec. 150.08. - Article and building code to prevail in case of conflict. 
    This article and the International Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby by reference are cumulative of any other ordinances on this subject dealt with herein and do not repeal any present ordinances unless this article and such building code are in direct conflict therewith, in which connection this article and the building code shall prevail. 
(Code 1970, § 5-15; Code 1996, § 150.08; Ord. No. 1979-10, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1985-13, 10-1-1985; Ord. No. 1989-10, 9-19-1989) 
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS CODES 

Sec. 150.15. - Incorporated by reference. 
    The following codes, together with existing amendments and amendments hereinafter, are incorporated by reference and are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  2015 International Residential Code. 
(2)  2015 International Mechanical Code. 
(3)  2015 International Existing Building Code. 
(4)  2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
(5)  2015 International Energy Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 150.16. - Reference to certain official. 
    Within the codes listed in section 150.15, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named, the building official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 3, 11-18-2014) 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted August 16, 2016, repealed art. III, §§ 15-21-150-82 and enacted a new § 155-17. At the direction of the city, these provisions have been included as ch. 158, §§ 158.01-158.21. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1977-2, adopted April 19, 1977; Ord. No. 1977-3, adopted May 17, 1977; Ord. No. 1981-7, adopted March 5, 1981. 

Secs. 150-17-150-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority concerning substandard buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; additional authority to secure substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.0011, 214.0015. 

Sec. 150.60. - Adoption of state law. 
    The city hereby adopts V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214, subch. A, and the following minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction; the following provisions for giving proper notice to the owner of a building; and the following provisions for a public hearing to determine compliance of real property, buildings, structures, premises and vacant lots. In the event that any provision of this article conflicts with said chapter 214, subchapter A, or in the event that any provision of said chapter 214, subchapter A has been omitted from this article, the city shall be entitled to pursue its remedies in conformity with said state law, as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(A), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.61. - Building standards commission. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created a building standards commission, which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of this article. The city council may also appoint three alternates to serve in the absence of any commissioner. All cases to be heard by the commission shall be heard by a panel of at least four members. 
(b)  Ex officio members. The city manager, code enforcement officer, fire marshal, and the building official of the city shall be ex officio, nonvoting members of the building standards commission. It shall be the duty of the ex officio members of the building standards commission to inspect all buildings or structures reported to be or believed to be substandard and present a report of such inspection to the city secretary. 
(c)  Officers of the commission. At its first meeting of each year, the commission shall select from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission. 
(d)  Rules and procedures. 
(1)  Four members of the commission shall be required to constitute a quorum and the concurring vote of four members of the commission is necessary to take any action under this article. 
(2)  A commission member having a personal or financial interest in any matter before the commission shall excuse himself from the discussion and the vote on that matter. 
(3)  The chairperson or city secretary may call meetings of the commission when necessary to rule on any case brought before it regarding substandard building nuisances. 
(4)  The commission shall establish such other rules and procedures it deems necessary for the election of officers and the conduct of its business. 
(e)  Duties. The commission shall hear any case dealing with substandard building nuisances and make a ruling as to whether such building is a public nuisance and whether such building or structure should be repaired, vacated and/or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(B), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.62. - Alterations, additions, and repairs. 
    All buildings or structures that are required to be repaired under provisions of this article shall be subject to all applicable sections of the building code, as amended, and as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(C), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.63. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Any real property, building, structure, or any portion thereof, or any premises, including a vacant lot, in or on which there exists a condition not in compliance with this article shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a violation of this article and subject to the penalty clauses and remedies available to the city hereunder and under the common law or equity jurisprudence of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(D), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.64. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural structure means any building or structure which is used solely for farming or ranching uses. The term "agricultural structure" includes, but is not limited to, barns, wind breaks, or silos. An agricultural structure may not be an accessory structure. 
    Building means a structure with walls and a roof, or a structure that was originally constructed with walls and a roof (e.g., a house or factory, but does not include any agricultural structure). Typically includes, but is not limited to, residential or commercial structures and includes any accessory structures on the same property. The term "building" includes the term "structure". 
    Enforcement officer means the city manager, chief of police, building official, code enforcement officer, their designated representatives, charged with any enforcement and administration of this article. 
    Inspection means the examination of property by the enforcement officer or his authorized representative for the purpose of evaluating its condition as provided for in this article. 
    Manifestly unsafe means a building that is a public nuisance, as that term is defined in this section, or unsafe for human occupation, whether temporary or permanent, and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Owner means any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in a property as shown on the most recent tax roll. 
    Person means any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity, or tenant as that term is defined in this section. 
    Public nuisance means: 
(1)  The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law or as defined elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or structures; 
(3)  Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property; 
(4)  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by the city's ordinances have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against unauthorized use or entry have not been provided; 
(5)  Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay, faulty construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; 
(6)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances that is dangerous to the physical health or safety of an occupant or other person; or 
(7)  Because of violations of section 150.66, the state of disrepair is such that it could reasonably cause injury, damage, or harm to a considerable portion of the community in the use and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the proper use or comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and the character of the community in which they are situated, which condition would be substantially offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities living in the community. 
    Tenant means any person, agent, firm, corporation, or association who occupies a property or premises and who is not the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(E), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.65. - Specific nuisances. 
    Without limiting the power of the city council to hereafter declare as public nuisances any other act, condition or thing, by ordinance, the following specific acts, conditions and things are, each and all of them, hereby declared to be and constitute public nuisances: 
(1)  Any building or any portion thereof that is: 
a.  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
b.  Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
c.  Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
1.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
2.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building. 
(2)  Any building that has any or all of the conditions or defects described in this subsection shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants is endangered: 
a.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not arranged so as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
b.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
c.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 11/2 times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
d.  Whenever any portion of a building has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such a catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
e.  Whenever any portion of a building, or member or appurtenance thereof, is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
f.  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
g.  Whenever any portion of a building has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
h.  Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe because of: 
1.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
2.  Faulty construction; 
3.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
4.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
5.  Any other cause, or is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
i.  Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
j.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
k.  Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent or more damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
l.  Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to: 
1.  Become an attractive nuisance to children; 
2.  Become a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or 
3.  Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
m.  Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the International Building Code or International Property Maintenance Code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
n.  Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the: 
1.  Strength; 
2.  Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or 
3.  Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
o.  Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the enforcement officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
p.  Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
q.  Whenever any building is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
r.  Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or whenever any building is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
s.  Whenever water heating facilities are not properly installed or maintained in a safe and good working condition and/or such water heating facilities are not capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of this subsection are not in operation. 
t.  Whenever any minimum standards provided by the International Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the International Residential Code, the International Fire Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code or National Electrical Code, as amended, and as adopted by the city council, are not met for any building. 
(3)  Any agricultural structure that fails to meet the minimum standards required for such agricultural structure adopted pursuant to the occupational safety and health standards for agriculture, 29 CFR 1928, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(F), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.66. - Minimum standards. 
    The minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings, regardless of the date of construction thereof, shall be those established by the International Property Maintenance Code, which standards are hereby adopted, as well as those standards established by the International Building Code as promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials as heretofore previously adopted or hereafter adopted or amended by the city, those standards established by this article, and those standards specified and enumerated in section 150.65. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(G), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.67. - Notice to property owners and others of public hearing. 
(a)  If the building official determines that the nuisance requires the vacation, securing, repair, or removal of a building, structure, or nuisance condition on the property, or the relocation of the occupants of the property, the building official shall: 
(1)  Give notice of the nuisance to the owner of the property as well as any one known tenant or occupant, by personal service or by certified mail, with a duplicate copy addressed to such owner, tenant or occupant as shown in the most recent tax roll or utility records of the city and deposited in the U. S. mail, postage paid; 
(2)  Provide detail in such notice of the standard violated under this article and the necessary action to abate the nuisance; a copy of the building official's report is sufficient for this purpose; 
(3)  Advise such owner, tenant or occupant of the date and time of the public hearing at which a determination will be made by the building standards commission as to whether the nuisance exists and whether the real property, building, structure, premises or any portion thereof complies with the standards of this article; 
(4)  Include a statement in such notice that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work; and 
(5)  Provide a copy of such notice of nuisance, details thereof, the required action necessary to abate the nuisance, and the date and time of the public hearing to any mortgagee or lienholder of record after a diligent effort to discover such mortgagee or lienholder. 
(b)  If the city mails a notice in accordance with this article to a property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(c)  The city satisfies the requirements of this article to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to make a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the city searches the following records: 
(1)  County real property records; 
(2)  County appraisal district records; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county; 
(5)  Utility records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(H), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.68. - Date of public hearing. 
    The date of the public hearing before the building standards commission shall not be fewer than 30 days from the date of personal service or deposit of same in the U.S. mail, whichever is earliest. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(I), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.69. - Filing of notice of public hearing in public records. 
    The city secretary shall file a notice of public hearing in the county real property records at least ten days before the date of the public hearing. The notice of public hearing shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the affected real property, if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file with the county clerk; 
(2)  A legal description of the property; and 
(3)  A description of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(J), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.70. - Effect of filing of notice in public records. 
    The filing of the notice of public hearing under section 150.69 shall be binding upon subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of any interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(K), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.71. - Conduct of public hearing. 
    The building standards commission shall conduct the public hearing to determine compliance with the standards set out in this article. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(L), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.72. - Orders and notice after public hearing. 
(a)  If, after a public hearing, the building standards commission finds that a nuisance exists pursuant to this article, the building standards commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the real property, building, structure or premises to within 30 days: 
(1)  Secure the offending building or agricultural structure from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Abate the nuisance or repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner, mortgagee or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within the 30 days allowed. The building standards commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
(b)  If, after the public hearing, a building, structure or premises is found to be in violation of the standards set forth in this article, the building standards commission may order that the building, structure, or premises be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The building standards commission also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of the owner. The building standards commission reserves the right to determine what is a reasonable amount of time to perform the ordered work or what is a reasonable amount of time to relocate the occupants. In the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner, the building standards commission may order any of the mortgagees or lienholders of the building, structure, or premises to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished to comply with the order within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The building standards commission also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of any of the mortgagees or lienholders. Under this section, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(c)  If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee establishes at the public hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work, and if the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has submitted at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule, and the building standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to abate the nuisance or repair, remove or demolish the building or agricultural structure, the building standards commission shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building standards commission through the building official to demonstrate compliance with time schedules for commencement and performance of the work and may require appearance before the building official, the building standards commission, or their designees, to demonstrate compliance. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the city's boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the building standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under this subsection. In lieu of a bond, the building standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the building standards commission. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third-party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the city issues the order. 
(d)  Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city secretary shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the city secretary's office; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(e)  After the public hearing, the city secretary shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt requested, to be delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building, structure or premise. 
(f)  If the building, structure or premise is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. This subsection does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(M), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.73. - Repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed by the building standards commission in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any building, structure, or premise, and any building, structure, or premise declared a nuisance under this article shall be made to comply with one or more of the following: 
(1)  The building, structure, or premise shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current codes applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair. 
(2)  Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than 50 percent of the building or agricultural structure must be repaired or replaced, and the repairs amount to less than 50 percent of the building or agricultural structure's value. 
(3)  If the building or agricultural structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered vacated and secured from unlawful entry. 
(4)  If the building or agricultural structure requires repairs over greater than 50 percent of its surface or amounting to greater than 50 percent of its value, it shall be demolished. Further, if a building or agricultural structure cannot be repaired so that it will be brought into compliance with this article, it shall be demolished. Additionally, if the building or agricultural structure as it stands presents an incurable fire hazard in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. For the purpose of this article, the term "demolished" includes the cleaning and grading of the property and the removal of all debris and trash. 
(5)  If the building or agricultural structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or agricultural structure or relocate the occupants at its own expense, and may thereafter assess expenses, and establish a lien against the property, as set forth in section 150.79. 
(6)  If, after the expiration of the time allotted under section 150.72, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee fails to comply, the city may do or cause to be done the repairs necessary to bring the building into compliance with this article and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds the minimum standards, as defined by this article, and expenses may be assessed as provided in section 150.79. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(N), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.74. - Designation of enforcement officer. 
    The city manager, or his designated representative, are hereby directed and authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Nothing contained herein is meant to limit discretion of any enforcement officer in evaluating and directing compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(O), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.75. - Enforcement authority and liability. 
    The city manager, or his designated representative, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the enforcement officer, or his designated representative, because of such act or omission performed in the enforcement of any provision of this article, shall be defended by legal counsel provided by the city until final termination of such proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(P), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.76. - 24-hour abatement under certain circumstances. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit the requirement for abatement within 24 hours, or a period of time less than as prescribed herein for public hearings, notice thereof, or the recovery of costs and establishment of liens, when a nuisance has been declared an immediate threat to health and safety by any enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(Q), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.77. - Remedies. 
    To enforce any requirement of this article, any enforcement personnel may gain compliance by any or all of the following: 
(1)  Taking such action as the enforcement officer deems appropriate within the authorization provided for in this article or any other ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Causing appropriate action to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Ordering the abatement of the nuisance and assessing the costs of abatement against the property if the owner of the property does not abate same after the required notice. 
(4)  Any other remedies permitted or authorized at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(R), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.78. - Contracting for abatement. 
    Whenever the property owner, agent, or tenant fails to abate the nuisance within the time allowed, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to contract with a contractor to perform such work as may be required to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(S), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.79. - Recovery of costs. 
(a)  Whenever the city enters upon the premises and causes any work to be performed to abate a nuisance, or if the building or agricultural structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or if the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may take such action at its own expense, and a charge will be made to the property owner, agent, or tenant to recover the costs associated with the abatement. The charge shall be the actual cost of abatement, plus applicable sales taxes. 
(b)  An administrative fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall be assessed for each such charge. 
(c)  If the actual charge and the administrative fee are not paid to the city within 30 days after billing, the city shall file a lien against the property. Said lien shall be filed in the deed records of the county. The charges shown on the lien shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the due date until paid. The lien shall be collected under the same terms and provisions of law as on city ad valorem taxes. The lien may be extinguished prior to foreclosure if the owner or other person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for its expenses. If the notice is given pursuant to section 150.69, and the opportunity to abate the nuisance or repair, remove, or demolish the building or agricultural structure is afforded to each mortgagee or lienholder under said section 150.69, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(o). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(T), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.80. - Penalty clause. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, requirement or order issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in the applicable city ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(c)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(U), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.81. - Judicial review. 
    Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee aggrieved by an order of the building standards commission issued under this article shall be entitled to review by a state district court pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0012, and the city shall be entitled to an award of attorney's fees, costs and expenses, and judgment therefor, pursuant to and as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0012(h). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(V), 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 150.82. - Municipal court proceedings not affected. 
    Action taken by the city pursuant to this article shall not affect the ability of the city to proceed under the jurisdiction of the city's municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § II(W), 1-20-2015) 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 150.90. - Short title. 
    This article is and shall be known and may be cited as the "Utility Construction Code for the City of Sinton." 
(Code 1970, § 5-50; Code 1996, § 150.35; Ord. No. 1979-13, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 150.91. - Procedure. 
(a)  Notification. Any utility, including, but not limited to, telephone, gas, electricity, water, sewer, cable television, contemplating working in the city will notify the city manager setting forth the scope of work. A full set of work prints shall be attached to the notification. 
(b)  Prebid conference. If the utility intends to contract, a prebid conference shall be scheduled between the utility, all prospective bidders and the manager to insure that all concerned are fully aware of this article and the other city regulations. 
(c)  Preconstruction conference. 
(1)  A preconstruction conference will be required. This conference shall be scheduled at least two weeks prior to start of construction. The following personnel will attend the conference: 
a.  City: 
1.  City manager. 
2.  Director of public works. 
3.  City inspector. 
b.  Utility: 
1.  Construction superintendent. 
2.  Immediate foreman or person in charge of the construction. 
3.  Appropriate owners or corporate owners. 
(2)  At this time all placement plans will be discussed and approved by the city (e.g., the city may need certain portions done early or delayed). 
(d)  Permits, and the like. A starting date will be presented at this time and a construction permit issued as well as any necessary street use permit. A performance bond in the amount of 25 percent of the construction charge will be required. All bonds, contracts and appropriate permits will be required before the start of any construction. 
(e)  Consent forms. Where it is necessary to perform construction work behind curb and gutter, the contractor will file with the city manager a consent and notification form from each affected property owner. 
(f)  Construction requirements. The following items will be adhered to without deviation in performing the construction: 
(1)  Any grass to be cut will be blocked and replaced after backfilling ditch. The same must be watered to prevent grass from dying. 
(2)  All backfill unless otherwise specified will be watered or mechanically tamped in six-inch lifts. 
(3)  All trees, shrubs, flower beds, and the like, will be bored at least six feet from center. 
(4)  On broken sewer lines a full joint will be replaced, patching will not be allowed. The work will not be performed by the city, but by the contractor, and will meet all city codes. All sewer breaks will be repaired within 24 hours and will not remain open overnight. The same applies to broken water services. The city will inspect the repair prior to closing and covering the break. This will be performed by the city inspector and a fee of $25.00 will be charged per inspection. Repairs to broken mains will be handled by city crews with all costs charged to the utility plus a 25 percent handling fee. 
(5)  Any openings for street crossings, connection pits, splice pits, meters, and the like, will be allowed to remain open for only three days from date of being dug. After three days they must be backfilled and, if not done, the city will do so and charge the utility cost plus a 25 percent handling fee. 
(6)  The city shall be notified of any openings, pole work, plant removal, and the like, by the utility prior to work being performed in normal situations. In emergency situations the city may be notified within the hour after the work has started. 
(7)  In all cases of sunken ditches, and the like, the utility and the contractor will be notified of the facilities in need of repair and cleanup and will be allowed two days to begin work to clean up same. If work has not started or is not progressing satisfactory, the city will contract the cleanup and/or repairs and the utility will be billed for the services rendered, plus a 25 percent handling charge. 
(8)  Any spoil removed from alleys will be in center or out of driving lanes in order that passage will not be obstructed. Backfill will be new select backfill material and will be mechanical or water tamped, and new shall be spread in alley. 
(g)  Pavement cuts. All driveways, sidewalks, and cross streets will be bored unless the city grants permission to cut. Any sidewalk or driveway cut must also be cleared with the property owner. 
(h)  Asphalt cut and repaired. When asphalt is to be cut and repaired, the following will apply in all cases: 
(1)  The asphalt will be sawed on the outer edged one inch wider on each side than the width of ditch. This will be done prior to ditching. 
(2)  All spoil will be removed from the street and hauled away. 
(3)  Backfill will be select backfill, mechanically tamped in six-inch lifts to within six inches of the top of the ditch. 
(4)  At this time a four-inch concrete and then a two-inch hot mix patch will be placed. The patch will overlap the actual cut of the ditch by four inches per side. This asphalt will be sawed so that the patch is watertight. 
(5)  After repairs to the street, the street will be swept and washed. 
(6)  There will be a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time for pavement cuts. 
(7)  The patch will be inspected by the city inspector at a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 5-51; Code 1996, § 150.36; Ord. No. 1979-13, 10-2-1979) 
CHAPTER 151. - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- National Electrical Code applicable statewide for residential construction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214. 

Sec. 151.01. - Short title. 
    This chapter is and shall be known as and may be cited as the "Electrical Code of the City of Sinton, Texas." 
(Code 1970, § 7-1; Code 1996, § 151.01; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 151.02. - Adoption. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, which one copy is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the "Electrical Code of the City of Sinton." 
(Code 1970, § 7-2; Code 1996, § 151.02; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1997-11, 10-21-1997; Ord. No. 2014-08, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 151.04. - Licenses and bonds. 
(a)  License required. No person shall install, repair or remove electrical wiring or devices unless he is licensed as a master electrician by the city, or unless he is supervised by a master electrician and holds a journeyman or apprentice license. Work done by apprentices must be directly supervised by a licensed master or journeyman electrician. 
(b)  Classifications. There shall be three classifications of electrician's licenses: 
(1)  A master license will be issued to an applicant when he has held a journeyman license for two consecutive years and has passed an open book test to determine his familiarity with the National Electrical Code. The applicant must achieve a score of 80 percent. 
(2)  An apprentice will be issued a journeyman license when he has held an apprentice license for one year and has passed the journeyman examination with a score of 75 percent. 
(3)  An applicant will be issued an apprentice license when he is employed by a licensed master or journeyman electrician, and is undergoing training to learn the craft of a skilled electrician. The license will be valid while employed by a licensed master or journeyman electrician. 
(c)  Fees. The fees for electrician's license under this chapter shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(d)  Terms and conditions. The terms and conditions of the license are as follows: 
(1)  The license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be on a concurrent term with the applicant's bond, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Such license may be renewed within ten days after the first license expires by payment of the renewal fee and evidence of renewal of bond. Failure to renew the license within the required time will require the applicant to reapply for licensing at the initial fee rate. 
(3)  Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the building official for failure to remedy unsatisfactory work, violation of the electrical code, failure to obtain a permit or failure to obtain proper inspections. 
(4)  If licensee has had his license revoked, he has ten days to appeal the decision. The request shall be in writing submitted to the board of adjustment, together with a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(e)  Corporate surety bond; indemnification of city. An applicant for a license, after passing the required examination, shall submit to the city secretary a corporate surety bond in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such bond shall indemnify the city and any person within the city for damages caused by the applicant or his agents or employees in connection with the exercise of privileges extended to the applicant by reason of having been licensed by the city. The bond shall run for concurrent term with the license. 
(f)  Homeowners. A license and bond is not required of a homeowner who is doing electrical work on his own residence. The homeowner may receive help from others to do such work, provided that no consideration of any kind be given for such help, and provided that the principal occupation of the person giving help is not that of an electrical contractor or electrician. A license is not required of a person who is hired as a full-time employee to perform normal maintenance excluding alterations and additions of electrical systems in commercial establishments, provided that the person does not work as an electrician or electrical contractor for the general public. 
(Code 1970, § 7-5; Code 1996, § 151.04; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 151.05. - Permits. 
(a)  Except as hereafter provided, it shall be unlawful for anyone to install or permit to be installed any electrical system, or part of such system, or to make alterations, additions, changes or major repairs to an electrical system without having obtained a permit to do such work. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for the following electrical work: 
(1)  Normal maintenance work, such as replacement of lamps, sockets, fuses, drop cords, snap switches or other similar minor repairs as may be permitted by the building inspector. 
(2)  Connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable existing permanently installed receptacles. 
(3)  Replacement of a motor by another motor of the same horsepower and rating, and installation of pressure devices and similar controls, when the electrical supply for the same has been properly installed by a licensed electrician. 
(c)  No permit will be issued to anyone except a licensed electrician or a homeowner who is doing electrical work on his own residence. This shall in no way allow the homeowner to violate any provision of this code. 
(d)  The fee schedule as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall apply to permits issued under this code. Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started prior to obtaining the required permit, the permit fee shall be doubled. 
(Code 1970, § 7-6; Code 1996, § 151.05; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 2011-08, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 151.06. - Inspector and inspections. 
(a)  The building official and/or inspector shall be the electrical inspector of the city. 
(b)  The building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all electrical work done for which a permit is required. The inspector may make as many inspections as are deemed necessary to insure an adequate system. It will be the responsibility of the permit holder to notify the inspector when an inspection is needed, in accordance with this schedule: 
(1)  Rough-in inspections when all wires have been placed, but prior to connection or covering by wallboard, insulation or paneling. 
(2)  Final inspections after all connections have been made and all devices have been installed, but prior to supplying power to the system. 
(3)  When the final building inspection has been made, the inspector will also inspect to determine if any damage has been done to the system during construction and that the system functions properly and all safety devices are in place. 
(4)  Re-inspection will be done when systems are to be found deficient. A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time will be charged for each re-inspection after the first re-inspection. 
(c)  All inspections will be made by the inspector within 48 hours after the inspection is requested excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If the inspection is not made in the required time, the contractor may cover his work or energize the system. This in no way will release the contractor from making corrections if deficiencies are found at a later time. 
(Code 1970, §§ 7-7, 7-8; Code 1996, § 151.06; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 151.07. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the building official or inspector shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction or materials to be used in an electrical system, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of electric fabrication can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that true intent and meaning of this code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the permit holder or applicant may appeal the decision of the building official or inspector to the board of adjustment. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city secretary within 90 days after the decision is rendered by the building official. A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time shall accompany such notice of appeal. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the building official, an electric system or device threatens the safety or welfare of others, he may limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
(c)  The board of adjustment created by the city council is hereby empowered to hear and rule on all appeals filed under this code. 
(Code 1970, §§ 7-9, 7-10; Code 1996, § 151.07; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1989-12, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 151.08. - Liability. 
    Any officer, employee or member of the board of adjustment, charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the governing body in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accrued to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by appropriate legal staff under the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Code 1970, § 7-11; Code 1996, § 151.08; Ord. No. 1979-12, 10-2-1979) 
CHAPTER 152. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 152.01. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    HUD-code manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body-feet in width or at least 40 body-feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; 
(2)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
(3)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
    Internal drive means a private street which carries traffic to and from the residential property or auxiliary buildings. 
    License means a license issued by the city, permitting a person to operate and maintain a manufactured home park. 
    Licensee or agent means any person licensed or authorized by the licensee of a manufactured home park to operate or maintain such park. 
    Manufactured home park means a tract of land under a single ownership on which two or more detached manufactured homes are used for dwellings and exist. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means a subdivision designed under and/or intended for the sale of lots for residential occupancy by detached manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured home or manufactured housing means a HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home. 
    Mobile home. 
(1)  The term "mobile home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed before June 15, 1976; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and 
(2)  The term "mobile home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
    Natural or artificial barrier means a river, pond, canal, railroad, levy, embankment, fence or hedge to separate land. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a tract of land under single ownership that is made up of individual sites or stands for temporary service or use of land. 
    Service building means a structure housing a lavatory and other service facilities. 
    Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a manufactured home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the manufactured home park. 
    Sewer service riser pipe means the portion of a sewer service system which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a manufactured home space. 
    Space means a plot of land within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home. 
    Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution. 
    Water riser pipe means the part of the water service system, serving a manufactured home park, which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a manufactured home space. 
(Code 1970, § 14-1; Code 1996, § 152.01; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.02. - Plan submittal and design requirements. 
(a)  Plan submittal. Every owner of an existing or proposed manufactured home park or subdivision, which plans to construct, enlarge or extend the facility, shall submit an application and site plan to the city secretary. Such site plan shall comply with the zoning and/or subdivision ordinances along with the following development criteria: 
(1)  Five copies of the preliminary plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, which shows the general features of the proposed development. Area and dimensions of the tract of land with reference to location and boundaries. 
(2)  Vicinity map and north arrow. The block, lot and size of all manufactured home spaces and park area. 
(3)  Location, width and specifications of driveways, curbs and gutters, roadways and sidewalks. 
(4)  The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
(5)  The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems. 
(6)  Location and specification of all buildings to be built and recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, satellite dishes, playground equipment and barbecue grills. 
(7)  Existing and proposed topography. 
(8)  Fire mains location, including the size and type of hydrants. 
(9)  Adjoining land uses within 200 feet and proposed fence, landscape barriers, natural barriers and garbage pickup areas. 
(10)  Approval by state and county for the usage of septic tanks, or septic treatment systems and water wells, due to the unavailability of city services within the site area. 
(b)  Design requirements. 
(1)  Site drainage. The tract for development shall be graded for drainage and placed at elevation to prevent flooding of the area. Refer to the city flood hazard prevention ordinance in chapter 150, article III. 
(2)  Zoning. The manufactured home subdivision or park and/or recreational vehicle park uses shall be required to have a specific use permit within a permitted zoning classification or a planned unit development classification. The manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park or the manufactured home subdivision shall contain no less than three acres in size, each with a minimum width or depth of 300 feet located on a public street or highway. The boundary of the park or subdivision, if within 25 feet of a boundary of a permanent residential district or proposed residential development, shall provide a minimum of a six-foot-high fence, wall or hedge with a landscape strip of at least 15 feet wide. The landscape strip shall not be included as part of the eight percent gross area (see section 152.03(2)) of the recreational space and cannot be built upon unless the strip can be used as part of a jogging trail, bike path or other recreational amenity. 
(3)  Lot size and setback. The standards are as follows: 
a.  Single-wide manufactured home lot. 
Description Manufactured 
Home Park Manufactured Home
SubdivisionsMinimum lot area 4,500 square feet 4,500 square feet Lot width 45 feet 45 feet Lot depth 100 feet 100 feet Front yard 20 feet 20 feet Side yard 10 feet 10 feet Rear yard 10 feet 10 feet Coverage 30 percent 30 percent  
b.  Double-wide manufactured home lot. 
Description Manufactured 
Home Park Manufactured Home 
Subdivisions Minimum lot area 4,800 square feet 4,800 square feet Lot width 60 feet 60 feet Lot depth 80 feet 80 feet Front yard 20 feet 20 feet Side yard 10 feet 10 feet Rear yard 10 feet 10 feet Coverage 30 percent 30 percent  
c.  Recreational vehicle park. 
Description Recreational Vehicle Park Minimum lot area 1,375 square feet Lot width 25 feet Lot depth 55 feet Front yard 10 feet Rear yard 5 feet Side yard 5 feet  
(4)  Traffic system. Every manufactured home community shall have access from a public street, and each space or lot shall have internal street access; however, no space or lot shall be designed for direct access to a public street outside the boundaries of the park or subdivision. All streets and interior access drives shall be paved and maintained in a smooth seal surface, conforming to subdivision standards, which is well-drained. Interior access streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at 90-degree angles to minimize traffic hazards; and all streets shall be named with signs at each corner; and address numbers shall be placed on each manufactured unit for identification. Street lighting shall be provided with height and spacing to provide an average illumination level of not less than 0.02 footcandles. 
(5)  Water system. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided for domestic and firefighting requirements. All water pipes are to be connected to each unit and must comply with local, state and federal regulations. 
(6)  Sewer system. If not connected to the city system, an adequate and safe sewage system, complying with county regulations, shall be provided for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Effluents from sewage treatment systems shall not be emptied into waters of the state without the approval of the state natural resource conservation commission. All spaces or lots shall provide connections for water closets, sinks, laundry and other sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1970, § 14-2; Code 1996, § 152.02; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.03. - Development and placement standards. 
    The development of any manufactured home or recreational home park or subdivision, whether created, constructed, enlarged or extended within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, depends upon the demands for such development. A complete system of services shall be required that provides for internal access drives and collector streets for traffic circulation of standard and large vehicles, adequate parking spaces, utilities, congestion, office and supporting service facilities and anchoring of the manufactured home or vehicle to safeguard the occupant and surrounding area. 
(1)  Street development. General maintenance and development of streets and drives include a pavement seal with proper drainage, a street right-of-way for garbage pickup, fire lanes and emergency access and utilities. Internal streets or drives shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet that are continuous and connect with other internal or public streets and allow for two paved parking stalls of concrete, asphalt or an equal seal for each unit lot. If the internal street should become a dead end, a cul-de-sac shall be provided at the end having a minimum diameter of 80 feet, free of any parking and not exceeding 150 feet in length. Maintenance of all private internal streets is the responsibility of the owner. Drainage by curb and gutter is required and should be integrated in the overall pavement width of the street. For dedication of the street system in a subdivision serving the general public, the developer/owner is required to follow street construction standards, which include curb and gutter and right-of-way requirements in the city subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Parking and park space. Off-street parking shall be two parking stalls with a minimum dimension of nine feet by 20 feet each. One visitor parking space with a minimum dimension of nine feet by 20 feet each for every four spaces of manufactured home or recreational vehicles shall be required. Such space shall be less than 150 feet from the manufactured home or recreational vehicle space. Not less than eight percent of the total gross site area shall be devoted to recreational purposes to relieve congestion of people. The recreational area includes space for community building, community use facilities, swimming pools, etc. The recreation area shall be centrally located and free of traffic hazards. 
(3)  Utilities. Includes electric, water, sewer and gas to serve the area by mains and laterals to each of the spaces or lots with a connection for: 
a.  Electrical. Power lines shall be underground with individual connections; grounding and wiring system of unit are to be in accordance with the applicable city electrical code; and proper easement placement shall be made. Adequate outside lighting shall be provided to illuminate streets, driveways and walkways for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with 110/220-volt service with minimum 150 amp service. 
b.  Water. Mains should be sized according to the surrounding developing area and laterals in accordance to the immediate development, each in proper easements. An adequate supply of water for drinking and sanitary purposes shall be supplied by pipes in easements servicing each manufactured home unit, with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground. Individual water riser pipes and connections, as well as the hot water system, shall comply with the city plumbing code. 
c.  Sewer. All sewage from the development shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable local standards or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction that will not present a health hazard or violation of state requirements. Each manufactured home or recreational vehicle space or lot shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer pipe, which shall rise aboveground by four inches in a vertical position. A manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park exceeding 600 feet in depth shall be required to install a six-inch fire main, looped, within the park area along the unpaved section of the right-of-way or easement, with fire hydrants adequately spaced and meters approved by the city. 
d.  Gas. Natural gas piping systems shall be contained underground in easements and maintained in accordance with applicable standards. Piped gas shall be capped properly to prevent discharge when not in use and shall require city approval of each manufactured home unit prior to hookup. Liquefied petroleum systems can be installed if the natural gas system is not within 1,000 feet of the park or subdivision development. The liquified system shall be in accordance with local code and state railroad commission standards. Bottled gas for recreational vehicles requires copper line hookup and connections and approval by the city prior to such use. 
No utility easements may be infringed upon by improvements of any type but may be used in satisfying setback requirements. 
(4)  Facilities. Includes buildings for office, storage services, restrooms, garbage collection and incidental uses, such as carports and storage units for individual manufactured home spaces. 
a.  An office, activity community building, washateria, mailbox area, grounds maintenance storage buildings and carports may be constructed but shall comply with all applicable city codes and may at no time be used for dwelling purposes. 
b.  Restroom facilities shall be required in recreational parks for males and females separately, as follows: 
1.  1 to 20 spaces: one restroom facility. 
2.  20 to 50 spaces: two restroom facilities. 
3.  50 to 100 spaces: three restroom facilities. 
4.  100 to 200 spaces: four restroom facilities. 
5.  One restroom facility per 100 spaces thereafter. 
c.  Garbage collection facilities shall be provided to prevent health hazards or air pollution. Individual mobile unit lot containers shall be kept tight from animals and insects and water infiltration and provided in sufficient number and capacity to store properly all refuse. Refuse containers, three cubic yards in size or larger, may be used in locations convenient to the manufactured home units; but such containers shall be so designed as to prevent spillage and infestation. Concrete pads are required for larger units to prevent damage to the surrounding grounds or pavement. 
d.  Carports and storage per lot. Manufactured homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least a 20-foot unobstructed clearance between manufactured homes. Except that an open carport can be placed within the side yard, so long as it is no closer than ten feet from the outer edge of the carport to a manufactured home. Portable storage or accessory buildings shall be included as per cent of lot coverage, and no such incidental structure shall be considered for dwelling purposes. 
(5)  Anchoring the manufactured home unit. Concrete pads for individual manufactured home park or subdivision and recreational vehicle parks shall be required in accordance with the structural sufficiency of the city to allow for placement of anchors for portable units and such use conveniently strapped against high winds and torrential weather conditions. For floodplain management purposes, all manufactured homes and any recreational vehicle or other similar vehicle placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days shall be required to be tied down. 
a.  Ties for each manufactured home shall be provided as follows: 
Unit Length 
(in feet) Number of Ties 
(per side) Up to 30 2 30 to 50 3 50 to 70 4 Over 70 5  
b.  The over-the-unit ties shall be as close to each end of the unit as possible, with straps at stud and rafter locations. Galvanized anchor rods shall be not less than five-eights-inch diameter with an eye at the top and connected with a No. 5 reinforcing bar on the bottom section of the concrete thickness pad. A galvanized steel strap, 11/4 inches by 0.035 inches, or approved equal, shall be wrapped over the unit and secured by galvanized U-bolt clamps or five-eighths-inch turnbuckles. 
c.  Piers and footings shall be spaced at ten-foot intervals on both frame rails, with each end no further than five feet from the end of the manufactured home unit. Footings shall be of 16-inch by 16-inch by four-inch solid concrete or piers of standard eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block, with treated shingles for leveling, with the approval of the city. 
d.  Incidental structures and awnings shall also be anchored for security and approved by the city, but such equipment is not mandatory for strapping. Auger anchors, suitable in size and length, could be used in lieu of the concrete deadman anchor slab method, if soil tests are made to assure that anchorage will withstand 3,750 pounds of pull per ten-foot length of the manufactured home unit. 
(Code 1970, § 14-3; Code 1996, § 152.03; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.04. - License required; maintenance requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any manufactured home park or recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the city, unless a license is issued by the city. A certificate of occupancy must accompany such license. The application for a license shall be filed with the city secretary. Issuance of the license is subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The application shall contain information as follows: 
(1)  The name, address and e-mail address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park. 
(3)  A complete plan of the park, showing compliance with the city ordinance. 
(4)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed, or to be constructed, within the park. 
(5)  Before the license is issued, the city secretary shall obtain approval of the fire marshal and any additional information the city council may require. 
(c)  Every person owning or operating a park shall maintain parking and streets, fixtures and permanent equipment in a state of good repair. Each park shall be under the direct management of the owner, whose action shall be fully responsible. A guest register shall be required with information as follows: 
(1)  Name, address and e-mail address of each occupant. 
(2)  Make, model and year of all vehicles. 
(3)  License number and owner of each manufactured home or recreational vehicle. 
(4)  State issuing such license. 
(5)  Date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home or recreational vehicle. 
(d)  The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The annual license fee shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Transfer of the license is possible, if approved by the city council. The fee for the transfer shall be the same as the annual license fee. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the park. The city council may revoke such a license, if the park is found to be in violation of this chapter, and may reissue such license based upon compliance. 
(e)  The park shall keep the register available at all times for necessary review by city or state officials. The register shall not be destroyed for a period of three years. The management shall comply strictly with the following: 
(1)  Regular inspection of utilities and removal of refuse. 
(2)  Maintenance of permanent buildings. 
(3)  Measures necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public, such as the disinfestation of insects and rodents. 
(4)  Reporting to the city any communicable disease. 
(5)  Reporting disorderly conduct. 
(6)  Making sure rules and regulations are maintained and kept conspicuous to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 14-4; Code 1996, § 152.04; Ord. No. 1987-16, 2-15-1987; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.05. - Status of existing parks. 
    All manufactured home parks or subdivisions and all recreational vehicle parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived , as approved by the city, shall be considered permitted and approved prior to such date; however, all terms and requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to any extension, alteration or addition to such preexisting park or subdivision. Any person seeking to alter or expand a park or subdivision or construct a new one shall obtain a permit from the city secretary. 
(Code 1970, § 14-5; Code 1996, § 152.05; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.06. - Permit for nonconforming manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured homes parked within the corporate limits of the city since January 11, 1966, and which were then and since in violation of the zoning ordinance only shall be permitted as nonconforming; provided, however, manufactured homes so parked conform to all other sections of this chapter and do not otherwise endanger surrounding property or create a nuisance. Upon vacating of such nonconforming parking area, no new license or permit shall be granted, except in conformity with all requirements of this chapter. Mobile homes may not be replaced by another mobile home once it is vacated from its parking area. 
(Code 1970, § 14-6; Code 1996, § 152.06; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.07. - Permit required to locate manufactured home outside park; regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain any manufactured home or recreational vehicle in any park in the city other than a duly licensed and lawful park, unless such person shall first secure a specific use permit from the city council, as set forth in the city's zoning ordinance. Bottled gas for cooking or heating purposes shall not be used, unless containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall not be located inside the manufactured home or recreational vehicle or within five feet of the door thereof. State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel must be followed. 
(b)  It is provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to secure a permit from the city council to park or store a recreational vehicle when such vehicle is parked for storage purposes only, is not occupied for any purpose, is not connected to any utilities, is parked on private property and does not violate any of the city's fire and traffic codes. 
(c)  It is provided, however, that the city manager may issue a temporary permit to maintain a recreational vehicle permit for not more than 90 days to homeowners whose residence has been made uninhabitable due to a catastrophe. The recreational vehicle must be located on the homeowner's property and must meet the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles may be occupied by persons associated with a circus, carnival, outdoor show or similar exhibition to show on the county showgrounds. 
(e)  The city manager may issue a temporary permit to maintain a recreational vehicle, parked on property belonging to an organized church, which has in place water and sewer hookup facilities specifically for recreational vehicles. The recreational vehicle may be occupied by the owners of the vehicle for the period of their church engagement, not to exceed seven days, with a maximum of two temporary permits in a 12-month period. 
(Code 1970, § 14-7; Code 1996, § 152.07; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
Sec. 152.08. - Inspections. 
    All manufactured homes and any recreational vehicle or similar vehicle which remains on the same site for more than 180 consecutive days shall be inspected annually by the city building inspector for proper tie-down. For those homes and vehicles parked in a park, the inspection shall be required at the time of license renewal. For those homes and vehicles located outside of a park, the inspection shall be required on the anniversary date of the placement on the site. There shall be a charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time per home or vehicle for each inspection. 
(Code 1970, § 14-8; Code 1996, § 152.08; Ord. No. 1987-15, 11-4-1987) 
CHAPTER 153. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 153.01. - Short title. 
    This chapter is and shall be known and may be cited as the "Plumbing Code of the City of Sinton." 
(Code 1970, § 19-1; Code 1996, § 153.01; Ord. No. 1979-11, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 153.02. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by International Code Council, Inc., of which one copy is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the "Plumbing Code of the City of Sinton." 
(Code 1970, § 19-2; Code 1996, § 153.02; Ord. No. 1979-11, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1989-11, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 1993-10, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 1997-10, 10-21-1997; Ord. No. 2014-07, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 153.021. - Plumbing permit fees. 
    Plumbing permit fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 153.03. - Hearing by board of adjustment. 
    The board of adjustment created by the city council is hereby empowered to hear and rule on all appeals filed under this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 19-3; Code 1996, § 153.03; Ord. No. 1979-11, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1989-11, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 153.04. - Conflicting provisions. 
    The International Plumbing Code adopted in this chapter does not repeal any other ordinances unless they are in direct conflict therewith, in which case the International Plumbing Code shall prevail. 
(Code 1970, § 19-5; Code 1996, § 153.04; Ord. No. 1979-11, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1989-11, 9-19-1989; Ord. No. 1993-10, 9-7-1993) 
Sec. 153.05. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    No plumber, plumbing contractor or subcontractor shall fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 19-6; Code 1996, § 153.05; Ord. No. 1979-11, 10-2-1979) 
Sec. 153.06. - Cross-connection control program. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exits unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the state natural resource conservation commission rules and regulations for public water systems (TNRCC rules) and this chapter. 
(2)  The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the TNRCC rules and this chapter. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance. 
(1)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating with specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications as least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. 
(2)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Back-flow Prevention and Cross-Connection Manual or University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
(3)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the city within five working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present location or can not be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section. The Prevention and Cross-Connection Control Manual (M14), current edition, University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is more stringent. 
(5)  Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with The American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current addition, or the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five working days after calibration. 
(6)  A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the state natural resource conservation commission. 
(c)  Customer service inspections. 
(1)  A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe the cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution facilities. 
(2)  Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection: 
a.  Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by the state board of plumbing examiners; 
b.  Certified waterworks operators and members of other water-related professional groups who have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission. 
(3)  The customer service inspection must certify that: 
a.  No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriated backflow prevention assembly; 
b.  No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists. Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced press-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester; 
c.  No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply is permitted; 
d.  No pipe or pipe filling which contains more than eight percent lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use; 
e.  No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2 percent lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. 
A minimum of one lead lest shall be performed for each inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 153.06) 
Sec. 153.07. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. If a person is convicted of one or more distinct violations of this chapter, the city manager, public works director or city inspector shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager, public works director or city inspector that the same action shall not be repeated while the chapter is in effect. Compliance with this chapter may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02, 3-6-2001) 
CHAPTER 154. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 154.01. - Adoption. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, being particularly the 2015 edition, one copy of which is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated as the property maintenance code of the city, subject to, and including by reference, such amendments as hereinafter shall appear. 
(Code 1970, § 12-1; Code 1996, § 154.01; Ord. No. 1033, 7-11-1967; Ord. No. 1973-8, 5-1-1973; Ord. No. 1989-13, 9-19-1989) 
Sec. 154.02. - Amendments. 
(a)  Section 111.2. Membership of board, of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read: 
The board of adjustment appointed by the city council shall constitute the board of adjustment and appeals for all purposes set out in the property maintenance code. 
(b)  Section 308.2.1. Rubbish storage facilities, of the International Property Maintenance Code shall read as follows: 
Every dwelling unit shall have garbage storage containers having a capacity of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 30 gallons for each container, with tight-fitting lids and racks that will not allow containers to turn over. 
(Code 1970, §§ 12-2, 12-4; Code 1996, § 154.02; Ord. No. 1033, 7-11-1967; Ord. No. 1989-13, 9-19-1989) 
CHAPTER 155. - SUBDIVISION CODE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 155.01. - Application of regulations. 
    These regulations shall govern every person, firm, association or corporation owning any tract of land within the city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, who may hereafter divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, streets, alleys, parks, or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1996, § 155.01; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.02. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plat means a map or chart of the subdivision. The term "plat" shall include plan, plat or replat, in both singular and plural. 
    Resubdivision means the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with the relocation of any street line. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include re-subdivision. The following is not defined as a subdivision: testamentary division of property; partnership division of property upon dissolution; and a division of property between two or more owners of an undivided interest by court order. 
(Code 1996, § 155.02; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.03. - Purpose, authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, which chapter is hereby made a part of these regulations, the city council does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city and in the unincorporated areas lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city limits, in order to provide for the safe, orderly and healthful development of the area within the city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction in a manner to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
(b)  Any owner of land located inside the corporate limits or within extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city wishing to subdivide such land shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a plan of subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in these regulations and conform to the city's comprehensive plan. Any owner subdividing his land into parcels of not less than five acres each for agricultural use and not involving new streets shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(c)  No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded, and no lot in a subdivision inside the corporate limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall be improved or sold, until the plat shall have been approved by the planning and zoning commission. The city shall have the authority to prohibit the installation of public utilities in unapproved subdivisions and to prohibit the issuance of building permits for structures in such unapproved subdivisions. 
(Code 1996, § 155.03; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE II. - PLAT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 155.15. - Preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission before the subdivider proceeds with the final plat. It shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Scale. This preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 200 feet to the inch or larger such scale as the city requires. All such maps shall use line types, symbols and other standard features as designated in the city's technical guidelines for drawings and maps. 
(2)  Existing features inside subdivisions. 
a.  The existing boundary lines of the land to be subdivided. Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy lines for easy identification. 
b.  The location of existing watercourses, railroads, and other similar drainage and transportation features. 
c.  The location and width of existing streets, alleys, easements, building and structures. 
d.  Topographical information with contour lines at one-foot intervals. 
(3)  Existing features outside subdivision. 
a.  The property lines and names of adjoining property owners in undivided tracts. 
b.  The name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, easements, pipelines, watercourses, and the like. 
c.  All lines outside of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision to be dashed. 
(4)  New features inside of subdivisions. 
a.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
b.  The location, width and names of proposed streets. 
c.  The approximate width and depth of all lots. If the side lines are not parallel, the approximate distance between them at the building line and at the narrowest point should be given. 
d.  The location of building lines, alleys and easements. 
e.  The location and approximate size of sites for schools, churches, parks and other special land uses. 
f.  The approximate acreage of the property to be subdivided. 
(5)  Key map. A key map showing relation of subdivision to well known streets in all directions to a distance of at least one mile. 
(6)  Title, and the like. The date, scale, north point and title under which the plat is to be recorded. 
(7)  Submission. The planning and zoning commission shall be furnished with a 3.5-inch floppy diskette which contains the tracing in AutoCAD release 12 or higher format, a reproducible tracing and three legible prints of the preliminary plat, and with three copies of a letter of transmittal stating briefly the type of street surfacing, drainage, sanitary facilities, and water supply proposed, and the name and address of the owner or agency and engineer or surveyor seven days or more before the regular planning and zoning commission meeting. These documents shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(8)  Approval. The planning and zoning commission shall approve conditionally, approve or disapprove within 30 days any preliminary plat submitted to it. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute final acceptance of the final plat. Failure to act within 30 days of the regularly scheduled meeting at which the plat would have been presented shall constitute approval of the planning and zoning commission, unless additional time is requested from the developer. Reasons for the disapproval or conditional approval of the planning and zoning commission shall be put in writing, attached to one copy of the plat and returned to the person submitting the plat. Preliminary approval will expire six months after the approval of the planning and zoning commission of the preliminary plat or of final sections thereof, except that if the subdivider shall apply in writing prior to the end of such six-month period, stating reasons for needing the extension, this period may be extended for another six months, but not beyond the total of one year. 
(Code 1996, § 155.15; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.16. - Final plat. 
(a)  After approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission, a final plat prepared by a registered public surveyor and bearing his seal, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission by filing in the office of the city secretary. Such plat shall have all changes and alterations made on it that were required on the previously submitted preliminary plat. The final plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall then approve or disapprove the final plat and, if approved, shall have the approval shown on the plat by the signature of the chairperson and the secretary. 
(b)  All final plats shall be submitted on a 3.5-inch floppy diskette in AutoCAD release 12 or higher format, and drawn in India ink on tracing cloth or drafting film sheets 18 inches by 24 inches and to scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. Plats may be prepared on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet, if they include a graphic scale and are reduced to 18 inches by 24 inches for filing in the county records. Where more than one sheet is required, an index sheet shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Existing features inside subdivision. 
a.  The existing boundary lines of the land to be subdivided. Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy lines for easy identification. 
b.  The location of existing watercourses, railroads, and other similar drainage and transportation features. 
c.  The location and width of existing streets, alleys, easements, buildings and structures to be retained. 
(2)  Existing features outside subdivision. 
a.  The name and property lines of adjoining subdivisions and of the adjoining property owners in undivided tracts. 
b  The name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, easements, pipelines, watercourses, and the like. 
c.  All lines outside of subdivision boundaries to be dashed. 
(3)  Streets, alleys, easements. The lines and names of all proposed streets or other ways or easement to be dedicated to public use, with the following engineering data: 
a.  For streets: complete curve (delta, length of curve, radius, point of curvature, point of tangency) shown on the centerline or on each side of the street. Length and bearings of all tangents. Dimensions from all angle points and points of curve to an adjacent side lot line. 
b.  For watercourses and easements: distances to be provided along the side lot lines from the front lot line to the high bank of a stream. Traverse line to be provided along the edge of all large watercourses in a convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if paralleling the drainage easement or stream. 
(4)  Name of subdivision and total acres. The name of the subdivision and the total acres being subdivided shall be shown. 
(5)  Lots and blocks. The lines and numbers of all proposed lots and blocks with complete bearings and dimensions for front, rear and side lot lines. 
(6)  Building lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots. 
(7)  Reservations. The use and property dimensions of all special reservations, including sites for schools, churches and parks. 
(8)  Monuments and control points. 
a.  The description and location of all permanent lot corners, curve points, angle points, block corners, and reference points. Refer to section 155.36(e). 
b.  Suitable primary control points to which all dimensions, bearings, and similar data shall be referred. Dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(9)  Certificate of approval to be placed on the plat. The following certificate of approval shall be placed on the plat: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I, _____ do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Sinton, Texas. 
_____
Signature and Seal of Registered Surveyor  
Approved this _____ day of ________, 20___ by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Sinton, Texas. 
_____
Chairperson, Planning and Zoning Commission  
_____
Secretary  
(10)  Water, sewer, paving and drainage plans. Two sets of plans and specifications for water, sewer, paving, and drainage prepared by a registered engineer must be submitted with the final plat. These plans must have the approval of the city engineer or representative of the city designated by the city council. 
(11)  Key map. A key map showing relation of subdivision to well-known streets in all directions to a distance of at least one mile. 
(12)  Title, and the like. The date, scale, north point and subdivision title. 
(13)  Dedications and certificates. Such dedications and certificates as are applicable. 
(14)  Special restrictions. Where restrictions of use of land, other than those given in these regulations are to be imposed by the subdivider, such restrictions may be placed on the final plat or on a separate instrument filed with the plat. 
(15)  Tax receipt. A receipt showing that all taxes have been paid is to be submitted concurrent with the final plat. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission shall be furnished with three legible prints and the original tracing or a reproducible copy of the final plat seven days or more before the regular planning and zoning commission meeting. These documents shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(d)  The city engineer or representative of the city designated by the city council shall furnish the planning and zoning commission with a written certificate stating that the plans and specifications of the subdivision (are/are not) in accordance with city's design and construction standards, attached here to this title as an appendix. 
(e)  The city council shall approve or disapprove of extensions or enlargements to existing water, sanitary sewer, street or drainage systems required by the proposed development. The city engineer, or the person designated by the city council, shall advise the city council of the effect and requirements of the proposed development on the existing utility, street and drainage systems. Any extension or enlargement of the systems, that may or may not require expenditure of public funds, shall have the written approval of the city council to the planning and zoning commission before the planning and zoning commission approves the plat. 
(f)  The subdivider is expected to complete the improvements of the subdivision, as required by this chapter, after approval of the final plat. He shall furnish the planning and zoning commission a letter, before the final plat is approved, agreeing to complete such improvements. 
(g)  The city shall withhold all city improvements, including the furnishing of water and sewer service, from all additions which have not been approved as provided by law or otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter concerning improvements provided by the subdivider. Building and other permits may be denied tracts which have not complied with the requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  The following schedule of fees and charges shall be paid into the general fund of the city when any map or plat is tendered to the city secretary, and each of the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the city council, city planning and zoning commission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid. The city secretary, deputies or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. The fees shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(2)  The fees in subsection (h)(1) of this section shall be charged on all plats regardless of the action taken by the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  The subdivider shall cause a check to be made payable to the county clerk to cover all recording fees involved in finishing the platting process and have this delivered to the city secretary. 
(i)  Final approval will expire one year after the planning and zoning commission action granting approval of any plat unless the plat has been filed for record, except that if the subdivider shall apply in writing prior to the end of such one-year period, stating reasons for needing the extension, this period may, at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission, be extended for another year but not beyond that period. 
(Code 1996, § 155.16; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted August 16, 2016, repealed § 155.17 and enacted a new § 155-17. At the direction of the city, these provisions have been included as ch. 158, §§ 158.01-158.21. Former § 155.17 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1996 and Ord. No. 1994-03, adopted March 1, 1994. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 155.30. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformity to major street plan. The width and location of streets shall conform to such major street plan as the planning and zoning commission may have adopted, both as to horizontal and vertical alignment and right-of-way widths. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend all existing major streets and such existing secondary and local-access streets as may be desirable for convenience of circulation. Where possible, the width and the horizontal and vertical alignment of extended streets shall be preserved. 
(c)  Street jogs. Where offsets in street alignment are, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, unavoidable, such offsets may be employed provided the distance between centerlines is not less than 125 feet. 
(d)  Large-lot subdivisions. If the lots in the proposed subdivision are large enough to suggest resubdivision in the future, or if part of the tract is not subdivided, consideration must be given to possible future street openings and access to future lots which could result from such resubdivision. 
(e)  Through traffic. Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage high-speed or through traffic. 
(f)  Topography. The street system shall bear a logical relationship to the natural topography of the ground. 
(g)  Right-of-way and paving width. 
(1)  Street width shall be measured from front lot line to front lot line of opposite lots. Paving width shall be measured from back to back of curb. 
Classification Row Width Paving Width Major streets 80 feet minimum 61 feet Collector or feeder streets 60 feet minimum 39 feet Local streets 60 feet minimum 39 feet  
(2)  Major streets. The width of major streets shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission, the major street plan and adopted standards. Major streets with a right-of-way width of less than 100 feet are to be increased to a width of 100 feet for a distance of 150 feet at the approach to a major street intersection, with a transition back to normal right-of-way over a distance of an additional 150 feet. 
(h)  Street alignment. The maximum deflection in alignment permitted without use of curve shall be ten degrees. 
(i)  Major street curves. Curves in major streets shall have a centerline radius of 2,000 feet or more with exceptions to this standard granted only by the planning and zoning commission. 
(j)  Secondary street curves. Curves in secondary or feeder streets shall have a centerline radius of 800 feet or more, with exceptions to this standard granted only by the planning and zoning commission. 
(k)  Local street curves. Curves in local streets are to have a centerline radius of 300 feet or more, except for loop or partial loop streets. 
(l)  Reverse curves. Reverse curves shall be separated by a minimum tangent of 100 feet. 
(m)  Dead-end street/cul-de-sacs. 
(1)  Turn-arounds. Turn-arounds are to have a minimum pavement radius of 50 feet for a single-family and two-family use and 60 feet for other uses. 
(2)  Maximum length. The maximum length of a dead-end street with a permanent turn-around shall be 600 feet, except in conditions of unusual topography. 
(3)  Temporary turn-arounds. Temporary turn-arounds are to be provided at the end of streets more than 400 feet long that will be extended in the future. The following note should be placed on the plat: 
"Cross-hatched area is temporary easement for turn-around until street is extended (give direction) in a recorded plat." 
(n)  Street intersections. 
(1)  Angle of intersection. Except where conditions will not permit, all streets, major and minor, shall intersect at a 90-degree angle. Variations of more than ten degrees on minor streets and more than five degrees on major or secondary streets must first be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Radius at acute corners. Acute angle intersections approved by the planning and zoning commission are to have 25 feet or greater radii at acute corners. 
(3)  Centerline tie with existing streets. Each new street intersecting with or extending to meet an existing street shall be tied to the existing street on centerline with dimensions and bearings to show relationship. 
(o)  Partial or half-streets. Partial or half-streets may be provided where the planning and zoning commission feels that a street should be located on a property line. The following note shall be used in all such dedications: 
"This ___-foot strip is dedicated as an easement for all utility purposes including storm and sanitary sewers and shall automatically become dedicated for street purposes when and insofar as a ___-foot strip adjacent to it is so dedicated and the required improvements are installed." 
(p)  Reserve strips. Provisional one-foot reserves may be used along the side or end of streets that abut acreage tracts, accompanied by a note on the plat as follows: 
"One-foot reserve to become automatically dedicated for street purposes when adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat." 
(q)  Street names. New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and so as to prevent conflict with identical, or similar names in other parts of the city. All street names shall require the approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(r)  Private streets. Private streets are prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 155.30; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.31. - Lots. 
    All lots shown on the plat will be for residential purposes unless otherwise noted. Standards that apply to residential lots follow: 
(1)  Lot size. On the basis of the district in which they lie and the use to which they are to be put, all lots must conform to the regulations of the zoning ordinance, including minimum area, width and depth. 
(2)  Corner lots. Corner lots with a width of less than 75 feet are to be at least five feet wider than average of interior lots in the block. Corner lots with a width of less than 85 feet adjacent to a major thoroughfare are to be at least 15 feet wider than the average of interior lots in the block. 
(3)  Lots on major streets. Lots facing or backing on major streets shall be at least ten feet deeper than average of lots facing on adjacent minor streets. 
(4)  Lots on drainage easements. Minimum usable lot depths for lots backing on natural drainage easements shall be not less than 80 feet measured between front lot line and drainage easement. 
(5)  Lot width. The lot width is the average of the front and rear lot dimensions. 
(6)  Lot shape. Lot should be rectangular insofar as practicable. Sharp angles between lot lines should be avoided. The ratio of depth to width should not ordinarily exceed 21/2 to one. 
(7)  Lot lines. Side lot lines should be perpendicular or radial to street frontage and the following note may be used in lieu of bearings: 
"All side lot lines are either perpendicular or radial to street frontage unless otherwise noted." 
(8)  Lot facing. 
a.  Street frontage. Each lot shall be provided with adequate access to an existing or proposed public street by frontage on such street. 
b.  Double front. Double front lots are prohibited except when backing on major thoroughfares. 
c.  Front facing. Wherever feasible, each lot should face the front of a similar lot across the street. In general, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to each other should be avoided. 
(9)  Lot numbering. All lots are to be numbered consecutively within each block. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering continues from block to block in a uniform manner that has been approved on an overall preliminary plat. 
(10)  Driveway restrictions. Rear and side driveway access to major thoroughfares shall be prohibited unless approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1996, § 155.31; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.32. - Blocks. 
(a)  Block length. 
(1)  Residential. Maximum block length for residential use shall be 1,200 feet, measured along the center of the block and a minimum of 500 feet unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  On major street. Maximum block length along a major street shall be 1,600 feet except under special conditions and upon approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of at least minimum depth, except when prevented by the size of the property or the need to backup to a major thoroughfare. 
(c)  Block numbering. Blocks are to be numbered consecutively within the overall plat and/or sections of an overall plat as recorded. 
(Code 1996, § 155.32; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.33. - Building lines. 
    The front, side and rear building lines shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 155.33; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.34. - Alleys. 
(a)  Width. Where provided, alleys shall not be less than 16 feet in width. 
(b)  Cut-offs. In case of intersecting alleys, a cut-off shall be required at each corner. Cut-offs shall be triangles having two equal sides each of which shall be not less than ten feet in length. 
(c)  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys will not be permitted. Alleys in new subdivisions shall connect to alleys in adjacent subdivision wherever feasible. 
(d)  Alleys required. Alleys shall be required in all business areas and in those portions of new residential subdivisions where partial blocks are needed to complete existing blocks with alleys. 
(Code 1996, § 155.34; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.35. - Easements. 
(a)  Size. The size of easements shall not be less than nine feet on each side of rear lot lines, with an additional five feet on each side beginning at a plane 18 feet above the ground. The full width of easement shall not be less than 18 feet at ground level nor less than 23 feet beginning at a plane 18 feet above the ground level. 
(b)  Use. Where necessary, easements shall be retained for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, open drains, gas lines, or other utilities. Such easements may be required across parts of lots, including side lines, other than as described above, if in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission same is needed. 
(Code 1996, § 155.35; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.36. - Improvements required. 
(a)  Streets, utilities and drainage. The subdivider shall provide paved streets with curb and gutter, sidewalks, water distribution and sanitary sewage collection systems, and a drainage system conforming to the requirements of this chapter and the engineering and construction standards of the city. 
(b)  As-built plans. The developer shall furnish to the city as-built plans on a 3.5-inch floppy diskette in AutoCAD release 12 or higher format and one set of reproducible as-built plans, certified as such by the developer's engineer, and two sets of prints. These items shall be furnished before city water meters are connected for service to structures in the subdivision. These plans shall show actual alignment and grade of all street, drainage, sanitary sewer and water system improvements which shall include location of water and sewer taps. 
(c)  Electric and telephone lines. Electric and telephone lines shall be provided by the subdivider in cooperation with the appropriate utility company. All such utilities shall be underground and must meet all applicable standards of the utility company. 
(d)  Street lights. Street lights shall be provided by the subdivider in cooperation with the city and electric power company. 
(e)  Monuments. 
(1)  Lot corners, curve points and angle points shall be marked with a piece of five-eighths-inch round reinforcing rod at least 24 inches in length driven flush with the finished ground level or lower if necessary in order to keep same from being disturbed. 
(2)  Block corners shall be marked with a piece of three-quarter-inch round reinforcing rod at least 30 inches in length or one-inch diameter or larger galvanized iron pipe at least 30 inches long, driven flush with the ground level or lower if necessary, in order to keep same from being disturbed. 
(3)  Reference points shall be established for locating block corner and primary control points. Reference points shall be set in the street right-of-way at the point of intersection of a three-foot offset line parallel to the property line. Reference points shall be a drill hole or lead plug and tack in the concrete sidewalk. The final plat shall show the location of all reference points. If for any reason sidewalks are not provided an alternate method of reference points shall be submitted for approval with the final plat. 
(Code 1996, § 155.36; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.37. - Reservations. 
(a)  Permitted purposes. No land contained in the proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any use other than a use permitted by the zoning ordinance for the district in which the land to be reserved is located. 
(b)  Designation on plat. The specific use for which each piece of land is to be reserved must be shown by appropriate label or description on the subdivision plat. Provision for future abandonment of a reservation as may be appropriate must likewise be shown on the plat. 
(c)  Parks and playground. The location and size of parks and playgrounds shall be in accordance with the planning and zoning commission's park site plan and with the requirements of the city council. Park sites are to be purchased at the developer's acreage cost plus a prorated cost of improvements. 
(d)  Schools. The location and size of schools shall be in accordance with the planning and zoning commission's school site plan and with the requirements of the school district. 
(Code 1996, § 155.37; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.38. - Large tract division. 
(a)  Where in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and the tracts are divided into one acre or larger lots, the following general requirements and design standards will apply: 
(1)  For right-of-way: 
a.  Minimum right-of-way width: 60 feet. 
b.  Minimum alley width, if provided: 16 feet. 
c.  Minimum easement-(total): 10 feet. 
d.  Maximum block length: 1,200 feet. 
e.  Minimum block length: 600 feet. 
f.  Maximum cul-de-sac length: 600 feet. 
g.  Minimum cul-de-sac length: 50 feet. 
(2)  For improvements: 
a.  Pavement width: 32 feet (paving to meet city subdivision standards). 
1.  Curb and gutter required: No. 
2.  Storm drainage required: Yes. 
b.  Public water and sanitary sewer: The subdivider will provide public water and sanitary sewer service to all lots if public water and sanitary service is available to the nearest point of the subdivision where the city deems it economically justified; or if public water and sanitary sewer service is not available to the subdivision then the subdivider will make deed restrictions that require connection to each developed lot when public water and/or sanitary sewer service becomes available to the subdivision. 
(3)  For lots: 
a.  Minimum building line: 25 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum lot depth: 125 feet. 
d.  Minimum average lot width for corner lots: 125 feet. 
(b)  Before the plat of such subdivision shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivision shall establish restrictive covenants as to the property within the subdivision to provide that the lot area shall not be reduced until a satisfactory replat of such subdivision, or portions thereof, which restrictive covenants shall be filed in the deed records of the county simultaneously with the filing of the plans of the subdivision. The final plat shall also contain a certificate signed by the county health officer approving such plat for individual water and sewer services, if such are proposed. 
(Code 1996, § 155.38; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 1995-11, 8-15-1995) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 155.50. - Payment of improvement costs. 
(a)  On-site. The subdivider will bear the cost of all improvements within his subdivision. 
(b)  Off-site. The city will extend existing city utilities to the nearest point of the subdivision where it is deemed economically justified. Such justification will normally entail less than ten feet of utility extension per new residential lot, and no new major water or sewer facilities. Streets and drainage will be considered generally the responsibility of the subdivider. Each request for extension will be considered on its own merits. 
(c)  Oversize lines. The city will bear the difference in the cost of the facility or improvement required to serve the subdivider's land and that are required by the city to be installed. 
(Code 1996, § 155.50; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.51. - Variances. 
    Where a subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where because of some condition peculiar to the site in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning and zoning commission may approve a variance. 
(Code 1996, § 155.51; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.52. - Inspections and approval. 
(a)  The city shall be given opportunity to inspect all phases of the construction of improvements for a subdivision. The subdivider or his contractor shall maintain daily contact with the city engineer, or his representative, during the construction of improvements. 
(b)  No sanitary sewer, water, or storm sewer pipe shall be covered without approval of the city engineer, or his representative. No concrete shall be poured for streets, structures, or curbs and gutters without said approval. No flexible base material shall be placed on the street sub-grade, or asphaltic surface applied to the flexible base of a street without said approval. 
(Code 1996, § 155.52; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.53. - Engineering and construction standards. 
    These standards are in outline form and are intended to indicate the minimum requirements for street, drainage, water and sanitary sewer system improvements to be constructed in new subdivisions in the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The responsibility for proper plans and specifications and control of construction to produce facilities adequate for the intended use is with the developer. The city will inspect construction at various times and as required by the developer. No instructions will be given by the city directly to the developer's contractor, unless specifically requested by the developer in writing. 
(1)  Street improvements. 
a.  Subgrade: clean, acceptable material compacted to natural subsurface density. 
b.  Base: eight-inch compacted thickness caliche. 
Major Collector Local 8-inch line stabilized 8-inch lime 8-inch lime 10-inch compact caliche 8-inch 
compacted caliche 8-inch 
compacted caliche  
1.  Caliche shall have the following characteristics: 
Gradation Limits Size 100 Percent Passing 21/2 inches 100 2 inches 95-100 1 inch 65-90 3/4 inch 60-80 40 mesh 15-40  
Minus 40 mesh material: 
Liquid limit 40 maximum Plasticity index 8-13 maximum Los Angeles abrasion loss 55 percent maximum  
2.  These limits apply to material as obtained directly from the pit. 
c.  Asphaltic pavement. 
Major Collector Local One course seal coat One course seal coat One course seal coat 4-inch hot-mix 3-inch hot-mix 2-inch hot-mix  
d.  Seal coat: 
0.30 gallons/square yard AC-5 (TDH spec.) 1 cubic yard/100 square yard Grade 4 (not precoated) aggregate (TDH spec.)  
e.  HMAC. Tack coat as required and 11/4-inch compacted thickness HMAC having the following characteristics: 
1.  Aggregate: crushed limestone. 
2.  Paving mix time: Type "D" (TDH spec.). 
3.  Density: optimum 95, minimum 93, maximum 96 (ASTM D 2041-71). 
4.  Stability: 42 minimum (ASTM Bulletin C-14). 
f.  Curb and gutter: reinforced concrete with doweled expansion joints. 
g.  Sidewalk: four-foot wide reinforced concrete with doweled expansion joints. Light broom finish. 
(2)  Drainage improvements. 
a.  Drainage ditches: side slopes one on three or flatter, min. grade 0.004(0.4 percent). greater from small ditches. Concrete lining will be required if a utility easement is used. Alleys will not serve as a drainage ditch. 
b.  Inlets: curb inlets, other types as specifically approved only. 
c.  Pipe: reinforced concrete, other types as specifically approved only. Backfill water consolidated. 
d.  Culverts: reinforced concrete with appropriate headwalls or end sections with the state department of transportation high safety feature. 
e.  Design: major drainage structures designed by rational method for 25-year storm; minor drainage structures designed for five-year storm. Storm Drainage Design 
Areas less than 200 acres. Use TDH formula for San Patricio County: 
i =  B  
(T+D)   
E 
   
Where: 
i = intensity of rainfall, inches/hour 
T = Time of concentration, minutes 
D = 8.7 
For five-year frequency: 
B = 78.0 
E = 0.789 
For 25-year frequency: 
B = 91.0 
E = 0.757 
f.  Lot grading: 0.5 percent slope toward designated and maintained drainageway, all building sites such that lowest occupied floor is 12 inches above 100-year flood level and a minimum of 18 inches above natural grade. 
The city is vitally concerned that adequate drainage is obtained. If for any reason, it is not feasible to meet the above minimum requirements, the engineer for the developer will prepare a drainage plan acceptable to the city engineer for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Water system improvements. 
a.  Pipe: six-inch diameter in residential fire system, eight-inch diameter in business or industrial fire system. Smaller sizes for other service not in fire system, as approved. 
b.  Valves: required with box and cover, at each tee or cross and every 1 000 feet along straight runs. Tees will require two valves and crosses will require three valves, unless approved otherwise. 
Taps: required with cast iron box and cover for each lot. 
c.  Fire hydrants: placed such that front building line of all residential lots falls within 500 feet of a hydrant, and direct access from hydrant to lot is provided. Spacing in commercial and industrial areas is 300 feet. Valve is required on each hydrant lead. Brand and model shall be approved by the city's engineer. 
d.  Fittings and blocking: fittings M, J, cast iron. Concrete blocking required at all fittings and fire hydrants. 
e.  Excavation and backfill: to give proper bedding of pipe and avoid backfill settlement after completion. Water consolidation of backfill required as a minimum. 
f.  Sterilizing: to meet state department of health criteria. 
g.  Testing: required, 24-hour system pressure followed by two hours at 100 psi (city will provide water). 
(4)  Sanitary sewer system improvements. 
a.  Pipe: vitrified clay, PVC or ABS, mains six-inch diameter or larger. Slopes and placing shall meet state natural resource conservation commission criteria. Special care required where trench material is water-bearing or unstable. 
b.  1.  Manholes: 
(i)  Clay brick: heavily mortared outside and sealed with asphaltic water proofing compound; 
(ii)  Reinforced concrete, monolithic; or 
(iii)  Fiberglass, not to exceed ten feet in depth. 
2.  Covers: traffic covers, machined. 
3.  Taps: separate four-inch tap required for each lot, plugged with a nondegradable plug. 
c.  Excavation and backfill: to give proper bedding of pipe and avoid backfill settlement after completion. Water consolidation of backfill required as a minimum. 
d.  State department of health criteria: these criteria shall be met. Attention is called to requirements for placements of water and sewer systems in proximity. 
(5)  Materials. Materials shall meet the following minimum specifications: 
a.  Concrete: 3000#/square inch cylinder strength at 28 days. Concrete testing below 90 percent of this value shall be replaced. 
b.  Reinforcing steel: ASTM A61 5 (Grade 60 or 40) concrete pipe for storm drainage ASTM C76, Class III. 
c.  Water system pipe: AWWA C400, Class 150 PVC, AWWA C900, Class 200 (DR 14), gasketed joints. 
d.  Water system valves: AWWA C500. 
e.  Fire hydrants: AWWA C502, two hose, one pumper connection. 
f.  Sanitary sewer system pipe: PVC ASTM D1784 (Type 1, Grade 1), ASTM D-1869 joints, SDR 35 or thicker ABS ASTM D-2751 and D-2680. 
g.  Water meter boxes: cast iron only. 
h.  Other materials as specified by the developer and approved by the city. 
(6)  Guarantee. The developer, either directly or through contract with others, shall guarantee to the city all construction against defects in workmanship or materials for a period of 12 months following acceptance by city for maintenance. 
(Code 1996, ch. 155, app.; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 155.99. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violations within the city limits. Any person violating this chapter or any portion thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Violations within the extra territorial jurisdiction. 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this chapter outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the city's area of extra territorial jurisdiction, shall not constitute a misdemeanor under this chapter, nor shall any fine provided for in this chapter be applicable to a violation within such area of extra territorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  In the event any provision of this chapter is violated within the area of extra territorial jurisdiction of the city, and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 155.99; Ord. No. 1994-03, 3-1-1994) 
CHAPTER 156. - ZONING CODE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 156.001. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as "The City of Sinton, Texas, Zoning Ordinance." 
(Code 1996, § 156.001; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.002. - Enacting clause. 
    There is enacted the following zoning ordinance, with a map creating and delineating zoning districts, which amends in its entirety, the zoning ordinance with a map of zoning districts of the city dated October 7, 1986, said amendment together with a map creating and delineating zoning districts. 
(Code 1996, § 156.002; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.003. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the street; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with view toward conserving the value of building and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1996, § 156.003; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.004. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with the customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
    Accessory building or use. 
(1)  The term "accessory building or use" means any accessory building or use is one which: 
a.  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building principal use. 
b.  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served. 
c.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience, and necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served. 
(2)  The term "is located," when used in the text, shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory building may be part of the principal building if there is no natural fire break, such as an alley or easement abutting the rear lot line. Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the adjoining property. If a fire break of six feet or more exists between the rear lot line and the adjoining property, no setback is necessary for an accessory building. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Apartment means a room or group of rooms in an apartment building used as a dwelling for one family unit which does its cooking therein. 
    Apartment building means a building or portion thereof used or intended to be used as a home for three or more families or households living independently of each other and each equipped for preparation of food. 
    Basement means a story, or portion of a story, partly below curb level, which at least one-half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, is above curb level. The curb level nearest to a story, or portion of a story, shall be used to determine whether such story, or portion of a story, is a basement. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and public parks or corporate boundaries of the city. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than hotel, motel, or an apartment hotel where, for compensation and prearrangement for a definite period, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
    Buffer zone means a strip of land created to separate and protect one type of land use from another. 
    Building. 
(1)  The term "building" means any structure which: 
a.  Is permanently affixed to the land; 
b.  Has one or more floors and a roof; 
c.  Is bounded by either open area or the lot lines. 
(2)  The term "building" does not include such structures as billboards, fences, radio towers, or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible for human use, such as tanks, smoke stacks, grain elevators, oil cracking towers or similar structures. 
    Building area means the total square footage of a lot covered by a building measured on a horizontal plane at mean grade level. 
    Building, detached, means a building which is surrounded by yards or open space on its building lot. 
    Building envelope means the net cubic space that remains for placing a structure on a site after building line, setback, side yard, height, and bulk regulations are observed. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. 
    Building line means a building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend. 
    Building official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or his representative. 
    Building plot means the land, lots, or tract of land upon which a building or buildings are located, or upon which they are to be constructed, including yards and bounded by the property line. 
    Clinic means an establishment of offices in which a group of physicians, dentists, or other practitioners of the healing arts, and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of diagnosing and the treating of ill or injured persons. A clinic may include a medical or dental laboratory, but may not include facilities for providing room or board for patients. A clinic may not include offices or facilities for veterinarians. 
    Club means an association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common objective, such as literature, science, politics, good fellowship and similar objectives which meets periodically and which is limited to members. 
    Commercial amusement means any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gates of the activity. Commercial amusements including zoos, carnivals, expositions, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, rodeos, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, pool parlors, and similar enterprises. 
    Common property means a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a planned unit. 
    Comprehensive master plan means a legal document often in the form of a map and an accompanying text adopted by the local legislative body. The plan is a compendium of its general policies regarding the long-term development of its jurisdiction. It is also called a "general plan" or "city plan." 
    Convalescent home means any structure used or occupied by three or more persons recovering from illness or receiving geriatric care for compensation. 
    Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
    Dance hall means an establishment devoted to entertainment primarily providing a dance floor and music for dancing, that derives less than 75 percent of its gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    District means any section of the city for which the zoning regulations covering the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Dormitory means any structure specifically designed to house student tenants associated with a university, college or school. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed for use for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, duplex, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building or portion thereof constructed for or occupied by two or more families and containing two or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling unit means a room or suite of two or more rooms designed or intended for use by an individual or family in which culinary and sanitary conveniences are provided for the exclusive use of such individual or family. 
    Family means a collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a continuing nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. The term "family" shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited duration of a school term or other similar determinable period, 
    Fraternity, sorority or group student house means a building occupied by, and maintained exclusively for, students affiliated with an academic or vocational institution. 
    Frontage means all the property on one side of the street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. 
    Garage, commercial, means a premises and structure used for housing more than five motor vehicles or where any vehicles are repaired for operation or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles or where any vehicles owned or used by the occupants of the building to which it is necessary. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Home occupation means any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other than a personal family name plate not more than one square foot in area, or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; there is no commodity which is prepared without a specific order placed before delivery, and sold upon the premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. 
    Hospital, sanitarium, nursing home or convalescent home means a building or portion thereof, used or designed for the housing or treatment of the sick, aged, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons, provided that the term "hospital," "sanitarium," "nursing home" or "convalescent home" shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, apartment or hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons. 
    Hotel means a building used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, but not excluding permanent guests, and may include a cafe, drugstore, clothes pressing shop, barber shop or other service facilities for guests for compensation. 
    HUD-code manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body-feet in width or at least 40 body-feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet. 
(2)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
(3)  The term "HUD-code manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
    Kindergarten means any school, private or parochial, operating for profit or not, attended by four or more children at any one time during part of a 24-hour day, which provides a program of instruction for children below the first grade level in which constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum. 
    Loading space mean a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
    Lot means the physical and undivided tract or parcel of land as shown on the duly recorded plat. A lot may be increased in size to include part of an adjoining lot, provided that the remaining portion of land meets the minimum dimension requirements of this chapter or is included in another adjoining lot. The owner of any enlarged lot shall file in the deed records of the county an affidavit adequately defining the dimensions of the enlarged lot and thereafter the enlarged tract shall be considered a single lot within the meaning of this chapter and may not be redivided without an approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents of the curve at the point of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior, means a building lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Manufactured home or manufactured housing means a HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home. 
    Mobile home. 
(1)  The term "mobile home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed before June 15, 1976; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body-feet in width or at least 40 body-feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet 
(2)  The term "mobile home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
    Motel or motor hotel means a building or group of buildings including either separate units or a row of units which contain sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy and providing off-street parking space on the same building lot for use of its occupants. 
    Multiple building complex means more than one principal building on a building plot. 
    Nightclub means an establishment open at night and devoted to entertainment primarily serving food and beverages and providing a floor show, music, and/or dancing, that derives less than 75 percent of its gross revenues from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Nonconforming use means the use of land or a building, or a portion thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated and which use was in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
    Occupancy means the use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
    Open space means that part of the countryside which has not been developed and which is desirable for preservation in its natural state for ecological, historical, or recreational purposes, or in its cultivated state to preserve agricultural, forest, or urban greenbelt areas. 
    Parking space means a surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with the street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile. A parking space shall not occupy any public land. 
    Permit means an official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
    Planned unit means a land area which has individual building sites and common property such as a park and is designed to be capable of satisfactory use and operation as a separate entity without necessarily having the participation of other building sites or other common property. The ownership of the common property may be either public or private. 
    Planned unit development means a single planned unit as initially designed; or such a unit as expanded by annexation of additional land area; or a group of continuous planned units, as separate entities or merged into a single consolidated entity. 
    Plot plan means a plan showing the use of the land, to include location of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities and other structures to be constructed. 
    Retail food store means a retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, light hardware and other similar items which are purchased for use and/or consumption off the premises (may be a drive-in or supermarket type). 
    Retail service station means an establishment where gasoline, oil, and grease, or automobile accessories are sold, supplied or dispensed to the motor vehicle trade or where motor vehicles receive limited repair, are equipped for service, or where electric storage batteries are charged and cared for, or a place where any two or more such activities are carried on or conducted as the principal use of the establishment. 
    Roominghouse means a group of rooms provided for compensation either in a converted single family home or in a structure specifically designed for such purposes. No cooking facilities are provided in individual living units. 
    Roominghouse and boardinghouse means a building where both rooms and meals are provided for compensation for more than four persons. 
    Setback line means a line which marks the setback distance from the property line, and establishes the minimum required front, side and rear yard space of a building plot. 
    Shopping center means a composite arrangement of shops and stores which provides a variety of goods and services to the general public, when developed as an integral unit. 
    Sign, advertising, means poster panel, painted bulletins or other advertising devices which promote and advertise commodities or services not limited to being offered on the premises on which such signs are located. 
    Sign, business, means a graphic device which advertises only commodities or services offered on the premises where such sign is located. 
    Sign, church and school, means name plates and bulletin boards for schools and churches located on premises, but not exceeding 30 square feet in area and not a flashing, intermittent, revolving or similar lighted type. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a freestanding sign supported by a single vertical support anchored or set in the ground, no exposed face of which exceeds 64 square feet in surface area. 
    Sign, real estate, means temporary signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property upon which they are located, not exceeding 20 square feet in area and advertising property only for a use which it is legally zoned. 
    Specific use permit means a use which may be permitted in a specific zoning district, under certain conditions, subject to city council approval after public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. The use shall comply with minimum lot area, setback requirements and other related performance standards. 
    Storage garage means any premises and structure used exclusively for the storage of more than five automobiles. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half, means a partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purpose, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alteration means any change which would tend to prolong the life of a supporting member of a structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Structure, principal, means the principal structure which fulfills the purpose for which the building plot is intended. 
    Tavern means any establishment that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Use means the purpose of activity for which the land or building thereby is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Variance means a legal deviation of a district zoning regulation whose strict enforcement will result in undue hardship. Pecuniary hardship to the owner, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
    Variety store means a retail commercial establishment which supplies a variety of household goods, toys, light hardware items, candy, some clothing and other general merchandise. 
    Wrecking or salvage yard means a place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places for storage of salvaged materials of house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment where conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, or salvaged materials incidental to a manufacturing operation. 
    Wrecking or salvage yard, auto, means a place where autos, trucks, motorcycles or other self-propelled vehicles are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, disassembled, stored or handled, but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and not including sale of used cars in operating condition. 
    Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the property line and the main building or any projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered a parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any other projections thereto. 
(Code 1996, § 156.004; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 1995-01, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 1999-05, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 156.005. - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the requirement that is more restrictive or that imposes higher standards as determined by the building inspector shall govern. 
(Code 1996, § 156.005; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.006. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Ordinances and all orders, ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
(Code 1996, § 156.006; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.007. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the regulations prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family required by the height and area provisions of this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is located. 
(Code 1996, § 156.007; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.008. - Annexed land. 
    All land annexed to the city shall be automatically classified as agricultural zone (A), or such other zone as agreed to by the city council. No land may be used nor any building constructed without first complying with the appropriate zone district and use. If a given use or structure is in existence prior to annexation, such use or structure shall be considered nonconforming, if not in compliance with the zoning requirements, and shall continue unless occupancy has ceased for a period of six months. 
(Code 1996, § 156.008; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS, BOUNDARIES AND MAP 

Sec. 156.020. - Establishment of districts. 
    The zoning districts are established into nine classifications, as follows: 
A Agricultural District R-1 Residential District - Single-family R-2 Residential District - Multifamily R-3 Residential District - Multifamily (small lot) C Commercial District CB Central Business District I Industrial District MH Manufactured Home/Recreational Vehicle District PD Planned Development District  
(Code 1996, § 156.020; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.021. - Description of districts. 
    The zoning districts are described as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural Zone (A). This type of zone permits the one acre size lot or larger for residential use. It is a type of zone that property is classified as when annexed into the city. 
(2)  Residential Zone, Single-Family (R-1). Permits only single-family dwellings. 
(3)  Residential Zone, Multifamily (R-2, R-3). The two different types of residential zones allow for different minimum size lot areas. Residential R-2 zone allows for a minimum 5,000 square foot lot area for a single-family dwelling with a minimum size of 6,000 square feet for two or more dwellings. Residential R-3 zone allows for a minimum 4,000 square foot lot size for a single-family dwelling and a minimum size of 6,000 square feet for two or more dwellings. The different residential districts allow for varying residential lot sizes to develop. 
(4)  Commercial Zone (C). The commercial zone allowing general retail, office use and sales of commercial items. 
(5)  Central Business Area Zone (CB). Describes the downtown business area. This classification is used to allow zero front and side lot lines and setbacks to be maintained in an area which requires zoning flexibility to protect and enhance this unique area. 
(6)  Industrial Zone (I). An industrial district allows certain performance standards for hazardous storage, obnoxious sound, odorous nuisance and pollutants. No residential uses are permitted in this zone. 
(7)  Planned development zone (PD). A mixed land use area containing residential and/or nonresidential types. A plan submittal and approval is required by the city for this type of development. 
(8)  Manufactured home and recreational vehicle zone (MH). A zone requiring a plan for manufactured home types in a park or subdivision. Refer to the manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance in chapter 152. 
(Code 1996, § 156.021; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.022. - Submission of plans required. 
    The zoning classifications, planned development and manufactured home, if requested and approved, require submission of a plan from the petitioner to be approved by the city. An outline of the zone classification types and land use type is as follows: 
(1)  Planned development district (PD). A zoning classification which allows a land area by district to be developed with flexible standards and mixed land uses. Mixed uses such as residential, office, retail and industrial types can be designed in an orderly manner which will not conflict with adjoining zone districts and can be made compatible through means as setbacks and performance standards which are compatible with the conceptual land area plan and zoning district separation requirements. The minimum land area for such a proposal is eight acres. 
(2)  Manufactured home park and/or subdivision district. Any proposed manufactured home park subdivision and/or recreational vehicle park subdivision will require a plan approval for development. The plan requirement is part of the specific use permit request. The manufactured home or recreational park subdivision shall contain no less than three acres each with a minimum depth or width of 300 feet located on a public street or highway. Refer to chapter 152 for detailed requirements. 
(Code 1996, § 156.022; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.023. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the zoning map of the city, which is on file in the offices of the city and made a part of this chapter, the same as if copied in full herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of a district as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed to follow such shorelines and in the event of their movement the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
(6)  In undivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(7)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two parts, the property will remain divided until the property owner, firm or corporation petitions the city council for rezoning. 
(8)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(Code 1996, § 156.023; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.024. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the city secretary and one copy shall be maintained in the office of the building official. One copy shall be kept by the planning and zoning commission. It shall be the duty of the city secretary to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such map any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning ordinance and map. 
(b)  The city secretary, upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall affix a certificate identifying the map in his office as the official zoning map of the city. He shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the planning and zoning commission and in the office of the building official. All amendments of the map shall be made immediately after their enactment and the date of the change shall be noted on the certificate. 
(Code 1996, § 156.024; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.025. - Classification of new and unscheduled uses. 
    It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in the city. In order to provide for such contingencies, a determination of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The building official shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning district into which such use shall be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount and nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission and the city council shall hold a joint public hearing and meet with the parties of interest and shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted. Such public hearings shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 156.079(e) and (f). 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall review recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, and make such determination concerning the classification of such use as it determines appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 156.025; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.026. - Correctional and rehabilitation facilities. 
(a)  A correctional or rehabilitation facility may not be located in the city within 1,000 feet of a residential area, a primary or secondary school, property designated as a public park or public recreation area by any governmental authority, or a church, synagogue, or other place of worship. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance is measured along the shortest straight line between the nearest property line of the correctional or rehabilitation facility and the nearest property line of the residential area, school, park, recreation area, or place of worship, as appropriate. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "correctional or rehabilitation facility" means a residential facility that is not operated by the federal government, the state, or the county, and that is operated for the purpose of housing persons who have been convicted of misdemeanors or felonies or children found to have engaged in delinquent conduct, regardless of whether the persons are housed: 
(1)  While serving a sentence of confinement following conviction of an offense; 
(2)  As a condition of probation, parole, or mandatory supervision; or 
(3)  Within one year after having been released from confinement in any penal institution. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "residential area" means: 
(1)  Any area designated as a residential zoning district by this ordinance; and 
(2)  Any area in which the principal permitted land use by this ordinance is for private residences. 
(e)  The city council finds the requirements of this section are reasonably necessary to preserve the public safety, morals, and general welfare. 
(Code 1996, § 156.026; Ord. of 4-26-1999) 
Sec. 156.040. - Lot area regulations. 
    The minimum residential lot area for the various districts shall be in accordance with the following schedules, except that an official lot of record existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used. 
ARTICLE III. - AREA AND SETBACK STANDARDS 
Residential Class Type 
(Sq. Ft.) A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Single-family 1 acre 5,250 5,000 4,000 6,000 * Multifamily 6,000 6,000 6,000 min., not less than 1,200 unit *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
* Nonresidential Class Type 
(Sq. Ft.) C CB I Single-family (conflict)* 6,000 6,000 * Multifamily 7,200 min., and not less than 1,200/unit *  
* Residential use not permitted. 
(Code 1996, § 156.040; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 

Sec. 156.041. - Lot width regulation. 
    The minimum residential lot widths for the various districts shall be in accordance with the following schedules, except that an official lot of record width prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used. 
Residential Class Type 
(Lin. Ft.) A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Single-family 150 50 50 40 50 * Multi- 
family 50 50 50 *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152).   
Nonresidential Class Type 
(Lin. Ft.) C CB I Single-family 50 50 * Multifamily 60 60 *  
* Residential use not permitted. 
(Code 1996, § 156.141; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.042. - Lot depth regulations. 
    The minimum residential lot depths for the various districts shall be in accordance with the following schedules, except that an official lot of record depth prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be used. 
Residential Class Type 
(Lin. Ft.) A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Single-family 150 105 100 100 120 * Multi- 
family 120 120 120 *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
Nonresidential Class Type 
(Lin. Ft.) C CB I Single-family 120 120 * Multifamily 120 120 *  
* Residential use not permitted. 
(Code 1996, § 156.042; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.043. - Lot coverage by building use regulation. 
    The maximum residential lot coverage by building use and all accessory buildings shall be in accordance with the following schedules, except that an existing building may have a greater use of an existing lot or tract before the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Maximum of lot coverage by building (%) 20 40 40 40 40 *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
Nonresidential Class C CB I Maximum of lot coverage by building (%) 80 100 *  
* Residential use not permitted. 
(Code 1996, § 156.043; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.044. - Front yard regulations and provisions. 
(a)  Front yard regulations. The minimum front yard shall be in accordance with the following schedules and no structure shall be placed in the front yard setback. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Minimum front yard (ft.) 40 25 20 20 As approved by plan *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
Nonresidential Class C CB I Minimum front yard (ft.) 25 N/A N/A  
(b)  Front yard provisions. 
(1)  Shall be measured from the property line to the front of the building, porch or extended entry. Eaves or roof extensions may not exceed into the front yard area by more than four feet and no subsurface structures may exceed into the front yard by more than 40 inches. 
(2)  A more restrictive front yard setback shall govern by city council action based upon a greater building line setback or if two or more zone districts should join along a street. 
(3)  If the existing buildings in a block, where at least 75 percent of the lots have been developed have a greater or lesser setback than required, then the average setback in the block is construed as the front yard setback, but shall not be required greater than 50 feet nor less than ten feet. 
(4)  In the central business area, no front yard setback is required. 
(Code 1996, § 156.044; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.045. - Side yard regulations and provisions. 
(a)  Side yard regulations. The minimum side yard shall be in accordance with the following schedule unless having existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from this chapter is derived. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Minimum required widths (ft.) 17 7 7 6 As approved by plan *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
Nonresidential Class C CB I Minimum required widths (ft.) * * 15  
* See subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(b)  Side yard provisions. 
(1)  The side yard shall be unobstructed, except that windows or ledges may extend a maximum of 12 inches and roof eaves may extend a maximum of 24 inches. 
(2)  The minimum side yard requirements for a planned development district shall be in accordance with a plan submitted and recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. 
(3)  Apartment buildings 35 feet or greater in height shall provide a side yard one foot for every two feet of height. 
(4)  No side yard is required for nonresidential use except abutting a residential zone or use, and in this case shall provide a 15-foot side yard. 
(Code 1996, § 156.045; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.046. - Rear yard regulations. 
(a)  The minimum rear yard shall be in accordance with the following schedule, and no rear yard area shall be less unless having existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from this chapter is derived. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Minimum rear yard (ft.) 20 20 20 20 As approved by plan *  
* Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152). 
(b)  In the Commercial (C), Central Business (CB) and Industrial (I) zones, no rear yard is specified for nonresidential use except when retail, commercial or industry adjoins a residential district whether divided by alley or easement, a ten-foot rear yard is required. 
(Code 1996, § 156.046; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.047. - Height regulations. 
    The maximum height regulations shall be in accordance with the following schedules so that no building or structure shall be located or erected to exceed the height limit. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Maximum height limitation (ft.) 25 25 35 35 As approved by plan As approved by plan  
  
Nonresidential Class C CB I Maximum height limitation (ft.) See subsection (2) of this section. See subsection (2) of this section. See subsection (2) of this section.  
(1)  Appurtenances to building height, such as cooling towers, vent stacks and chimneys may extend in residential areas, not to exceed 35 feet above the average grade line of the building. Churches, school and institutional buildings may be erected in residential areas to exceed the standard of 21/2 to three stories (111/2 feet per story) by adding one foot to the width and depth of lot for each foot that water stands, steeples, domes or similar features exceed three stories in height. 
(2)  In the Commercial (C), Central Business (CB) and Industrial (I) zones, height is not restricted except where prohibited by other laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 156.047; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.048. - Vehicle parking regulations. 
(a)  No building or structure or part shall be erected or altered for any use permitted in a district without adequate parking on a lot or tract or, in some cases, within 150 feet of a lot or tract, except that previous nonconforming parking requirements as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may continue to exist until compliance is sought. 
Residential Class A R-1 R-2 R-3 PD MH Parking space/unit 2 2 2 2 As approved by plan 1 1 Refer to manufactured home and recreational vehicle ordinance (chapter 152).  
(b)  Off-street parking requirements, with exception to central business area, are as follows: 
(1)  Bowling alley: six spaces for each lane. 
(2)  Bank or savings establishment: one space for each 300 square feet of total usable floor area with minimum of five spaces. 
(3)  Clinic or doctor's office: one space per 250 square feet of floor area, with minimum of five spaces. 
(4)  General office: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area with a minimum of five spaces. 
(5)  Place of public assembly: one space per each three seats provided. 
(6)  High school or institution of higher learning: one space per classroom plus one space per four students during heaviest attendance. 
(7)  Junior high and elementary school: one space for each class plus one space per four seats in a public assembly area, such as an auditorium. 
(8)  Convalescent home for aged: one space for each six rooms or beds. 
(9)  Gas station: minimum five spaces. 
(10)  Hospital, acute care: one space for every two beds. 
(11)  Hospital, chronic care: one space for each employee and one space for every six beds. 
(12)  Hotel or motel: one space per room. 
(13)  Library or museum: ten spaces plus one for every 300 square feet of floor area. 
(14)  Restaurant or cafeteria: one space for every three seats with a minimum five spaces. 
(15)  Retail or personal services: one space for every 200 square feet of floor area with a minimum of five spaces. 
(16)  Industrial, storage or warehousing: one space for each two employees or one space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1996, § 156.048; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.049. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Parking requirements for new and unlisted uses. 
(1)  The off-street parking requirement for any use not specifically listed, the requirements may be interpreted as those of similar listed use. 
(2)  The specific parking regulations supersede the scheduled requirements. 
(3)  New and unlisted parking requirements shall be referred by the building official to the planning and zoning commission and to the city council for final determination. 
(b)  Parking requirements for loading and unloading establishments. Except in the central business area, all retail, commercial, industrial and other service entities shall provide off-street facilities for receiving merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on a lot adjoining the main use. Such service may be adjacent to an alley or service drive or may consist of a truck berth, minimum ten feet by 45 feet. Schools and day care centers shall provide an off-street means to load and unload children. Off-street parking space, to accommodate one vehicle for every ten children to be loaded or unloaded shall be made available. 
(c)  Design standard. 
(1)  An off-street parking space is a paved surface not in a street or alley, but on private property, having an area not less than 180 square feet with minimum dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet. 
(2)  For angular parking, the minimum aisle widths shall be provided as follows: 
a.  30 degree: 12 feet. 
b.  45 degree: 14 feet. 
c.  60 degree: 20 feet. 
d.  90 degree: 24 feet. 
(3)  All parking spaces shall be identified and marked accordingly on the pavements, with curb stripes to prevent overhang into public or private property. 
(Code 1996, § 156.049; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 156.060. - Building code compliance. 
    All signs and outdoor display installations and use shall be as required in the building code. 
(Code 1996, § 156.060; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE V. - WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 156.070. - Definition. 
    In this section, the term "wind energy system" means a wind-driven energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity though the use of wind energy that drives a wind turbine, that has a rated capacity of not more than ten kw output at any give time, and that is intended for on-site production and consumption of electricity, 
(Code 1996, § 156.070; Ord. No. 2011-13, 10-25-2011) 
Sec. 156.071. - General regulations. 
    The following general regulations apply to all wind energy systems located within any approved district. A wind energy system lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements established herein. Nothing contained in this section is intended to supersede the provisions of any applicable deed restrictions. 
(1)  Required plans and specifications. In addition to the submittals otherwise required upon making application for a building permit, the application for a building permit for a wind energy system must be accompanied by: 
a.  A site plan of the proposed wind system, which shall include: 
1.  A survey or a scaled drawing of the site on which the proposed wind energy system will be constructed; 
2.  A plan view layout of the proposed wind energy system clearly showing: 
(i)  The location of the system in respect to the property on which the system will be built; 
(ii)  All components of the system; the distance of the system to property lines; required setbacks; existing structures on the site; and natural features such as watercourses and trees; 
(iii)  Elevation drawings that include: 
A.  The design and height of the proposed wind energy system; 
B.  Detailed drawings of all system components; 
C.  Screening requirements; and 
(iv)  A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the edition of the National Electrical Code in effect at the time of construction; 
b.  Standard installation drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base and footings, if any. 
c.  If the system is mounted on a tower, either an engineering analysis of the tower or a copy of the manufacturing specifications demonstrating compliance of the system with the edition of the International Residential Code in effect at the time of construction. An engineering analysis shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer registered in the state. 
c.  Evidence of the notice to the utility company as required by subsection (a)(10) of this section. 
(2)  Construction standards. A wind energy system shall be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations or under the seal of a professional engineer registered by the state. 
(3)  Maximum height. Subject to the height limitations imposed by the set back requirements proscribed in subsection (a)(4) of this section for other than a roof-mounted installation, the maximum height of the system shall not exceed 40 feet from ground level to the topmost portion of the system inclusive of the turbine and blades. For horizontally-mounted (vertically-spinning) turbines, the measurement of maximum height shall be made by measuring to the center of the turbine shaft and then adding the length of a blade. Additionally, no system, when installed, shall exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or the distributor of the system. 
(4)  Location and setback. A tower-mounted wind energy system shall be anchored only in the rear yard of the lot on which the system is located. A tower-mounted system may not be located nearer to a side or rear lot line than the height of the system, inclusive of turbine blades. No part of a wind energy system, including blades or guy wire anchors, may protrude across a property line. The system must be located on a tract of land with a minimum of three acres. 
(5)  Primary structure required. A wind energy system may exist only as a secondary use. A wind energy system may not be erected on a lot until a primary structure has been constructed. 
(6)  Sound pressure levels. Sound pressure levels produced by the operation of a wind energy system shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  Lighting. All lighting not required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulation is prohibited not including, however, operational lighting installed by the manufacturer of the system as original equipment. When obstruction lighting is required by FAA regulations, such lighting shall not exceed the minimum requirements of those regulations. If so required, a wind energy system tower structure may be artificially lighted only with steady-burning red obstruction lights (FAA type L-810) or flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L0864), flashing no faster than 20 flashes per minute. Upward lighting, flood lights or other lighting not strictly required by the FAA is prohibited. 
(8)  Signs. No advertising or other signs shall be placed on a wind energy system. 
(9)  Prohibited in easements. No portion of a wind energy system shall be located in, on or across a public easement unless authorized by the easement holder. 
(10)  Notice to utility company on grid-interconnected systems. No grid-interconnected wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been provided to the city that the appropriate electric power provider has been informed of the customer's intent to install a grid-connected customer-owned wind energy system and that the customer's system meets the utility's approved specifications for interconnection. If a system will interconnect through any electric power provider, the system shall conform to the provisions of all city codes and such other interconnection requirements applicable thereto. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement. 
(11)  State or federal requirements. A wind energy system shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wind energy systems. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owner of the wind energy system shall bring such wind energy system into compliance with those revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. 
(12)  Public hearing. Prior to the installation of a system, other than a roof-mounted installation, an application for a wind energy system must be approved by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing. At the hearing, the applicant may request a variance from the provisions of subsection (3) or (4) of this section, subject to the restrictions of this section. If the application or the variance is denied by the planning and zoning commission, an appeal may be made to the board of adjustment after application to the director of planning within 15 days of the date of denial. An application for approval of a wind energy system shall be made to the director of planning and shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee in the amount of $300.00. Prior to the hearing, the director shall mail written notice to all owners of property located within 400 feet of the site of the proposed wind energy system by using the last known address as listed on the city's tax rolls. If the applicant requests a variance, the applicant must establish at the hearing a hardship relating specifically to the proposed location of the system. A hardship may not be based upon the personal or financial needs of the applicant, but must be based upon conditions unique to that location including elevation, topography, slope, lot size, and the presence of trees, buildings or other obstacles to the movement of wind at the proposed location of the system. 
(13)  Roof-mounted systems. Any system to be mounted on the roof of a structure that does not extend more than 60 inches above the roof line shall not be required to comply with the provisions of subsections (1)a.1, (1)a.2, (3) and (4) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 156.071; Ord. No. 2011-13, 10-25-2011) 
Sec. 156.072. - Maintenance and abandonment. 
(a)  A wind energy system shall be maintained at all times according to the manufacture's specifications. 
(b)  A wind energy system that has become unstable, leans significantly out of plumb, or that poses a danger of collapse shall be removed or brought into repair within 60 days following notice by the building official to the owner of the lot upon which the system is located. The building official may order immediate repairs in the event of imminent collapse. Failure to make the required repairs within the time provided is an offense. 
(c)  If the owner of a wind energy system plans to abandon or discontinue, or is required to discontinue, the operations of the system, the owner shall notify the building official by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation. 
(1)  In the event that an owner fails to give such notice, the wind energy system shall be considered abandoned if the wind energy system is not operated for a continuous period of six months. 
(2)  Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the property owner shall physically remove the wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. The term "physically remove" includes, without limitation, the actual, complete removal of the tower, turbine and all other components of the wind energy system from the site of the original installation. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 10.99. 
(Code 1996, § 156.072; Ord. No. 2011-13, 10-25-2011) 
ARTICLE VI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 156.075. - Statement of intent. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the city, this chapter shall not be amended except to correct error in the chapter, or, because of changed or changing conditions in particular areas or in the city generally, or to rezone an area, extend the boundary of an existing zoning district or to change the regulations and restrictions thereof, all in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Subject to the limitations of the foregoing statement of intent, an amendment to this chapter may be initiated by: 
(1)  The city council on its own motion; 
(2)  The planning and zoning commission; 
(3)  Petition. 
(Code 1996, § 156.075; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.076. - Authority. 
    The city council in accordance with applicable state law may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulation standards and boundaries herein established. In addition, a comprehensive review of the zoning ordinance text and map shall be made by the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of keeping the city current with the development patterns and innovative methods in zoning and examining existing land uses and changes in land uses made by developers and builders within the city in order to ascertain those areas where the patterns of development are changing. The planning and zoning commission, at least every three years shall file a report and recommendation thereon with the mayor and the city council. The three-year time period shall commence upon the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1996, § 156.076; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.077. - Application and petition for amendment. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation petitioning the city council for a change in the zoning district map shall do so upon forms provided for such purpose by the office of the city secretary and all petitions for changes shall be filed with the office of the city secretary. Notice shall also be given to the city secretary if the application for change originates with any member of the city council or planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Petitions shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission at its regularly scheduled meeting. The planning and zoning commission shall have an agenda that has been posted 72 hours before the meeting. 
(Code 1996, § 156.077; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.078. - Procedure for amendment petition. 
(a)  Filing of petition. All petitions for amendments to this chapter shall be in writing, signed, and filed with the city secretary for the presentation to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Contents of petition. All petitions for amendments to this chapter shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  The petitioner's name, address, and interest in the petition, as well as the name, address and interest of every person having a legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition. 
(2)  The nature and effect of the proposed amendment. 
(3)  A full-dimensioned map showing the following will be provided: 
a.  The land which would be affected by the proposed amendment. 
b.  A legal description of such land. 
c.  The present zoning classification of the land. 
d.  The zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts. 
e.  All public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the land under consideration. 
(4)  If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning map, the names and addresses of the owners of all land within the area to be changed by the proposed amendment 
(5)  The alleged error in this chapter, which would be corrected by the proposed amendment together with a detailed explanation of such error in the chapter, which is alleged, and detailed reasons as how the proposed amendment will correct the same. 
(6)  The changed or changing conditions, if any, in the area or in the municipality generally, that make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary. 
(7)  Evidence that the petition is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  All other circumstances, factors and reasons which applicant offers in support of the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1996, § 156.078; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.079. - Public notice and procedure for amendments. 
(a)  Whenever it is the desire of the majority of the members of the planning and zoning commission or the city council that an amendment or change to the zoning ordinance or district map be proposed and considered at a public hearing or as a result of a petition or application by a person, firm, or corporation, such proposed amendment or change shall be scheduled by the city secretary for a public hearing before a joint meeting of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Such public hearing shall hereinafter be known as the public zoning hearing. 
(b)  Each petition for a public zoning hearing shall be accompanied at the time the hearing is scheduled by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(1)  No fee shall be charged for a public zoning hearing on the first hearing after property is annexed into the city. 
(2)  No action to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the zoning ordinance or the district map shall be final until there shall have been a joint public zoning hearing thereon with public notice of such hearing as herein required. 
(c)  Notice of any public hearing involving the zoning ordinance and district map shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and designated as the official publication of the city stating briefly the change or amendment to be considered at the hearing and the time and place of such hearing which shall not be less than ten days prior to the public hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the property owners as determined from the most recently approved city tax toll of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification or specific use permit is proposed. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing. The notice shall be made by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. 
(d)  Notice of any public zoning hearing involving the granting of a specific use permit shall be given as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. In addition, written notice shall state the time and place of hearing and give the address of the property proposed for granting of a specific use permit. 
(e)  The public zoning hearing shall be a joint meeting of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. Rules of order commensurate with proper conduct, hearing of arguments or receiving of evidence shall be adopted and observed at the hearing. The recording of minutes shall be made of the hearing and shall be maintained or filed in the office of the city secretary. No action on any proposed change, amendment or specific use permit shall be taken by either body at or during the public zoning hearing. 
(f)  The planning and zoning commission shall within ten days after a public zoning hearing, hold a regular or special meeting to recommend and act upon changes, amendments or specific use permits considered at such hearing. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall vote on each proposed change, amendment or specific use permit as to their recommendations to the city council for either adoption or denial. The recommendations of the city planning and zoning commission shall be transmitted to the office of the city secretary for the city council in writing within five days following the meeting of the city planning and zoning commission. 
(g)  After receipt by the city council of the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall at either a regular or a special meeting act upon the proposed changes, amendments or special use permits. In cases when the planning and zoning commission recommends against proposed specific use permit or amendment, supplement, change or repeal of the regulations or restrictions of the zoning ordinance or the boundaries of the district map herein established or when a written protest against an amendment under consideration is filed with the office of the city secretary and signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change or those immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet there from such amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the city council. 
(h)  If the city council fails to pass an ordinance approving such proposed specific use permit, amendment, supplement, or change, a new application for such proposed specific use permit, amendment, supplement, or change in the zoning ordinance or the boundaries of the district map shall not again be considered until after the expiration of 12 months from the date that such proposed amendment, supplement or change was rejected; provided, however, that such application may be reconsidered within the above mentioned 12-month period if it is shown that a substantial change in conditions has taken place in the vicinity of the property sought to be rezoned or for which a specific use permit was requested. The procedures for such application for rezoning shall be the same as if the applicant had never filed a previous application for zoning change. 
(Code 1996, § 156.079; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE VII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 156.110. - Purpose. 
    It may be desirable that many properties in the city be developed in accordance with site plans prepared and approved in advance of development. To encourage such planned unit development, regulatory provisions are provided as follows in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 156.110; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.111. - Authorized uses. 
    Whenever any property is designated as being within the planned residential unit development, the following types of uses may be authorized: 
(1)  Housing development consisting of any combination of dwelling types on tracts with a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  Uses permitted in the Commercial C District on tracts with a minimum area of one acre and an integral part of a planned unit development. 
(3)  Recreation area and open space. 
(4)  A combination of any of the developments listed or other uses permitted in the zoning districts corresponding to property on the zoning district map. 
(Code 1996, § 156.111; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.112. - Procedures. 
(a)  A site plan setting forth the uses to be incorporated into the planned residential unit development shall be approved and filed as part of the ordinance. The provisions of article VI of this chapter shall govern the review and processing of each application for a planned unit development. 
(b)  Such required site plan shall show the provisions for ingress and egress to the property, access from a public street, number and density of housing units per gross acre, and sidewalks, utilities, drainage, parking space, height of buildings, maximum lot coverage, yards and open spaces, screening walls or fences and other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a reasonable transition and protection of the adjacent property. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may impose conditions relative to the standards of development and such conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure, which is part of the development. Such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning use, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Site plans submitted for consideration under the provisions of this section may be altered or amended with approval of the planning and zoning commission, but any change in the development shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with sections 156.075 through 156.079. 
(Code 1996, § 156.112; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 156.125. - Continuation of uses. 
    Any nonconforming use of land or structures may be continued for definite periods of time, subject to such regulations as the board of adjustment may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining property and the ultimate approval of the nonconforming use. If, however, a continuous operation is not carried on in such nonconforming use during a continuous period of six months, the building, other structure or tract of land where nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use. Intent to resume activity or operations shall not affect the foregoing. 
(Code 1996, § 156.125; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.126. - Change of use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of nonconforming use without the prior approval of the board of adjustment which may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another, provided the use is within the same or higher classification, as the original nonconforming use, that such nonconforming use and occupancy will not tend to prolong and continue nonconforming use. A nonconforming use once changed from a lower to a higher classification use shall not be changed thereafter to a lower classification use, and such prior lower classification use shall be considered abandoned. 
(Code 1996, § 156.126; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.127. - Damage and destruction. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding 50 percent of its value, the building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If greater than 50 percent and less than total, the board of adjustment may grant permit for repair after public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of public welfare and the character of the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use. 
(Code 1996, § 156.127; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.128. - Enlargement. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, except upon authorization of the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1996, § 156.128; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.129. - Normal maintenance. 
    Normal maintenance of a building or a structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the nonconforming use. 
(Code 1996, § 156.129; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.130. - Structural changes. 
    No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use except that required by law. 
(Code 1996, § 156.130; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 156.145. - Building permits and plan requirements. 
(a)  Building permits shall be in conformance with current building codes. 
(b)  All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on a subdivision plat and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. 
(Code 1996, § 156.145; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.146. - Effect upon existing permits, agreements and rights. 
(a)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(2)  Any easement, covenant or other private agreement more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  By the passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or effected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or effected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance has not been repealed. 
(Code 1996, § 156.146; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.147. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Certificates of occupancy shall be required for: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(2)  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
(3)  Occupancy and use of vacant land. 
(4)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
(5)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. No such occupancy, use, or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore has been issued by the building official. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Application for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the building official by the owner or leaser of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. It shall be the duty of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, or refusal of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use shall be evidence that the nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(c)  Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which has been altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. The certificate shall be issued within three days of completion of construction or alteration. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land for a building, or for a change in nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the building official, if the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy therefor shall be issued. The fee of such certificate of occupancy shall be $20.00 to be paid to the city at the time the building permit is issued. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of the building or land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official or his agent. 
(Code 1996, § 156.147; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 2011-07, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 156.148. - Composition and appointment. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed for terms of two years. Each member of the city council, including the mayor, may appoint one member to the board. The city council may remove a board member for cause, as found by the city council, on a written charge after a public hearing. A vacancy in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(b)  There shall be four alternate members of the board of adjustment who shall be appointed by the city council to serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. An alternate member serves for the same period as a regular member and subject to removal in the same manner as a regular member. A vacancy among the alternate members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members. 
(c)  The board of adjustment, by majority vote, shall adopt rules in accordance with this chapter. Meetings of the board are held at the call of the presiding officer and at other times as determined by the board. The presiding officer or acting presiding officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings that indicate the vote of or fails to vote. The board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the board's office and are public records. Each case before the board of adjustment must be heard by at least 75 percent of the members. 
(Code 1996, § 156.148; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-15-1999) 
State Law reference- Authority to create a board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008. 
Sec. 156.149. - Authority of the board of adjustment. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall: 
(1)  Hear and decide applications for direct relief. An application for direct relief is a proceeding seeking: 
a.  A special exception to the terms of this chapter. A special exception is a use permitted expressly by this ordinance under conditions specified in it. Subsection (d) of this section lists special exceptions the board of adjustment is authorized to issue. 
b.  A variance form the terms of this chapter. A variance is a suspension of a literal enforcement of this chapter. Subsection (e) of this section lists variances the board of adjustment is authorized to issue. 
(2)  Hear and decide an appeal. An appeal is a proceeding claiming error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Hear and decide other matters authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  In exercising its authority, the board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the board of adjustment has the same authority as the administrative official. 
(c)  The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board of adjustment is necessary to: 
(1)  Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official; 
(2)  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board of adjustment is required to pass; or 
(3)  Authorize a variation from the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions are incompatible with the uniformity sought to be achieved by these regulations and should be issued only in exceptional cases. 
(1)  The board of adjustment is required to grant a special exception under the conditions stated in subsection (f) of this chapter. The board of adjustment may also grant a special exception from the regulations contained in this chapter when it finds that the exception will not be detrimental to other property in the district or the public health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the general public and that it will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter. The board of adjustment may grant special exceptions that allow: 
a.  The extension of nonconforming use into different areas of a pre-existing building; 
b.  The reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, provided the reconstruction does not prevent the eventual return of the property to a conforming use; 
c.  Modifications of yard, open space, parking lot area or lot width regulations as may be necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land where such parcel was separately owned at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and is of such restricted area or where the shape of the lot is such that it cannot be appropriately developed without such modification; 
d.  The discontinuance of nonconforming uses of land under any plan whereby the full value of any improvements can be amortized within a reasonable number of years, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this chapter; 
e.  The reduction of off-street parking if it can be shown that the required minimum will not at any time be necessary because of the character of the proposed uses and a probable limited quantity of occupants, employees, clients, customers or tenants. 
(2)  The board of adjustment may not issue a special exception permitting a prohibited use. 
(3)  The board of adjustment may impose restrictions and conditions it deems appropriate to a special exception including those related to use, occupancy, time, size, area, design, quality, construction, repair, reconstruction, facilities, safety and appearance. 
(e)  Variances. 
(1)  The board of adjustment is required to grant a variance under the conditions stated in subsection (f) of this section. The board of adjustment may also grant a variance for a use identified by the abbreviation "S" in the appendix to this title, Schedule of Uses, if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter is observed and substantial justice is done. 
(2)  The board of adjustment may impose restrictions and conditions it deems appropriate to variances including those related to use, occupancy, time, size, area, design, quality, construction, repair, reconstruction, facilities, safety, and appearance. 
(f)  The board of adjustment is required to issue a special exception or variance to a property owner applying for it whenever, as applied to the property at issue or its use, the application of this chapter either: 
(1)  Does not substantially advance legitimate state interests; 
(2)  Denies the property owner all economically viable use of his land; or 
(3)  Unreasonably interferes with the landowner's right to use and enjoy his property. 
(g)  The special exception or variance must permit the owner some appropriate economically viable use of his land but need not permit the particular use requested by the property owner applying for it. 
(1)  In determining whether legitimate state interests have been substantially advanced by the regulation, the board of adjustment may consider a broad range of governmental purposes that will satisfy that requirement, including, but not limited to, the ill effects of urbanization, enhancing the quality of life, protecting recreation, tourism, and public health, preserving desirable aesthetic features, preserving agricultural uses of land, controlling both the rate and character of community growth, and ensuring careful and orderly development of residential property with provision for open space areas. 
(2)  The board of adjustment will determine whether the property owner has been denied all economically viable use of his land by considering whether the regulation renders the land valueless. 
(3)  The board of adjustment will determine whether the regulation unreasonably interferes with the landowner's right to use and enjoy his property by considering: 
a.  The economic impact of the regulation. The economic impact of the regulation is determined by comparing the value that has been taken from the property with the value that remains in the property. The loss of anticipated gains or potential future profits is not to be considered. 
b.  The extent to which the regulation interferes with distinct investment based expectations. The factors to be considered in determining whether the regulation unreasonably interferes with investment-backed expectation include the historical use of the property and its length, the existing zoning of the property at the time it was acquired by the landowner, and whether the landowner has purchased the property speculatively based on the possibility of an up zoning. 
(Code 1996, § 156.149; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-15-1999) 
State Law reference- Authority of board, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.009. 
Sec. 156.150. - Direct proceedings before the board of adjustment. 
(a)  A person whose person or property is affected by this chapter may apply to the board of adjustment for any direct relief the board is authorized to grant. 
(b)  The person applying for direct relief shall file with the board of adjustment and with the city manager an application specifying the direct relief requested from the board and the grounds for it. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall set a reasonable time for hearing the application and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall decide the application within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1996, § 156.150; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 156.151. - Appeals to the board of adjustment. 
(a)  Any of the following persons may appeal to the board of adjustment a decision made by an administrative official: 
(1)  A person aggrieved by the decision; or 
(2)  Any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by the decision. 
(b)  The appellant must file with the board of adjustment and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board of adjustment. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
(c)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board of adjustment facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the board of adjustment or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board of adjustment shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1996, § 156.151) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.010. 
Sec. 156.152. - Judicial review of board of adjustment decisions. 
(a)  Any of the following persons may present to a court of record a verified petition stating that the decision of the board of adjustment is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality: 
(1)  A person aggrieved by a decision of the board of adjustment; 
(2)  A taxpayer; or 
(3)  An officer, department, board or bureau of the city. 
(b)  The petition must be presented within ten days after the date the decision is filed in the board of adjustment's office. 
(c)  On the presentation of the petition, the court may grant a writ of certiorari directed to the board of adjustment to review the board's decision. The writ must indicate the time by which the board's return must be made and served on the petitioner's attorney, which must be after ten days and may be extended by the court. Granting of the writ does not stay the proceedings on the decision under appeal, but on application and, after notice of the board, the court may grant a restraining order if due cause is shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment's return must be verified and must concisely state any pertinent and material facts that show the grounds of the decision under appeal. The board is not required to return the original documents on which the board acted but may return certified or sworn copies of the documents or parts of the documents as required by the writ. 
(e)  If at the hearing the court determines that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take evidence as directed. The referee shall report the evidence to the court with the referee's findings of fact and conclusions of law. The referee's report constitutes a part of the proceedings on which the court shall make its decision. 
(f)  The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision that is appealed. Costs may not be assessed against the board of adjustment unless the court determines that the board acted with gross negligence, in bad faith, or with malice in making its decision. 
(Code 1996, § 156.152; Ord. No. 1999-06, 6-15-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.011. 
Sec. 156.153. - Building official to enforce. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 156.153; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.154. - Right of entry. 
    The building official or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any time prior to the completion of the building for the purpose of making inspections of building or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 156.154; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.155. - Stop orders. 
    Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building official may issue a stop order to the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1996, § 156.155; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.998. - Remedies. 
    In case any person, firm, or corporation violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply therewith, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties provided in section 156.999 may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any land, and the definition of any violation of the terms of this chapter as a misdemeanor shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by law in such cases, but same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such violations. 
(Code 1996, § 156.998; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
Sec. 156.999. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder or who shall violate any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, shall, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 156.999; Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994) 
CHAPTER 157. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create this commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033. 

Sec. 157.001. - Implemented. 
    V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, subch. C, is hereby implemented. 
(Code 1996, § 157.001; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 157.002. - Building and standards commission. 
    A building and standards commission shall be appointed by the city council to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 157.002; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 157.003. - Requirements. 
    The commission shall consist of one or more panels. Each panel shall consist of five members unless that number is less than the minimum or in excess of the maximum permitted by state law, in which case a panel shall consist of the minimum number of members permitted by state law. The city council may appoint eight or more alternate members of the commission. 
(Code 1996, § 157.003; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 157.004. - Jurisdiction and power. 
    The commission shall have the maximum jurisdiction permitted by state law. The commission shall have all power and authority permitted by state law. The commission shall adopt rules conforming to state law. Proceedings by and before the commission shall conform to its rules and state law. 
(Code 1996, § 157.004; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
Sec. 157.005. - Appropriate official. 
    The city manager is designated as the appropriate official of the municipality to present all cases before the commission panels. 
(Code 1996, § 157.005; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
CHAPTER 158. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted August 16, 2016, set out provisions for § 155-17. At the direction of the city, these provisions have been included as ch. 158, §§ 158.01-158.21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 158.01. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § I(A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.02. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § I(B), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.03. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § I(C), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.04. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § I(D), 8-16-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 158.05. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) -see flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within the city subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway -see regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or, 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a city's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area -see area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the floodplain management regulation. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § II, 8-16-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 158.06. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.07. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for City of Sinton, San Patricio County, Texas," dated November 4, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated November 4, 2016. and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(B), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.08. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(C), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.09. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(D), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(E), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.11. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(F), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
    This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § III(G), 8-16-2016) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 158.13. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city manager, or designee, is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § IV(A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.14. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplan administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter; 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required; 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained; 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 158.07 the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 5; 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the city's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city; and 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a city may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the city's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the city first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § IV(B), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.15. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of 158.18(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with 158.14(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the flooplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § IV(C), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.16. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by city council, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in 158.15(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 158.03). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in 158.16(a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § IV(D), 8-16-2016) 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 158.17. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § V(A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.18. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) 158.07, (ii) 158.14(8), or (iii) 158.19(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in 158.15(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on the city's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the city's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of 158.15(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § V(B), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.19. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 158.02-158.04 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 158.08; section 158.15; and the provisions of Article 5 of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 158.07 or section 158.14(8) of this chapter. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § V(C), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.20. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 158.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 158.15 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § V(D), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 158.21. - Floodways. 
    Floodways-located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 158.07, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If section 158.28(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article 5. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, the city may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the city first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § V(E), 8-16-2016) 
APPENDIX. - SCHEDULE OF USES 

Sec. 15A.01. - Explanation of abbreviations. 
    The following table lists abbreviations used in the schedule of uses in section 15A.02. 
X Indicates an authorized use within a zone S Indicates a variance is required A Agricultural District R-1 Residential District - Single-Family R-2 Residential District - Multifamily R-3 Residential District - Multifamily (small lot) C Commercial District CB Central Business District I Industrial District MH Manufactured Homes/Recreational Vehicle District PD Planned Development District  
Sec. 15A.02. - Schedule of uses. 
    The following table represents the city's schedule of uses. 
Schedule of Uses A R-1 R-2 R-3 C CB I MH PD Agricultural Uses Agricultural field crops X X X X X X X Agricultural animal husbandry building X X X X X X X Farm, ranch or orchard (For own use) X X X X X X X (For sale) X S S S S S S Primary Residential Uses One-family dwelling detached X X X X X X X X Two-family dwelling X X X X X Multifamily dwelling (apartment) X X X X X Planned residential unit development X X X X X X Boarding or rooming house X X X X X Hotel or motel apartment hotel X X X Manufactured homes S S S S S S X X Accessory and Incidental Uses Accessory building residential X X X X X X X X Farm accessory building X X X X X X X Home occupation X X X X X X Servant or caretakers quarters X X X X X X Social and recreational building S S S X X X X Swimming pool (private) X X X X X X X X Temporary field or construction office (includes mobile and travel trailers used for this purpose) S S S S S S S S Institutional and Social Service Uses Airport, heliport or landing field S S S X X Church/rectory X X X X X X X Civic center X X X X Community homes for disabled persons X X X X X X X X Convent/monastery X Day nursery kindergarten S X X X X X Fraternity/sorority, lodge or club (no liquor) X X X X Correctional or rehabilitation facilities X 1 X 1 X 1 Home for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients X Hospital (general acute care) X X X X X Hospital (chronic care) X X X X X Institutions of religious or philanthropic nature X X X X X Library, art gallery, museum X X X X X X Public administration offices X X X X X X Residence home for aged X X X X X Schools, private, college, university X X X X X X Schools, public or parochial X X X X X X Utilities and Related Service Uses Electrical substation S S S S X S S Electric power generating plant S S S S X S S Fire station X X X X X X X X Gas transmission and monitoring station S S S S X S S Local utility distribution lines X X X X X X S S Radio, television or microwave towers S S S S X X X Radio or TV transmitting station, commercial S S S S S X X Sewerage pumping station S S S S X X X Sewerage treatment plant S S S S S X S Railroad team track freight depot X X X Telephone business office X X X X Telephone exchange switching relay and transmitting equipment S S X X X Utilities, public or private other than listed S S S S X S Utility shops or storage yards and buildings S S S S X S Water treatment plant X X X X X X Waterwell, reservoir, pumping station or storage X X X X X X Wind energy system S S S Entertainment and Recreational Uses Amusement - commercial outdoor - indoor X S S Fairgrounds X Park/playground/similar public site X X X X X X X Club S S S S S S S X Public recreation center S S S X X X X Automobile and Related Service Uses Auto laundry X X X Auto sales, and repairs (in building) X X X Auto sales, new or used car lot (open) X X X Auto painting and body shop X X X Gasoline service station X X X Commercial parking lot or structures, auto X X X Parking lot truck storage X X X Sale new auto parts, in building X X X Sales and service new and used, auto accessories and parts, in building X X X Seat cover or muffler installation shop X X Wrecking and salvage yard for autos and parts S Retail and Business Services Antique shop X X X Art supply store X X X Animal clinic or pet hospital (no outside pens) X X Bank or savings and loan office X X X Book and stationery store X X X Barber and beauty shop X X X Bakery/confectionery shop (retail sales) X X X Cafeteria/restaurant X X X Camera shop X X X Cleaning shop/laundry X X X Cleaning/laundry pick-up station X X X Cleaning/laundry self-service shop X X X Clinic medical/dental X X X Drug store/pharmacy X X X Department store/discount house X X X Grocery store X X X Furniture/appliance store X X X Florist shop X X X Garden shop and plant sales X X X Handcraft and art object sale X X X Hardware store X X X Hobby shop X X X Key shop X X X Laboratory, medical or dental X X X Letter/mimeograph shop X X X Medical appliances fitting and sales X X X Mortuary X X X Office, professional/general business S S S X X X Optical shop X X X Package store X X Pawn shop X X X Pet shop - small animal, birds/fish X X X Personal custom services, such as tailor, milliner, related X X X Retail shops, apparel accessories, gifts and similar consumer items X X X Repair of appliances, television, radios and similar equipment X X X Shoe repair X X X Signs, business S S S S X X S X Signs, billboards/advertising X X X Signs, pole type, not exceeding 64 square feet, only exposed face X X X Signs, church and school X X X X X X Signs, real estate office X X X Studio photographer, artist, music, drama, dance X X X Studio, decorator and display of art objects X X X Travel bureau or consultant X X X Veterinarian, office (no animal hospital) X X X Variety store X X X Commercial and Related Services Uses Bakery, wholesale X X X Building materials sales X X X Cabinet and upholstery shop X X X Clothing manufacturing and similar manufacturing process S S X Cleaning, dyeing/laundry plant, commercial X X X Contractors storage/equipment yard X Dance hall/night club S S X Drive-in theater S X Heavy machinery sale, storage, or repair X Laboratory manufacturing X Laboratory, scientific or research X Lithographer/print shop X X X Maintenance and repair service X X X Milk depot, dairy/ice cream plant X Open storage and sale of furniture, appliances and machinery X X X Paint shop X X X Plumbing shop X X X Railroad/bus passenger station X X X Storage warehouse X X X Tavern S X Trade/commercial schools X X X Trailer and manufactured home sales or rental only X X X Transfer storage and baggage terminal X X X Veterinarian hospital or kennel (outside pens) S X Welding or machine shop X X X Wholesale office storage/sales X X X X Industrial and Related Uses Manufacturing process X Any manufacturing, industrial, storage or assembling process not prohibited by law X Asphalt or concrete patching plants S Storage of shell, soil, sand and gravel S Commercial extraction soil, sand and gravel S Wrecking/salvage yard S  
1 Allowed here only as permitted by Section 156.026. 
(Ord. No. 1994-06, 3-1-1994; Ord. No. 1995-01, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 1999-04, 7-6-1999) 
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Service Current Fee Confidentiality of public utility record $5.00  
Water 
Service Current Fee Water connection Inside city limits actual cost plus 15% Outside city limits actual cost plus 15% + $25.00 Monthly water inside city limits 2,000 gallons minimum $21.17 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 
2,001-12,000 $2.99 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 
12,001-22,000 $3.08 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 
22,001-32,000 $3.24 over 32,001, per 1,000 $3.48 Monthly water outside city limits 2000 gallons, minimum $28.87 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 
2,001-12,000 $2.99 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 
12,001-22,000 $3.08 Next 10,000 gallons, per 1,000 
22,001-32,000 $3.24 Over 32,001, per 1,000 gallons $3.48 Bulk water-per load 1,000 gallons, minimum $22.20 Over 1,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 
or fraction thereof $10.80 Monthly water cemetery 24,000 g minimum Same rates as above based on inside or outside city limits 24,001-144,000 144,001-264,000 264,001-384,000 Over 384,001  
Sewer 
Service Current Fee Sewer connection (inspection only) Single family Inside city limits $200.00 Outside city limits $225.00 Multi-family Inside city limits $200.00 Outside city limits $225.00 Base residential inside city limits $19.41 MF base each unit inside city limits $27.19 Base outside city limits $27.19 User charge inside city limits/outside city limits (OCL) 70% of winter avg times $1.44 per 1,000/70% of winter avg times $2.17 per 1,000 Sewer base business inside city limits $19.41 Business user charge inside city limits 100% of winter avg times $1.44 per 1,000 Service reconnect between 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. $25.00 Afterhours reconnect $50.00 Meter pulled to prevent unauthorized use $100.00 Meter tampering $100.00 Meter test-in-house If accurate $75.00, no charge inaccurate Meter test-sent out If accurate $100.00, no charge inaccurate Utility Deposit Residential inside city limits $175.00 Business inside city limits $275.00 based on consumption Residential outside city limits $200.00 Business outside city limits $275.00 based on consumption  
Animals 
Service Current Fee Kennel license $12.00 per animal Reapplication $25.00 Annual kennel permit less than 10 $50.00 Annual kennel permit 10-49 $75.00 Annual kennel permit 50 or more $150.00 Pet shop $100.00 Riding stable $100.00 Auction barn $75.00 Zoological park $150.00 Circus $100.00 Performing animal exhibition $75.00 Grooming shop $75.00 Animal license Unneutered dog $50.00 Unneutered cat $50.00 Unspayed dog $50.00 Unspayed cat $50.00 Neutered dog $5.00 Neutered cat $5.00 Spayed dog $5.00 Spayed cat $5.00 Animal redemption $50 plus license fee Daily care charge $10.00 per day + medical costs  
Miscellaneous 
Service Current Fee Propane tank inspection $75.00 Butane tank inspection w/ piping $75.00 Nuisance abatement Actual cost plus 25% Park deposit $100.00 Lazy V $275.00 Monday-Thursday $75.00 for 3 hours Additional hours $75.00 per hour Deposit $200.00 Pit 1 and tables, Mon-Thur $35.00 per hour Pit 1 and tables, Fri-Sun $225.00 Deposit $200.00 Underground crossing $200.00 for 1" diameter pipe, plus $50.00 for every linear foot 8 liner machines $1,000.00 per machine Late Penalty 20% of fee per machine Well operation $500.00 Processing fee $100.00 Peddler/solicitor investigation $25.00 Peddler/solicitor permit One month $75.00 Three months $150.00 One year $300.00 Itinerant merchant application $10.00 Itinerant merchant permit $25.00 Sexually oriented business permit $1,000.00 Public vehicle permit $10.00 per month Wrecker permit $100.00 per wrecker Small cell application fee 
(This fee shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits) $500.00 (1-5 network nodes) 
$250.00 (each additional network node) Small cell user fee 
(this fee shall not exceed and is capped by statutory limits) $250.00 annually for each network node 
$20.00 per year for city pole attachment  
Building 
Service Current Fee Commercial building permit based on valuation (use valuation for all permit fees, building, plumbing, electric, etc.) Less than $1,000 $75.00 1,001-50,000 $75.00 for the first $1,000.00, plus $10.00 for each additional $1,000 50,001-100,000 $600.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 100,001-500,000 $1,000.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus $6.00 for each additional $1,000.00 50,0001 and up $3,400.00 for the first $500,000.00, plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00 Commercial and MF Plan Review $1-$10,000 $75.00 $10,001-$25,000 $75 For the first $10,000.00, plus $6.46 for each additional $1,000.00 $25,001-$50,000 $157 for the first $25,000.00, plus $4.94 for each additional $1,000.00 $50,001-$100,000 $256 for the first $50,000.00, plus $3.73 for each additional $1,000.00 $100,001-$500,000 $392 for the first $100,000.00, plus $3.19 for each additional $1,000.00 $500,001-$1,000,000 $1,268 for the first $500,000.00, plus $2.85 for each additional $1,000.00 $100,001 and up $2193 for the first $1,000,000.00, plus $2.23 for each additional $1,000.00 Construction without a permit Permit fee doubled Moving a structure $400.00 Demolition permit $25.00 Inspect broken sewer line $100.00 Asphalt cut and repair $10 per linear foot Asphalt patch inspection $75.00 Parabolic antenna permit $75.00 Electrician's license Master $100.00 Journeyman $40.00 Apprentice $10.00 Revocation appeal $50.00 Board of adjustment appeal $75.00 Manufactured home park Up to 5 Spaces $50.00 6-14 Spaces $100.00 15 or More $200.00 New Residential $0.75/sq. ft. All Additions* $0.75/sq. ft. Swimming Pools $500.00 Swimming Pools w/ Deck $700.00 Spas (cast in place concrete only) $200.00 Accessory Buildings $.075/sq. ft. *Minimum Fee Additions $150.00 Fences (Wood, etc.) $150.00 Re-Roofing $75.00 Signs (commercial) $150.00 Decks $150.00 Driveways-per approach $150.00 Foundation repair $150.00 Re-inspection $150.00 Additional inspection $150.00 Electrical Permit Fees Remodel Existing $200.00 T-Pole $100.00 Temporary Cut-in $100.00 Meter Loop, rebuild service $100.00 Outside Lighting $100.00 Swimming Pool $100.00 Electric Gate $100.00 Accessory Building $200.00 Generator Electric $100.00 Re-inspection $150.00 Additional inspections $150.00 Min. Elec. Permit $100.00 Mechanical Permit Fees Replacing A/C Unit(s) $100.00 Plumbing Permit Fees Remodel Existing $200.00 Swimming Pool $100.00 Pool w/ Gas $175.00 Irrigation System $150.00 Fire Sprinkler $150.00 Replace Water Heater $100.00 Gas Test Only $100.00 Re-inspection $150.00 Additional inspection $150.00  
Pool 
Service Current Fee Daily Swim $3.00 Party Fri.-Sun., 7:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. 1-50 people N/A 51-100 people N/A Party Fri.-Sun., 7:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. $250.00 Deposit $150.00  
RV Park 
Service Current Fee Daily Rate $35.00 Weekly $175.00 Monthly $425.00 Late Fee Payments are due at the first of each month, payments received after the 5 th of the month are considered late and will be assessed a late fee. P&Z/BOA Application $75.00  
(Ord. No. 2016-09 , 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 2016-11 , 9-20-2016; Res. No. 20170828 , Exh. A, 8-31-2017; Ord. No. 2019-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-18-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Water and sewer charges, § 53-62. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1970 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1970 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1970 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1970 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 10.01 1-2 10.04 1-3 10.05 10.06 1-4 10.16 1-6 10.07 1-7 10.18 2-2 32.15 2-3 32.16 2-4 32.16 2-5 32.17 2-6 37.01 2-11 31.15 2-12 31.15 2-13 32.30 2-14 32.31 2-50 32.03 2-55.1 32.02 2-55.2 32.02 2-55.3 32.02 2-55.4 32.02 2-55.5 32.02 2-55.6 32.02 2-57 32.46 2-58 32.47 2-59 32.48 2-60 32.49 2-61 32.50 2-62 32.51 2-63 32.52 2-64 32.53 2-65 32.54 2-66 32.55 2-67 32.56 2-68 32.57 2-69 32.58 2-70 32.59 2-71 32.60 2-85 50.15 2-86 50.16 2-87 50.17 2-88 50.18 2-111 34.01 2-112 34.01 2-113 34.02 2-114 34.03 2-115 34.04 2-116 34.05 2-117 34.06 2-118 34.04 2-119 34.07 2-120 34.08 2-121 34.08 2-122 34.09 2-123 34.09 2-124 34.09 21/2-1 111.01 21/2-2 111.02 3-1 112.01 3-3 112.02 3-4 112.03 3-5 112.04 3-6 112.05 3-8 112.09 3-10 112.10 4-1 90.001 4-2 90.002 4-3 90.002 4-4 90.003 4-5 90.004 4-6 90.005 4-7 90.006 4-8 90.007 4-9 90.008 4-10 90.009 4-11 90.010 4-25 90.025 4-26 90.026 4-27 90.026 4-28 90.027 4-29 90.028 4-30 90.029 4-40 90.040 4-41 90.040 4-42 90.040 4-43 90.040 4-44 90.041 4-45 90.042 4-46 90.043 4-47 90.044 4-60 90.055 4-61 90.056 4-62 90.057 4-63 90.058 4-64 90.059 4-65 90.060 4-66 90.060 4-67 90.060 4-68 90.060 4-69 90.061 4-80 90.075 4-81 90.076 4-82 90.077 4-83 90.078 4-84 90.079 4-85 90.079 4-86 90.080 4-87 90.080 4-88 90.080 4-89 90.080 4-90 90.081 4-91 90.081 4-92 90.082 4-100 90.095 4-101 90.096 4-102 90.097 4-103 90.098 4-104 90.099 4-105 90.100 4-106 90.101 4-107 90.102 5-11 150.01 5-12 150.02 5-13 150.03 5-14 150.04 5-15 150.08 5-17 150.05 5-18 150.06 5-20 150.03 5-50 150.90 5-51 150.91 6-1 35.01 6-2 35.01 6-3 35.01 6-4 35.02 6-5 35.03 6-6 35.04 6-7 35.05 6-8 35.06 6-9 35.08 6-10 35.09 6-11 35.10 7-1 151.01 7-2 151.02 7-5 151.04 7-6 151.05 7-7 151.06 7-8 151.06 7-9 151.07 7-10 151.07 7-11 151.08 8-1 92.15 8-2 92.16 8-3 92.17 8-4 92.18 8-5 92.20 8-6 92.19 8-8 92.01 8-9 92.01 8-11 92.02 8-12 92.02 8-13 92.02 8-25 92.65 8-26 92.66 8-27 92.66 8-28 92.67 8-29 92.68 8-30 92.69 8-31 92.70 8-32 92.70 8-33 92.05 8-35 92.05 8-36 92.05 8-37 92.71 11-1 93.01 11-2 93.02 11-3 93.03 11-4 93.04 11-5 93.05 11-6 93.05 11-7 93.06 11-8 93.07 11-35 93.20 11-36 93.20 11-37 93.21 11-38 93.22 11-39 93.23 12-1 154.01 12-2 154.02 12-4 154.02 13-1 110.01 13-2 110.02 13-3 110.03 13-4 110.04 13-5 110.05 13-17 114.01 13-18 114.02 13-19 114.03 13-20 114.04 13-21 114.05 13-22 114.06 14-1 152.01 14-2 152.02 14-3 152.03 14-4 152.04 14-5 152.05 14-6 152.06 14-7 152.07 14-8 152.08 15-7 113.01 15-11 131.08 15-12 131.08 15-13 131.08 15-14 131.08 15-15 131.08 15-26 131.01 15-31 131.04 15-55 131.03 15-68 131.06 15-69 131.06 15-70 131.07 15-80 94.01 15-81 94.02 - 94.08 15-82 94.03 - 94.07 15-83 94.04 15-84 94.05 15-85 94.06 16-1 116.01 16-3 116.03 16-4 116.04 - 116.05 16-5 116.81 - 116.99 16-6 116.06 16-7 116.02 16-16 116.75 16-17 116.75 16-18 116.75 16-19 116.75 - 116.76 16-20 116.75 16-21 116.77 16-23 116.78 16-24 116.79 16-25 116.80 16-33 116.20 16-35 116.22 16-36 116.22 16-37 116.23 16-38 116.24 16-39 116.25 16-41 116.26 16-42 116.27 16-43 116.28 16-44 116.29 16-45 116.30 16-46 116.31 16-47 116.32 16-48 116.32 16-49 116.32 16-55 116.45 16-57 116.47 16-59 116.49 16-60 116.49 16-61 116.50 16-62 116.51 16-63 116.52 16-64 116.53 16-65 116.54 16-66 116.55 16-67 116.56 16-68 116.57 16-69 116.58 16-70 116.59 16-71 116.60 16-72 116.61 16-73 116.62 16-74 116.63 17-1 95.01 17-22 95.10 17-23 95.11 17-24 95.12 17-25 95.12 17-26 95.12 17-27 95.13 17-32 95.14 17-35 95.14 17-36 95.14 17-37 95.14 17-38 95.14 17-39 95.14 17-40 95.14 17-41 95.14 17-42 95.14 17-43 95.14 17-55 95.25 17-56 95.26 17-58 95.27 - 95.28 18-1 117.01 18-24 117.15 18-25 117.16 18-26 117.17 18-27 117.18 18-28 117.19 18-29 117.19 18-30 117.19 18-31 117.20 18-32 117.21 18-39 117.35 18-40 117.36 18-41 117.37 18-42 117.38 18-43 117.39 18-44 117.40 18-45 117.41 18-46 117.42 19-1 153.01 19-2 153.02 19-3 153.03 19-5 153.04 19-6 153.05 191/2-21 31.16 191/2-22 31.16 191/2-23 31.16 191/2-24 31.16 193/4-1 118.01 193/4-2 118.02 193/4-3 118.03 193/4-4 118.04 193/4-11 118.15 193/4-12 118.16 193/4-13 118.15 193/4-14 118.17 193/4-15 118.18 193/4-16 118.19 193/4-17 118.20 193/4-18 118.21 193/4-19 118.22 193/4-20 118.23 193/4-21 118.24 193/4-31 118.35 193/4-32 118.36 193/4-33 118.37 193/4-34 118.38 193/4-35 118.39 193/4-41 118.99 193/4-42 118.50 20-1 96.001 20-2 96.086 20-6 96.003 20-7 96.004 20-17 96.020 20-18 96.021 20-19 96.022 20-20 96.023 20-21 96.024 20-22 96.024 20-23 96.024 20-24 96.025 20-25 96.026 20-26 96.027 20-27 96.028 20-28 96.029 20-29 96.030 20-30 96.031 20-31 96.032 20-32 96.033 20-33 96.034 20-34 96.035 20-35 96.036 20-41 96.050 20-42 96.051 20-43 96.052 20-44 96.053 20-50 96.070 20-51 96.070 20-52 96.071 20-53 96.072 20-61 96.085 20-62 96.087 20-63 96.088 20-64 96.089 20-65 96.090 20-66 96.091 20-67 96.092 20-68 96.093 20-76 96.105 20-77 96.106 20-78 96.107 22-2 33.02 22-21 33.10 22-22 33.11 22-23 33.12 22-24 33.13 22-25 33.14 22-26 33.15 23-1 70.01 23-2 70.01 23-3 70.02 23-4 70.03 23-11 70.20 23-12 70.21 23-13 70.22 23-14 70.23 23-15 70.24 23-16 70.25 23-17 70.26 23-18 70.27 23-19 70.28 23-26 71.01 23-27 71.02 23-28 71.03 23-29 71.04 23-30 71.05 23-31 70.04 23-41 71.20 23-42 71.21 23-51 72.01 23-52 72.02 23-53 72.03 23-54 72.04 23-55 72.05 23-61 71.06 23-71 70.05 23-72 70.06 23-73 70.07 23-74 70.08 24-11 119.01 24-12 119.02 24-13 119.03 24-14 119.04 24-15 119.05 24-16 119.06 24-17 119.07 24-18 119.08 24-19 119.09 24-20 119.10 24-21 119.11 24-22 119.12 24-23 119.13 24-31 119.25 24-32 119.26 24-33 119.27 24-34 119.28 24-35 119.29 24-36 119.30 24-37 119.31 24-38 119.32 24-39 119.33 24-40 119.34 24-41 119.35 24-42 119.36 24-43 119.37 24-44 119.38 24-45 119.39 24-46 119.40 25-1 53.01 25-6 53.15 25-7 53.16 25-8 53.17 25-9 53.35 25-10 53.02 25-11 53.85 25-12 53.36 25-13 53.37 25-14 53.38 25-15 53.60 25-16 53.61 25-17 53.39 25-18 53.40 25-19 53.41 25-20 53.41 25-21 53.41 25-22 53.41 25-23 53.42 25-24 53.43 25-25 53.44 25-26 53.45 25-27 53.46 25-28 53.47 25-29 53.47 25-30 53.18 25-31 53.19 25-32 53.19 25-33 53.86 25-34 53.87 25-35 53.48 25-36 53.49 25-37 53.49 25-38 53.03 25-39 53.20 25-40 53.21 25-41 53.22 25-42 53.71 25-43 53.62 25-44 53.63 25-45 53.64 25-47 53.88 25-48 53.89 25-49 53.66 25-50 53.67 25-51 53.67 25-52 53.68 25-53 53.69 25-55 53.70 25-60 52.01 25-61 52.02 25-62 52.03 25-63 52.04 25-64 52.05 25-65 52.06 - 52.07 25-71 52.20 25-72 52.21 25-73 52.22 25-74 52.23 25-75 52.24 25-76 52.25 25-77 52.26 25-78 52.27 25-79 52.28 25-80 52.29 25-81 52.30 25-82 52.31 25-83 52.32 25-84 52.33 25-85 52.34 25-86 52.35 25-87 52.36 25-89 52.37 - 52.50 25-90 52.51 25-91 52.52 25-92 52.52 25-93 52.55 25-94 52.53 25-95 52.54  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1996 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the ordinance comparative table. 
1996 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 10.01 10.01 10.02 10.02 10.03 10.03 10.04 10.04 10.05 10.05 10.06 10.06 10.07 10.07 10.08 10.08 10.09 10.09 10.10 10.10 10.11 10.11 10.12 10.12 10.13 10.13 10.14 10.14 10.15 10.15 10.16 10.16 10.18 10.18 15-86 94.07 15-87 94.07 31.15 31.15 31.16 31.16 32.01 32.01 32.02 32.02 32.03 32.03 32.04 32.04 32.05 32.05 32.06 32.06 32.15 32.15 32.30 32.30 32.31 32.31 32.45 32.45 32.46 32.46 32.47 32.47 32.48 32.48 32.49 32.49 32.50 32.50 32.52 32.52 32.53 32.53 32.54 32.54 32.55 32.55 32.56 32.56 32.57 32.57 32.58 32.58 32.59 32.59 32.60 32.60 33.02 33.02 33.10 33.10 33.11 33.11 33.12 33.12 33.13 33.13 33.14 33.14 33.15 33.15 33.25 33.25 33.27 33.27 33.60 33.60 33.61 33.61 33.62 33.62 33.63 33.63 33.64 33.64 33.65 33.65 33.66 33.66 33.67 33.67 33.68 33.68 33.69 33.69 33.70 33.70 33.71 33.71 33.72 33.72 33.73 33.73 33.74 33.74 34.01 34.01 34.02 34.02 34.03 34.03 34.04 34.04 34.05 34.05 34.06 34.06 34.07 34.07 34.08 34.08 34.09 34.09 35.01 35.01 35.02 35.02 35.03 35.03 35.04 35.04 35.05 35.05 35.06 35.06 35.07 35.08 35.08 35.09 35.09 35.10 36.02 36.02 37.01 37.01 50.01 50.01 50.02 50.02 50.03 50.03 50.15 50.15 50.16 50.16 50.18 50.18 52.01 52.01 52.02 52.02 52.03 52.03 52.04 52.04 52.05 52.05 52.06 52.06 52.07 52.07 52.20 52.20 52.21 52.21 52.22 52.22 52.23 52.23 52.24 52.24 52.25 52.25 52.26 52.26 52.27 52.27 52.28 52.28 52.29 52.29 52.30 52.30 52.31 52.31 52.32 52.32 52.33 52.33 52.34 52.34 52.35 52.35 52.36 52.36 52.37 52.37 52.50 52.50 52.51 52.51 52.52 52.52 52.53 52.53 52.54 52.54 52.55 52.55 52.80 53.04 53.01 53.01 53.02 53.02 53.03 53.03 53.15 53.15 53.16 53.16 53.17 53.17 53.18 53.18 53.19 53.19 53.20 53.20 53.21 53.21 53.22 53.22 53.35 53.35 53.36 53.36 53.37 53.37 53.38 53.38 53.39 53.39 53.40 53.40 53.41 53.41 53.42 53.42 53.43 53.43 53.44 53.44 53.45 53.45 53.46 53.46 53.47 53.47 53.48 53.48 53.49 53.49 53.60 53.60 53.61 53.61 53.62 53.62 53.63 53.63 53.64 53.64 53.65 53.65 53.66 53.66 53.67 53.67 53.68 53.68 53.69 53.69 53.70 53.70 53.71 53.71 53.85 53.85 53.86 53.86 53.87 53.87 53.88 53.88 53.89 53.89 70.01 70.01 70.02 70.02 70.03 70.03 70.04 70.04 70.05 70.05 70.06 70.06 70.07 70.07 70.08 70.08 70.10 70.10 70.20 70.20 70.21 70.21 70.22 70.22 70.23 70.23 70.24 70.24 70.25 70.25 70.26 70.26 70.27 70.27 70.28 70.28 71.01 71.01 71.02 71.02 71.03 71.03 71.04 71.04 71.05 71.05 71.06 71.06 71.07 71.07 71.20 71.20 71.21 71.21 72.01 72.01 72.02 72.02 72.03 72.03 72.04 72.04 72.05 72.05 72.06 72.06 72.07 72.07 72.08 72.08 90.001 90.001 90.002 90.002 90.003 90.003 90.004 90.004 90.005 90.005 90.006 90.006 90.007 90.007 90.008 90.008 90.009 90.009 90.010 90.010 90.012 90.012 90.025 90.025 90.026 90.026 90.027 90.027 90.028 90.028 90.029 90.029 90.040 90.040 90.041 90.041 90.042 90.042 90.043 90.043 90.044 90.044 90.055 90.055 90.056 90.056 90.057 90.057 90.058 90.058 90.059 90.059 90.060 90.060 90.061 90.061 90.075 90.075 90.076 90.076 90.077 90.077 90.078 90.078 90.079 90.079 90.080 90.080 90.081 90.081 90.082 90.082 90.095 90.095 90.096 90.096 90.097 90.097 90.098 90.098 90.099 90.099 90.100 90.100 90.101 90.101 90.102 90.102 91.01 91.01 91.02 91.02 91.03 91.03 91.04 91.04 91.05 91.05 91.06 91.06 91.07 91.07 91.08 91.08 91.09 91.09 91.10 91.10 91.11 91.11 92.01 92.01 92.02 92.02 92.03 92.03 92.04 92.04 92.05 92.05 92.15 92.15 92.16 92.16 92.17 92.17 92.18 92.18 92.19 92.19 92.20 92.20 92.65 92.65 92.66 92.66 92.67 92.67 92.68 92.68 92.69 92.69 92.70 92.70 92.71 92.71 93.01 93.01 93.02 93.02 93.03 93.03 93.04 93.04 93.05 93.05 93.06 93.06 93.07 93.07 93.20 93.20 93.21 93.21 93.22 93.22 93.23 93.23 94.01 94.01 94.02 94.02 94.03 94.03 94.04 94.04 94.05 94.05 94.06 94.06 94.07 94.07 94.08 94.08 95.01 95.01 95.10 95.10 95.11 95.11 95.12 95.12 95.13 95.13 95.14 95.14 95.15 95.15 95.25 95.25 95.26 95.26 95.27 95.27 95.28 95.28 96.001 96.001 96.003 96.003 96.004 96.004 96.005 96.005 96.020 96.020 96.021 96.021 96.022 96.022 96.023 96.023 96.024 96.024 96.025 96.025 96.026 96.026 96.027 96.027 96.028 96.028 96.029 96.029 96.030 96.030 96.031 96.031 96.032 96.032 96.033 96.033 96.034 96.034 96.035 96.035 96.036 96.036 96.050 96.050 96.051 96.051 96.052 96.052 96.053 96.053 96.070 96.070 96.071 96.071 96.072 96.072 96.085 96.085 96.086 96.086 96.087 96.087 96.088 96.088 96.089 96.089 96.090 96.090 96.091 96.091 96.092 96.092 96.093 96.093 96.105 96.105 96.106 96.106 96.107 96.107 110.01 110.01 110.02 110.02 110.03 110.03 110.04 110.04 110.05 110.05 111.01 111.01 111.02 111.02 112.01 112.01 112.02 112.02 112.03 112.03 112.04 112.04 112.05 112.05 112.09 112.09 112.10 112.10 112.11 112.11 112.99 112.99 113.01 113.01 114.01 114.01 114.02 114.02 114.03 114.03 114.04 114.04 114.06 114.06 114.07 114.07 116.01 116.01 116.02 116.02 116.03 116.03 116.04 116.04 116.05 116.05 116.06 116.06 116.20 116.20 116.21 116.21 116.22 116.22 116.23 116.23 116.24 116.24 116.25 116.25 116.26 116.26 116.27 116.27 116.28 116.28 116.29 116.29 116.30 116.30 116.31 116.31 116.32 116.32 116.45 116.45 116.46 116.46 116.47 116.47 116.48 116.48 116.49 116.49 116.50 116.50 116.51 116.51 116.52 116.52 116.53 116.53 116.54 116.54 116.55 116.55 116.56 116.56 116.57 116.57 116.58 116.58 116.59 116.59 116.60 116.60 116.61 116.61 116.63 116.63 116.75 116.75 116.76 116.76 116.77 116.77 116.78 116.78 116.79 116.79 116.80 116.80 116.81 116.81 116.99 116.99 117.01 117.01 117.15 117.15 117.16 117.16 117.17 117.17 117.18 117.18 117.19 117.19 117.20 117.20 117.21 117.21 117.35 117.35 117.36 117.36 117.37 117.37 117.38 117.38 - 117.39 117.40 117.40 117.41 117.41 117.42 117.42 118.01 118.01 118.02 118.02 118.03 118.03 118.04 118.04 118.16 118.16 118.17 118.17 118.18 118.18 118.19 118.19 118.20 118.20 118.21 118.21 118.22 118.22 118.23 118.23 118.24 118.24 118.35 118.35 118.36 118.36 118.37 118.37 118.38 118.38 118.39 118.39 118.50 118.50 118.99 118.99 119.01 119.01 119.02 119.02 119.03 119.03 119.04 119.04 119.05 119.05 119.06 119.06 119.07 119.07 119.08 119.08 119.09 119.09 119.10 119.10 119.11 119.11 119.12 119.12 119.13 119.13 119.25 119.25 119.26 119.26 119.27 119.27 119.28 119.28 119.29 119.29 119.30 119.30 119.31 119.31 119.32 119.32 119.33 119.33 119.34 119.34 119.35 119.35 119.36 119.36 119.37 119.37 119.38 119.38 119.39 119.39 119.40 119.40 119.41 119.41 120.00 120.00 131.01 131.01 131.02 131.02 131.03 131.03 131.04 131.04 131.06 131.06 131.07 131.07 131.08 131.08 131.09 131.09 131.10 71.08 131.99 131.99 132.01 132.01 132.02 132.02 132.03 132.03 132.04 132.04 150.01 150.01 150.02 150.02 150.03 150.03 150.04 150.04 150.05 150.05 150.06 150.06 150.08 150.08 150.35 150.90 150.36 150.91 151.01 151.01 151.02 151.02 151.04 151.04 151.05 151.05 151.06 151.06 151.07 151.07 151.08 151.08 152.01 152.01 152.02 152.02 152.03 152.03 152.04 152.04 152.05 152.05 152.06 152.06 152.07 152.07 152.08 152.08 153.01 153.01 153.02 153.02 153.03 153.03 153.04 153.04 153.05 153.05 153.06 153.06 154.01 154.01 154.02 154.02 ch. 155, app. 155.53 155.01 155.01 155.02 155.02 155.03 155.03 155.15 155.15 155.16 155.16 155.17 155.17 155.30 155.30 155.31 155.31 155.32 155.32 155.33 155.33 155.34 155.34 155.35 155.35 155.36 155.36 155.37 155.37 155.38 155.38 155.50 155.50 155.51 155.51 155.52 155.52 155.99 155.99 156.001 156.001 156.002 156.002 156.003 156.003 156.004 156.004 156.005 156.005 156.006 156.006 156.007 156.007 156.008 156.008 156.020 156.020 156.021 156.021 156.022 156.022 156.023 156.023 156.024 156.024 156.025 156.025 156.026 156.026 156.040 156.040 156.042 156.042 156.043 156.043 156.044 156.044 156.045 156.045 156.046 156.046 156.047 156.047 156.048 156.048 156.049 156.049 156.060 156.060 156.070 156.070 156.071 156.071 156.072 156.072 156.075 156.075 156.076 156.076 156.077 156.077 156.078 156.078 156.079 156.079 156.110 156.110 156.111 156.111 156.112 156.112 156.125 156.125 156.126 156.126 156.127 156.127 156.128 156.128 156.129 156.129 156.130 156.130 156.141 156.041 156.145 156.145 156.146 156.146 156.147 156.147 156.148 156.148 156.149 156.149 156.150 156.150 156.151 156.151 156.152 156.152 156.153 156.153 156.154 156.154 156.155 156.155 156.998 156.998 156.999 156.999 157.001 157.001 157.002 157.002 157.003 157.003 157.004 157.004 157.005 157.005  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 11 4-19-1916 - 92.05 - 92.65 - 92.66 - 92.67 - 92.68 - 92.69 - 92.70 - 92.71 Ord. No. 15 7-15-1916 - 96.001 - 96.086 Ord. No. 26 1-2-1918 - 96.021 - 96.024 - 96.025 - 96.026 - 96.027 - 96.028 - 96.029 - 96.032 - 96.033 - 96.034 - 96.035 - 96.036 Ord. No. 28 1-9-1918 - 96.035 Ord. No. 34 2-2-1921 - 113.01 Ord. No. 63 6-1-1925 - 93.20 - 93.21 - 93.22 - 93.23 Ord. No. 65 6-11-1925 - 92.71 Ord. No. 84 8-17-1928 - 96.020 - 96.022 - 96.023 - 96.024 Ord. No. 84B 9-6-1928 - 96.024 Ord. No. 96 9-11-1933 - 112.04 - 112.05 Ord. No. 99 2-2-1936 - 112.09 Ord. No. 222 6-6-1950 - 116.01 - 116.03 - 116.04 - 116.05 - 116.06 - 116.20 - 116.21 - 116.22 - 116.23 - 116.24 - 116.25 - 116.26 - 116.27 - 116.28 - 116.29 - 116.30 - 116.31 - 116.32 - 116.45 - 116.46 - 116.47 - 116.48 - 116.49 - 116.50 - 116.51 - 116.52 - 116.53 - 116.54 - 116.55 - 116.56 - 116.57 - 116.58 - 116.59 - 116.60 - 116.61 - 116.62 - 116.81 - 116.99 Ord. No. 229 9-6-1950 - 92.02 Ord. No. 235 12-1-1950 - 116.32 Ord. No. 242 4-30-1951 - 116.26 - 116.28 - 116.29 - 116.32 - 116.54 - 116.55 - 116.59 - 116.81 - 116.99 Ord. No. 257 1-8-1952 - 116.24 Ord. No. 301 10-1-1954 - 131.06 Ord. No. 303 10-1-1954 - 131.01 Ord. No. 304 10-1-1954 - 92.02 - 131.07 Ord. No. 305 10-1-1954 - 112.03 Ord. No. 306 10-1-1954 - 131.04 Ord. No. 308 10-1-1954 - 96.070 - 96.071 Ord. No. 310 10-7-1954 - 96.050 - 96.051 - 96.052 - 96.053 Ord. No. 316 3-8-1955 - 32.15 - 32.16 - 32.17 Ord. No. 333 2-7-1956 - 95.11 Ord. No. 334 2-7-1956 - 95.01 Ord. No. 342 4-24-1956 - 131.03 Ord. No. 359 6-4-1957 - 95.14 Ord. No. 364 8-6-1957 - 116.25 Ord. No. 366 9-9-1957 - 95.10 Ord. No. 367 9-9-1957 - 116.75 - 116.76 - 116.77 - 116.78 - 116.79 - 116.80 Ord. No. 418 8-7-1962 - 92.01 Ord. No. 519 9-21-1964 - 119.01 - 119.02 - 119.03 - 119.04 - 119.05 - 119.06 - 119.07 - 119.08 - 119.09 - 119.10 - 119.11 - 119.12 - 119.13 Ord. No. 737 12-14-1965 - 131.08 Ord. No. 996 4-11-1967 - 112.01 Ord. No. 997 4-11-1967 - 112.01 - 112.02 Ord. No. 1031 7-11-1967 - 52.01 - 52.02 - 52.03 - 52.04 - 52.05 - 52.06 - 52.07 Ord. No. 1033 7-11-1967 - 154.01 - 154.02 Ord. No. 1034 7-11-1967 - 92.15 - 92.16 - 92.17 - 92.18 - 92.19 - 92.20 Ord. No. 1093 12-19-1967 - 110.01 - 110.02 - 110.03 - 110.04 - 110.05 - 114.01 - 114.02 - 114.03 - 114.04 - 114.05 - 114.06 Ord. No. 1105 2-20-1968 - 117.01 - 117.15 - 117.16 - 117.17 - 117.18 - 117.19 - 117.20 - 117.21 - 117.35 - 117.36 - 117.37 - 117.38 - 117.39 - 117.40 - 117.41 - 117.42 Ord. No. 1125 5-21-1968 - 95.12 Ord. No. 1198 2-18-1969 - 111.01 Ord. No. 1970-5 5-19-1970 - 31.15 Ord. No. 1972-9 7-11-1972 - 96.003 Ord. No. 1973-4 4-17-1973 - 92.65 Ord. No. 1973-8 5-1-1973 - 154.01 Ord. No. 1974-7 9-17-1974 - 53.02 - 53.03 - 53.15 - 53.16 - 53.17 - 53.18 - 53.19 - 53.20 - 53.21 - 53.22 - 53.35 - 53.36 - 53.37 - 53.38 - 53.39 - 53.40 - 53.41 - 53.42 - 53.43 - 53.44 - 53.45 - 53.46 - 53.47 - 53.48 - 53.49 - 53.60 - 53.61 - 53.62 - 53.63 - 53.64 - 53.66 - 53.67 - 53.68 - 53.69 - 53.71 - 53.85 - 53.86 - 53.87 - 53.88 - 53.89 Ord. No. 1974-11 11-19-1974 - 32.45 - 32.46 - 32.48 - 32.49 - 32.50 - 32.51 - 32.52 - 32.53 - 32.54 - 32.55 - 32.56 - 32.57 - 32.58 - 32.59 - 32.60 Ord. No. 1975-12 8-19-1975 - 32.30 Ord. No. 1975-18 8-19-1975 - 32.31 Ord. No. 1975-14 10-7-1975 - 112.10 Ord. No. 1976-1 3-3-1976 - 33.10 - 33.11 - 33.12 - 33.13 - 33.14 - 33.15 Ord. No. 1976-3 3-16-1976 - 116.25 Ord. No. 1977-2 4-19-1977 art. I, § A 150.21 art. I, § B 150.22 art. I, § C 150.23 art. I, § D 150.24 art. II 150.25 art. III, § A 150.26 art. III, § B 150.27 art. III, § C 150.28 art. III, § D 150.29 art. III, § E 150.30 art. III, § F 150.31 art. III, § G 150.32 art. IV, § A 150.36 art. IV, § B 150.37 art. IV, § C 150.38 art. IV, § D 150.39 art. V, § A 150.46 art. V, § B 150.47 art. V, § C 150.48 art. V, § D 150.49 Ord. No. 1977-3 5-17-1977 1 150.27 2 150.37 Ord. No. 1977-7 11-1-1977 - 31.16 Ord. No. 1978-4 8-1-1978 - 95.25 - 95.26 - 95.27 - 95.28 Ord. No. 1978-9 10-17-1978 - 53.60 Ord. No. 1979-4 3-6-1979 - 95.13 Ord. No. 1979-8 8-21-1979 - 32.02 Ord. No. 1979-10 10-2-1979 - 150.01 - 150.02 - 150.03 - 150.04 - 150.08 Ord. No. 1979-11 10-2-1979 - 153.01 - 153.02 - 153.03 - 153.04 - 153.05 Ord. No. 1979-12 10-2-1979 - 151.01 - 151.02 - 151.04 - 151.05 - 151.06 - 151.07 - 151.08 Ord. No. 1979-13 10-2-1979 - 150.90 - 150.91 Ord. No. 1979-17 12-4-1979 - 90.001 - 90.002 - 90.003 - 90.004 - 90.005 - 90.006 - 90.007 - 90.008 - 90.009 - 90.010 - 90.025 - 90.026 - 90.028 - 90.029 - 90.040 - 90.041 - 90.042 - 90.043 - 90.044 - 90.055 - 90.056 - 90.057 - 90.058 - 90.059 - 90.060 - 90.061 - 90.075 - 90.076 - 90.077 - 90.078 - 90.079 - 90.080 - 90.081 - 90.082 Ord. No. 1979-14 12-18-1979 - 53.60 Ord. No. 1980-4 7-29-1980 - 53.01 Ord. No. 1980-6 10-2-1980 - 35.01 - 35.02 - 35.03 - 35.04 - 35.05 - 35.06 - 35.08 - 35.09 - 35.10 Ord. No. 1980-11 11-6-1980 - 96.004 Ord. No. 1981-7 3-5-1981 1 150.27 2 150.47 Ord. No. 1981-12-A 7-16-1981 - 53.36 - 53.39 - 53.61 - 53.64 Ord. No. 1981-18 10-1-1981 - 35.01 - 35.02 - 35.03 - 35.04 - 35.05 - 35.06 - 35.08 - 35.09 - 35.10 Ord. No. 1981-19 10-13-1981 - 113.01 Ord. No. 1982-07 7-1-1982 - 70.20 Ord. No. 1982-7 7-1-1982 - 70.01 - 70.02 - 70.03 - 70.04 - 70.05 - 70.06 - 70.07 - 70.08 - 70.21 - 70.22 - 70.23 - 70.24 - 70.25 - 70.26 - 70.27 - 70.28 - 71.01 - 71.02 - 71.03 - 71.04 - 71.05 - 71.06 - 71.20 - 71.21 - 72.01 - 72.02 - 72.03 - 96.085 - 96.087 - 96.088 - 96.089 - 96.090 - 96.091 - 96.092 - 96.093 Ord. No. 1983-3 3-17-1983 - 37.01 Ord. No. 1983-4 3-17-1983 - 52.20 - 52.21 - 52.22 - 52.23 - 52.24 - 52.25 - 52.26 - 52.27 - 52.28 - 52.29 - 52.30 - 52.31 - 52.32 - 52.33 - 52.34 - 52.35 - 52.36 - 52.37 - 52.50 - 52.51 - 52.52 - 52.53 - 52.54 - 52.55 Ord. No. 1983-10 7-5-1983 - 53.39 Ord. No. 1982-10 9-2-1983 - 53.69 Ord. No. 1983-14 12-6-1983 - 72.05 Ord. No. 1984-4 2-7-1984 - 72.01 Ord. No. 1984-6 4-3-1984 - 119.25 - 119.26 - 119.27 - 119.28 - 119.29 - 119.30 - 119.31 - 119.32 - 119.33 - 119.34 - 119.35 - 119.36 - 119.37 - 119.38 - 119.39 - 119.40 - 119.41 Ord. No. 1984-7 5-15-1984 - 72.04 Ord. No. 1984-8 5-15-1984 - 131.03 Ord. No. 1984-10 6-5-1984 - 119.26 - 119.28 Ord. No. 1984-11 6-19-1984 - 32.45 - 32.48 - 32.51 - 32.52 Ord. No. 1984-12 6-19-1984 - 111.02 Ord. No. 1984-17 9-18-1984 - 33.11 Ord. No. 1985-13 10-1-1985 - 150.02 - 150.03 - 150.05 - 150.06 - 150.08 Ord. No. 1985-15 11-19-1985 - 10.18 Ord. No. 1986-3 3-18-1986 - 150.06 Ord. No. 1986-9 9-2-1986 - 90.080 Ord. No. 1986-12 11-4-1986 - 50.15 - 50.16 - 50.17 - 50.18 Ord. No. 1987-16 2-15-1987 - 152.04 Ord. No. 1987-4 2-17-1987 - 116.01 - 116.02 - 116.20 - 116.21 - 116.22 - 116.23 - 116.24 - 116.25 - 116.26 - 116.28 - 116.29 - 116.32 - 116.45 - 116.46 - 116.47 - 116.48 - 116.49 - 116.50 - 116.56 - 116.58 - 116.63 - 116.75 - 116.77 - 116.81 - 116.99 Ord. No. 1987-12 8-18-1987 - 33.15 - 52.55 - 111.02 - 119.41 Ord. No. 1987-7 8-18-1987 - 53.61 - 53.70 Ord. No. 1987-8 8-18-1987 - 94.01 - 94.02 - 94.03 - 94.04 - 94.05 - 94.06 - 94.07 - 94.08 Ord. No. 1987-15 11-4-1987 - 152.01 - 152.02 - 152.03 - 152.04 - 152.05 - 152.06 - 152.07 - 152.08 Ord. No. 1988-1 1-19-1988 - 93.02 - 93.04 - 93.05 - 93.06 - 93.07 Ord. No. 1988-7 5-17-1988 - 90.095 - 90.096 - 90.097 - 90.098 - 90.099 - 90.100 - 90.101 - 90.102 Ord. No. 1988-8 8-16-1988 - 53.69 Ord. No. 1988-16 12-6-1988 - 118.01 - 118.02 - 118.03 - 118.04 - 118.16 - 118.17 - 118.18 - 118.19 - 118.20 - 118.21 - 118.22 - 118.23 - 118.24 - 118.35 - 118.36 - 118.37 - 118.38 - 118.39 - 118.50 - 118.99 Ord. No. 1989-3 4-18-1989 - 32.03 Ord. No. 1989-10 9-19-1989 - 150.02 - 150.03 - 150.04 - 150.08 Ord. No. 1989-11 9-19-1989 - 153.02 - 153.03 - 153.04 Ord. No. 1989-12 9-19-1989 - 151.07 Ord. No. 1989-13 9-19-1989 - 154.01 - 154.02 Ord. No. 1989-14 9-19-1989 - 92.01 Ord. No. 1989 12-19-1989 - 116.21 Ord. No. 1989-18 12-19-1989 - 116.32 Ord. No. 1990-1 2-20-1990 - 33.11 Ord. No. 1990-11 12-4-1990 - 32.03 Ord. No. 1991-05 9-3-1991 - 96.105 - 96.106 - 96.107 Ord. No. 1991-07 11-5-1991 - 34.01 - 34.02 - 34.03 - 34.04 - 34.05 - 34.06 - 34.07 - 34.08 - 34.09 Ord. No. 1992-6 6-16-1992 - 90.001 - 90.006 Ord. No. 1992-7 8-4-1992 - 95.12 Ord. No. 1993-10 9-7-1993 - 153.02 - 153.04 Ord. No. 1993-11 10-5-1993 - 50.01 Ord. No. 1993-12 10-5-1993 - 50.02 Ord. No. 1993-13 11-16-1993 - 90.012 Ord. No. 1993-15 1-4-1994 - 112.11 - 112.99 Ord. No. 1994-01 2-1-1994 - 92.03 - 92.04 Ord. No. 1994-03 3-1-1994 - 155.01 - 155.02 - 155.03 - 155.15 - 155.16 - 155.17 - 155.30 - 155.31 - 155.32 - 155.33 - 155.34 - 155.35 - 155.36 - 155.37 - 155.38 - 155.50 - 155.51 - 155.52 - 155.53 - 155.99 Ord. No. 1994-06 3-1-1994 - 156.001 - 156.002 - 156.003 - 156.004 - 156.005 - 156.006 - 156.007 - 156.008 - 156.020 - 156.021 - 156.022 - 156.023 - 156.024 - 156.025 - 156.040 - 156.041 - 156.042 - 156.043 - 156.044 - 156.045 - 156.046 - 156.047 - 156.048 - 156.049 - 156.060 - 156.075 - 156.076 - 156.077 - 156.078 - 156.079 - 156.110 - 156.111 - 156.112 - 156.125 - 156.126 - 156.127 - 156.128 - 156.129 - 156.130 - 156.145 - 156.146 - 156.147 - 156.153 - 156.154 - 156.155 - 156.998 - 156.999 Ord. No. 1994-04 4-5-1994 - 33.11 Ord. No. 1994-07 4-19-1994 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1994-08 5-3-1994 - 53.60 Ord. No. 1994-09 5-17-1994 - 114.01 - 114.02 - 114.03 - 114.04 - 114.06 Ord. No. 1994-10 5-17-1994 - 72.01 Ord. No. 1994-11 7-5-1994 - 90.012 Ord. No. 1994-14 8-16-1994 - 131.02 Ord. No. 1994-15 8-16-1994 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1994-17 11-15-1994 - 131.09 - 131.99 Ord. No. 1994-18 12-6-1994 - 32.01 Ord. No. 1995-01 1-17-1995 - 156.004 Ord. No. 1995-04 3-14-1995 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1995-05 5-7-1995 - 33.25 Ord. No. 1995-11 8-15-1995 - 155.38 Ord. No. 1995-13 9-19-1995 - 91.01 - 91.02 - 91.03 - 91.04 - 91.05 - 91.06 - 91.07 - 91.08 - 91.09 - 91.10 - 91.11 Ord. No. 1995-15 9-19-1995 - 33.60 - 33.61 - 33.62 - 33.63 - 33.64 - 33.65 - 33.66 - 33.67 - 33.68 - 33.69 - 33.70 - 33.71 - 33.72 - 33.73 - 33.74 Ord. No. 1995-14 10-3-1995 - 53.04 Ord. No. 1996-01 1-16-1996 - 112.05 Ord. No. 1996-03 2-20-1996 - 33.02 Ord. No. 1996-06 6-18-1996 - 131.07 Ord. No. 1996-07 6-18-1996 - 131.06 Ord. No. 1997-05 5-6-1997 - 95.12 Ord. No. 1996-08 8-6-1996 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1997-06 8-5-1997 - 96.070 Ord. No. 1997-07 8-5-1997 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1997-09 10-21-1997 - 92.15 Ord. No. 1997-10 10-21-1997 - 153.02 Ord. No. 1997-11 10-21-1997 - 151.02 Ord. No. 1997-12 10-21-1997 - 150.02 Ord. No. 1998-01 1-20-1998 - 71.07 Ord. No. 1998-02 2-3-1998 - 95.12 Ord. No. 1998-04 6-2-1998 - 53.62 Ord. No. 1998-5 7-7-1998 - 96.088 Ord. No. 1998-6 7-7-1998 - 96.090 Ord. No. 1998-7 7-7-1998 - 96.093 Ord. No. 1998-08 8-4-1998 - 111.01 Ord. No. 1998-10 9-15-1998 - 32.04 - 32.05 - 32.06 Ord. No. 1998-11 10-21-1998 - 131.03 Ord. No. 1998-12 12-1-1998 - 113.01 Ord. No. 1999-01 3-2-1999 1 96.120 2 96.119 3 96.121 4 96.122 5 96.123 6 96.124 7 96.125 8 96.126 9 96.127 10 96.128 11 96.129 12 96.130 13 96.131 14 96.132 Ord. of 4-26-1999 4-26-1999 - 156.026 Ord. No. 1999-06 6-15-1999 - 156.148 - 156.149 - 156.150 - 156.152 Ord. No. 1999-07 6-15-1999 - 50.03 Ord. No. 1999-05 7-6-1999 - 156.004 Ord. No. 2000-01 4-4-2000 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2000-02 4-4-2000 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2000-03 6-6-2000 - 92.15 Ord. No. 2000-04 6-6-2000 - 150.02 Ord. No. 2000-5 6-6-2000 - 93.03 6-9-2000 93.01 Ord. No. 2000-06 7-11-2000 - 72.06 Ord. No. 2000-07 7-11-2000 - 72.07 Ord. No. 2000-09 12-5-2000 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2001-02 3-6-2001 - 153.07 Ord. No. 2001-06 11-6-2001 - 72.08 Ord. No. 2001-07 11-6-2001 - 157.001 - 157.002 - 157.003 - 157.004 - 157.005 Ord. No. 2001-08 11-20-2001 - 36.02 Ord. No. 2003-01 1-21-2003 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2003-02 3-18-2003 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2003-04 6-3-2003 - 95.10 - 95.15 Ord. No. 2004-04 5-25-2004 - 36.02 Ord. No. 2004-05 7-6-2004 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2004-07 9-7-2004 1 32.32 2 32.33 3 32.34 - 32.37 Ord. No. 2005-01 9-20-2005 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2005-02 9-20-2005 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2005-04 9-20-2005 - 35.07 Ord. No. 2006-01 2-21-2006 - 95.11 Ord. No. 2006-02 8-15-2006 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2006-03 8-15-2006 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2008-01-15 1-15-2008 1 33.27 Ord. No. 2008-01 4-22-2008 - 32.05 Ord. No. 2008-03 10-14-2008 - 70.10 Ord. No. 2008-04 11-18-2008 I 115.01 II 115.02 III 115.03 IV 115.04 V 115.05 VI 115.06 VII 115.07 VIII 115.08 IX 115.09 X 115.10 XI 115.11 Ord. No. 2009-03 11-24-2009 - 90.081 Ord. No. 2010-01 2-16-2010 - 94.01 - 94.03 Ord. No. 2010-02 7-20-2010 - 114.07 Ord. No. 2010-05 8-17-2010 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2010-06 8-17-2010 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2011-01 4-19-2011 - 53.67 Ord. No. 2011-04 6-21-2011 - 53.62 Ord. No. 2011-02 6-22-2011 - 53.61 - 53.65 Ord. No. 2011-03 7-19-2011 - 120.00 Ord. No. 2011-05 9-20-2011 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2011-05-A 9-20-2011 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2011-06 9-20-2011 - 114.07 Ord. No. 2011-07 9-20-2011 - 156.147 Ord. No. 2011-08 9-20-2011 - 151.05 Ord. No. 2011-09 9-20-2011 - 150.03 Ord. No. 2011-10 9-20-2011 - 153.021 Ord. No. 2011-12 9-20-2011 1 32.32 2 32.33 3 32.34 4 32.35 5 32.36 Ord. No. 2011-13 10-25-2011 - 156.070 - 156.071 - 156.072 Ord. No. 2012-01 5-15-2012 - 93.05 - 93.07 Ord. No. 2013-01 3-14-2013 1 97.001 2 97.002 3 97.003 Ord. No. 2014-01 1-21-2014 - 95.12 Ord. No. 2014-02 1-21-2014 1 71.08 Ord. No. 2014-03 7-15-2014 - 96.005 Ord. No. 2014-06 9-16-2014 - 150.02 Ord. No. 2014-07 9-16-2014 - 153.02 Ord. No. 2014-08 9-16-2014 - 151.02 Ord. No. 2014-12 11-18-2014 1 150.15 3 150.16 Ord. No. 2015-01 1-20-2015 II(A) 150.60 II(B) 150.61 II(C) 150.62 II(D) 150.63 II(E) 150.64 II(F) 150.65 II(G) 150.66 II(H) 150.67 II(I) 150.68 II(J) 150.69 II(K) 150.70 II(L) 150.71 II(M) 150.72 II(N) 150.73 II(O) 150.74 II(P) 150.75 II(Q) 150.76 II(R) 150.77 II(S) 150.78 II(T) 150.79 II(U) 150.80 II(V) 150.81 II(W) 150.82 Ord. No. 2015-03 2-17-2015 - 132.01 - 132.02 - 132.03 - 132.04 Ord. No. 2015-04  3-17-2015       Rpld 97.001-97.003 1-12       Added 97.01-97.12 Ord. No. 2015-09 12-15-2015 Adopting Ordinance, 
p. xi Ord. No. 2016-03  5-17-2016 - 95.10, 95.13, 95.15 Ord. No. 2016-04  6-21-2016 1, 2       Added 51.01, 51.02 Ord. No. 2016-05  7-19-2016 1-7 115.01-115.07 8 115.09 9 115.08 Ord. No. 2016-06  8-16-2016 I(A)-V(E)       Added 158.01-158.21 Ord. No. 2016-09  9-20-2016       Added App. A Ord. No. 2016-10  9-20-2016       Added 53-62(b) Ord. No. 2016-11  9-20-2016 1       Added App. A Ord. No. 2017-02  8-31-2017 1       Added 96.141-96.146 Res. No. 20170828  8-31-2017 Exh. A App. A Ord. No. 2019-01  5-14-2019 II 131.02 Ord. No. 2019-02  6-18-2019 1(Exh. A) App. A  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to State Law. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article Section 
this Code 1175 Tit. IX, Ch. 96  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 201 Tit. XV, Ch. 150, 
Art. III 142.001 et seq. 90.041 143.101 et seq. 90.041  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 112 1.04 112.01 11.38 Tit. XI, Ch. 112 112.05 61.36 Tit. XI, Ch. 112 112.05 101.63 112.03 105.05 112.02 106.03 112.03 108.55 Tit. XI, Ch. 112 109.31 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 112 109.33 112.04 251.71 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 112  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section Section 
this Code 6.002 Char. § 14.06 ch. 63 Char. § 14.05 ch. 101 et seq. Char. § 14.04 101.101 37.01  
V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure 
Article Section 
this Code ch.45 Char. Art. V 62.001 et seq. Tit. XIII, Ch. 132 102.0172 36.02 102.17 36.01  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section Section 
this Code 25.085 131.09 61.003 33.10  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Char. Art. III ch. 2 Char. § 3.04 ch. 11 Char. § 3.01 ch. 52 Char. § 3.03 31.005 Char. § 3.01 32.005 Char. § 3.01 32.011 Char. § 3.01 32.035 Char. § 3.01 42.061 Char. § 3.01 43.004 Char. § 3.01 141.003 Char. § 2.02  
V.T.C.A. Family Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 31 131.09 51.08 131.99  
V.T.C.A. Finance Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 33  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 21 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 36 ch. 29 Char. Art. V Tit. III, Ch. 36 ch. 201 et seq. 34.03 311.005 10.05 411.171 et seq. 131.06 ch. 414 92.01 ch. 418 Tit. III, Ch. 35 Tit. XV, Ch. 150, Art. III 418.023 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II 419.032 Tit. IX, Ch. 92 441.151 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 34 ch. 551 Char. § 2.10 ch. 552 Char. § 14.02 Tit. III, Ch. 34 34.01 ch. 573 33.68 573.001 et seq. Char. § 14.08 ch. 574 Char. § 2.07 606.021-606.031 32.15 ch. 851 et seq. 32.30 32.31 853.401(d) 32.32 853.402(d) 32.32 853.404(e) 32.34 854.203 32.33 855.407(g) 32.36 ch. 1501 et seq. Char. Art. XI 2009.054(c) 34.01 2051.041 et seq. Char. § 14.03 ch. 2256 33.60 2256.003(b) 33.73 2256.009 33.61 2256.010 33.61 2256.011 33.61 2256.0115 33.61 2256.012 33.61 2256.013 33.61 2256.014 33.61 2256.015 33.61 2256.016 33.61 2256.019 33.61  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 93 ch. 341 Tit. V, Ch. 51 Tit. XI, Ch. 115 341.019 Tit. IX, Ch. 93, 
Art. II ch. 342 Tit. V, Ch. 51 342.002 Tit. V, Ch. 52 342.007 93.06 343.011 Tit. IX, Ch. 93, 
Art. II ch. 361 Tit. V, Ch. 51 ch. 363 Tit. V, Ch. 51 ch. 365 Tit. V, Ch. 51 ch. 431 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 93 ch. 431 Tit. XI, Ch. 115 ch. 437 Tit. XI, Ch. 115 115.01 437.004(d) Tit. XI, Ch. 115 437.023 90.009 ch. 438 Tit. XI, Ch. 115 115.01 438.037 Tit. XI, Ch. 115 481.002 32.03 481.134 132.02 132.04 ch. 751 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 92 ch. 773 Tit. IX, Ch. 97 ch. 791 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 92 821.001-828.013 Tit. IX, Ch. 90 821.022 90.007 822.041 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 90, 
Art. VI 822.047 Tit. IX, Ch. 90, 
Art. VI 826.021 90.060 826.031 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 90, 
Art. IV 826.033 Tit. IX, Ch. 90 826.041 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 90, 
Art. V  
V.T.C.A. Labor Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.051 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 32, 
Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 5 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 30 ch. 9 Char. (note) 9.002 Char. § 14.18 9.003 Char. § 14.18 9.004 et seq. Char. § 14.17 9.005 Char. § 14.19 ch. 26 Char. Art. II Tit. III, Ch. 30 26.021 Char. § 1.02 ch. 41 Char. § 1.03 ch. 42, ch. 43 Char. § 13.01 ch. 51 Char. § 1.04 51.072 Char. § 1.04 52.013 Char. § 2.14 ch. 53 Char. § 2.15 53.001 10.01 ch. 54 150.80 ch. 54, subch. C 157.001 54.001 10.99 54.033 Tit. XV, Ch. 157 ch. 101 et seq. Char. Art. VIII, 
Char. Art. IX Tit. III, Ch. 33 101.022 Char. § 8.01 101.023 Char. § 14.05 ch. 102 Char. § 8.02 102.006 Char. § 8.05 102.0065 Char. § 8.04 102.007 Char. § 8.06 Char. § 8.07 102.008 Char. § 8.08 102.009 Char. § 8.10 Char. § 8.16 105.074 Char. § 9.12 105.075 Char. § 9.12 105.076 Char. § 9.12 171.001 et seq. Char. § 14.07 ch. 201 et seq. Char. § 8.03 Char. § 14.02 Tit. III, Ch. 34 203.021 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 34 ch. 211 et seq. Tit. XV (note) Tit. XV, Ch. 156 211.001 et seq. 118.01 211.007 Char. § 13.03 211.008 et seq. Char. § 13.07 211.008 156.148 211.009 156.149 211.010 156.151 211.011 156.152 ch. 212 Char. § 13.01 Char. § 13.02 Tit. XV, Ch. 155 155.03 212.003 Char. § 13.01 ch. 214, subch. A 150.60 214.001 et seq. Tit. XV, Ch. 150 Tit. XV, Ch. 150, 
Art. IV 214.001(o) 150.79 214.0011 Tit. XV, Ch. 150, 
Art. IV 214.0012 150.81 214.0015 Tit. XV, Ch. 150, 
Art. IV 214.214 Tit. XV, Ch. 151 214.216 150.02 215.002 et seq. Tit. XI (note) 215.031 Tit. XI, Ch. 117 215.073 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. I 215.075 Tit. XI (note) ch. 216 Tit. XI, Ch. 111 229.001 131.07 229.001(b) 131.06 ch. 243 Tit. XI, Ch. 118 118.01 ch. 251 et seq. Char. § 9.08 ch. 252 Char. § 9.09 253.005 Tit. XI, Ch. 116 ch. 281 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 96 ch. 283 Tit. IX, Ch. 96, Art. VII ch. 284 96.142 96.144 ch. 306 et seq. Char. § 2.17 Tit. IX, Ch. 96 ch. 331 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 95 ch. 341 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 92 ch. 341 Char. Art. VII 341.012 31.16 341.905 131.08 342.003 92.02 342.011 Tit. IX, Ch. 92 351.903 131.08 362.001-362.003 31.15 ch. 371 et seq. Char. Art. XIII Tit. XV, Ch. 156 Tit. XV (note) ch. 551 et seq. Char. Art. XII 552.017 Tit. V, Ch. 53  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 52 Tit. XI, Ch. 116 ch. 81 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 116 92.007 Tit. XI, Ch. 116  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1801 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 117 ch. 2151 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 113 ch. 2152 113.01 ch. 2153 Tit. XI, Ch. 114 2153.002 114.01 2153.401 114.04 2153.402 114.03 2154.001 et seq. 92.02 2154.004 92.02 chs. 2302, 2303 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II ch. 2308 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II 2308.201 et seq. Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Char. Art. VII Tit. XIII (note) ch. 12 10.99 16.02 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II chs. 21, 22 118.16 21.01 118.20 ch. 25 118.16 28.02 92.01 28.03 Tit. III, Ch. 35 52.54 95.01 30.06 131.06 31.03 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II 38.15 Tit. III, Ch. 35 116.787 38.15(a) 115.01 42.01(c) 131.02 42.06 Tit. III, Ch. 35 42.09 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 90 ch. 43 118.16 46.02 131.06 46.03 131.06  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code 12.002 Char. § 13.01 ch. 301 Tit. IX, Ch. 91  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Tit. III, Ch. 33 Tit. III, Ch. 33, Art. III 1.05 Char. § 8.01 11.253 33.27 33.07 33.02 152.001 33.10 ch. 156 Tit. III, Ch. 33, Art. II ch. 351 Tit. III, Ch. 33, Art. II 33.11 351.004 33.15  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Char. Art. VII Tit. VII (note) 311.001 Tit. IX, Ch. 96 311.004 Tit. IX, Ch. 96 316.001 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 96 ch. 541 et seq. Tit. VII, Ch. 71 ch. 550 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II ch. 601 119.09 ch. 643 Tit. XI, Ch. 119, 
Art. II ch. 683 Tit. IX, Ch. 94 542.202 Tit. VII (note) 542.202(a)(1) 70.01 542.202(a)(2) Tit. VII, Ch. 72 542.203 Tit. VII (note) 544.001 70.22 545.251 et seq. Tit. VII, Ch. 72 545.351 et seq. Tit. VII, Ch. 71, 
Art. II 545.424 et seq. 71.08 683.071 94.01  
V.T.C.A. Utilities Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 11 et seq. Tit. IX, Ch. 96, 
Art. VII 50.15 11.004 96.119 51.002(11) 96.119 54.203(c) 96.125 54.206 96.123  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Tit. V, Ch. 53 ch. 16, subch. I 150.21 16.315 158.01 ch. 26 52.25  
