CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SCHERTZ, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SCHERTZ, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Hal Baldwin 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carl Douglas, Place 1 
John Trayhan, Place 2 
Reginna Agee, Place 3 
Tony Wilenchik, Place 4 
Michael Carpenter, Place 5 
City Council 
____________ 
Don E. Taylor 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael Spain 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Judy Tokar 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SCHERTZ, TEXAS 
____________ 
Michael Carpenter 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mark Davis, Place 1 
Ralph Gutierrez, Place 2 
Scott Larson, Place 3 
Cedric Edwards, Place 4 
Robin Thompson, Place 5 
Allison Heyward, Place 6 
Tim Brown, Place 7 
City Council 
____________ 
John Kessel 
City Manager 
____________ 
Charles Zech 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Brenda Dennis 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Supervising Legal Editor, and Francine King, Legal Tech Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Norma Althouse, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Schertz, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Schertz, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Schertz, Texas. 2005.  
VOLUME I - PART I CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City's Home Rule Charter is set out herein as adopted by the people at an election held on November 3, 2015. Previously, the Charter had been adopted by an election held April 6, 1974, as amended by elections on April 7, 1979, May 6, 1989, May 7, 1994, and May 3, 1997. Elections adopting amendments on May 13, 2006, November 4, 2008, and November 6, 2012 were canvassed and declared adopted by Ord. No. 15-M-15 adopted May 12, 2015. The parenthetical note at the end of certain sections indicates the election(s) at which that section was amended. The original arrangement, numbering system, article headings, section catchlines and subcatchlines have been retained. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
PREAMBLE 
The citizens of the City of Schertz, in the Counties of Guadalupe, Bexar and Comal, State of Texas, being aware that their community is becoming ever larger and more prosperous and that ever increasing growth and prosperity are certain, desire to plan, regulate and control the affairs of the City to the fullest extent possible under the Constitution and general laws of this State. In this spirit, the citizens of the City of Schertz do hereby ordain this the Charter of the City of Schertz and accept the duties and responsibilities which it imposes and the privileges which it grants.  
ARTICLE I. - NAME OF CITY AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Name. 
Those persons residing within the limits of the City, as those limits now are or as they may be in the future changed, are hereby constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic to exist in perpetuity under the name "CITY OF SCHERTZ" hereinafter referred to as the "City".  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries; Extension, Annexation and Disannexation. 
(a)  Boundaries. The bounds and limits of the City are hereby established and described as those which exist under authority of the current City ordinances and displayed on a map maintained by the City Secretary and those boundaries established and changed hereafter as provided; such map to be maintained hereafter by the City Manager and maintained in a public place. 
(b)  Extension of Boundaries; Annexation of Territory. The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to annex territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the owners or inhabitants thereof, thereby extending and enlarging the bounds and limits of the City. Such annexations shall be limited and controlled by the applicable annexation laws of the State. 
(c)  Disannexation. Any area hereafter annexed under this Charter and the law of this State may be disannexed as follows: 
i.  Prior to disannexing any property of the City a public hearing shall held before both the City's Planning and Zoning commission and City Council on the proposed disannexation. 
ii.  Before the 10th day before the hearing date before the Planning and Zoning Commission, written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within 200 feet of the area to be disannexed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the United States mail, properly addressed with postage paid. 
iii.  Not later than 30 days of completion of the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed disannexation. Before the 15th day before the date of the public hearing, a general description of the property to be disannexed and notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
iv.  Not later than 30 days after the completion of the public hearing conducted by City Council the City Council may adopt an ordinance disannexing the property. A metes and bounds description of the property shall be attached to the ordinance as an exhibit.  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General Powers. 
The City shall have all the powers granted to cities by the Constitution and general laws of the State together with all of the implied powers necessary to execute such granted powers.  
ARTICLE III. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Establishment. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall consist of a Mayor and Councilmembers, elected by the people and responsible to the people, and a City Manager, appointed by and responsible to the City Council for proper administration of the affairs of the City. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution and general laws of the State and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in the elected Mayor and Councilmembers, who shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets and determine policies.  
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Number, Selection and Term. 
The City Council shall be composed of the Mayor and seven Councilmembers. The Mayor and all Councilmembers shall be elected from the City at large. Subject to Section 4.06(c), the Mayor and Councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided in Section 9.01 of this Charter for three-year terms. Each Councilmember shall occupy a position on the City Council, such positions being numbered Place One through Place Seven.  
Sec. 4.02. - Qualifications. 
The Mayor and each Councilmember must have attained the age of eighteen or older on the first day of the term of office applied for, be a registered voter of the City of Schertz, and have been a resident of the City for at least twelve consecutive months immediately preceding the deadline for filing for an application for a place on the ballot.  
Sec. 4.03. - Judge of Election Qualifications. 
The City Council is the final judge of all elections and the qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the City.  
Sec. 4.04. - Compensation. 
Members of the City Council shall serve with such compensation as determined by the City Council. An increase in compensation shall not be effective for any member of the City Council during the term for which he or she was elected and the increase was approved. Payment of expenses incurred in performance of official duty may be approved by the City Council.  
Sec. 4.05. - Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tem. 
The Mayor shall be the official head of the City government. He or she shall be the chairman and shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The Mayor may vote only in the event of a tie. He or she shall, unless another signatory is otherwise designated by the City Council, sign all official documents such as ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, grant agreements, official plats, contracts, and bonds. He or she shall appoint special committees as instructed by City Council, with committee membership to be composed of nominees by the City Council. He or she shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter or as may be imposed upon him or her by City Council. The Mayor shall not have veto powers. 
The Mayor Pro-Tem shall be a Councilmember appointed by the City Council for a term and pursuant to procedures established by the City Council from time to time. The Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the Mayor. While acting as Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem may vote on any matter before the City Council.  
Sec. 4.06. - Vacancies, Forfeiture, Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a Councilmember or the office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon his or her death, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of his or her office as provided for in this Charter. 
(b)  Forfeiture. The Mayor or a Councilmember shall forfeit his or her office upon: 
(1)  Final conviction of a felony or of an offense involving moral turpitude, a violation of any state laws regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers, or is assessed a deferred adjudication or probation for any state laws regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers. 
(2)  Ceasing to be a resident of the City. 
(3)  Failure to regularly attend City Council meetings without an approved absence obtained by a majority vote by City Council either before or after the absence. There shall be a presumption of failure to regularly attend when three (3) regular meetings are missed during a term year without obtaining an approved absence from City Council. 
(4)  A determination by City Council of the inability or unfitness to promptly and properly discharge official duties because of a serious mental or physical defect that did not exist at the time of election. 
(c)  Filling Vacancies. In the event of a single vacancy in the City Council, if there are 365 days or more remaining on the term of the vacated City Council position, the City Council shall call a special election to fill such vacancy. If there are less than 365 days remaining in the term of the vacated City Council position, the City Council may, by majority vote of the remaining Councilmembers, at its discretion appoint a new Mayor or Councilmember to fill such vacancy or call a special election to fill such vacancy.  
Sec. 4.07. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other Office. No Mayor or Councilmember shall hold any compensated City office or employment until two (2) years after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected to the City Council. 
(b)  Appointments and Removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officer or employee whom the City Manager or any of his or her subordinates are empowered to appoint, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, but the City Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c)  Interference with Administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the City Council or its members shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(d)  Admission of Liability. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall accept or admit liability or pay any claim for damages asserted against the City without first obtaining a written opinion from the City Attorney regarding the City's liability therein. 
(e)  Conflicts of Interest. It is hereby prohibited for the Mayor or Council Member or a City Official to violate the rules and regulations regarding conflicts of interests as set out in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 171 as amended or its successor. For purposes of this Section term "City Official" means any individual subject to the requirements of Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 171 as amended or its successor. 
(f)  Attorney Client Privilege. It shall be unlawful for the Mayor or a Council Member to release any attorney-client privileged communication. The City Council as the governing body of the City solely holds and is entitled to the attorney client-privilege and it may only be waived by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the City Council.  
Sec. 4.08. - Powers of the City Council. 
All City powers shall be vested in the City Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter.  
Sec. 4.09. - Meetings and Procedure. 
(a)  Date, Time, Place, and Notice. The City Council shall meet at least once each month at a time and place prescribed by ordinance. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, the City Manager, or on application of three Councilmembers. Written notice of the date, place and subject of each meeting shall be posted in the City Hall and written notice of no less than twelve hours (two hours in the event of an emergency meeting of the City Council) shall be given to each Councilmember. 
(b)  Open Meetings. Meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable State law. 
(c)  Quorum. Three Councilmembers (excluding the Mayor) shall constitute a quorum, and no action shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three or more members of the City Council. If the Mayor Pro-Tem is presiding, he or she shall be counted for purposes of determining a quorum. 
(c)  Quorum. Four Councilmembers (excluding the Mayor) shall constitute a quorum, and no action shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the City Council. If the Mayor Pro Tem is presiding, he or she shall be counted for purposes of determining a quorum. [EFFECTIVE THE FIRST REGULAR CITY COUNCIL IN NOVEMBER 2016 THAT CONSISTS OF SEVEN CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS] 
(d)  Rules of Procedure. The City Council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business, provided, however, that the citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting with regard to any matter relevant to the government of the City except at such meetings of the City Council as may be closed to the public as permitted by State law. Provision shall be made for the taking of minutes, which minutes shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural matters, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(e)  Passage of Ordinances and Resolutions. Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the City Council only in written or printed form. The subject or subjects of all ordinances and resolutions shall be clearly expressed in the title. Except as may otherwise be prescribed in this Charter, an ordinance shall not be passed at the meeting of the City Council at which it is first introduced, but instead the ordinance or its caption shall be read, and the City Council will determine whether it shall be rejected or further considered at a subsequent meeting of the City Council. If rejected, no further action shall be required. The City Council must take second and final consideration of any ordinance not later than sixty days after the first reading of such ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, if the City Council, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the members present at the meeting at which an ordinance is first introduced, determines that an emergency exists requiring immediate action, such ordinance may then be voted upon and rejected or passed at that meeting. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SCHERTZ, TEXAS", and every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and the City Secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the City Council. 
(1)  Franchise ordinances. All ordinances granting, confirming, extending, renewing or amending a franchise shall be accepted in writing by the grantees, and the full text thereof shall be placed on the City's website for at least one week prior to final adoption of the franchise ordinance. 
(2)  Effective date. Every ordinance passed by the City Council shall be enrolled by the City Secretary as soon as practicable after its passage. If the ordinance was published, he or she shall note the time and place of publication which shall be prima facie proof of publication thereof. The affidavit by the printer or publisher shall also be prima facie proof of the publication. Enrollment of an ordinance shall be prima facie proof of its legal adoption and effect. 
(3)  Codification of ordinances. The City Council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the City to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the City Council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the City Council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. All printed ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted as evidence in all courts without further proof and shall have the same force and effect as did the original ordinance.  
Sec. 4.10. - Inquiry Powers. 
The City Council shall have the authority to inquire into the affairs of the City and the conduct of any City department, office, or agency.  
Sec. 4.11. - Council Investigations; Hearings; Process. 
A.  General. In addition to any other specific authority of investigation and hearing provided for in this Charter, the City Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, appointed boards, office, officers, employees or appointed board members of the City. For the purpose of investigations and hearings, the City Council shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence material to the inquiry. The City Council shall provide, by ordinance, penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers or other evidence. The City Council shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance. 
B.  Hearings Process for Forfeitures of Office and Prohibitions. 
1.  All hearings held under this subsection shall be conducted in open session, except that the City Council may conduct a closed session to get advice from its attorney pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act; 
2.  The office holder subject to any investigation and/or hearing under this section shall be entitled to written notice of the allegations of forfeiture and/or the alleged violation of this Charter as applicable; 
3.  A special meeting shall be called to hold the hearing; 
4.  A member of City Council who initiated or is the subject of the investigation or hearing shall not sit at the dais and shall not participate in deliberations or vote; 
5.  City Council shall adopt by ordinance rules of procedures to be followed; 
6.  The City Council shall state the nature of the hearing and the allegations to be considered, shall be provided the results of any investigation and a presentation of the evidence against the office holder including, but not limited to testimony from individuals; 
7.  The individual who is subject to the hearing shall be provided an opportunity to respond to the allegations and present any relevant evidence including, but not limited to, testimony from individuals; 
8.  City Council may ask questions of any individual; 
9.  No public comment shall be allowed; 
10.  In the case of an alleged forfeitures of office pursuant to Section 4.06 (b) of this Charter City Council shall vote on the forfeiture and on the affirmative vote of two-thirds of City Council declare the office of said office holder to be forfeited and vacant; 
11.  In the case of an alleged violation of Section 4.07 of this Charter City Council may, on the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Council, take any action it determines to be appropriate including, but not limited to, directing further investigation, requesting further information, vote to enforce a penalty pursuant to section 12.10 of this Charter, vote to bring an action in municipal court, take a vote of censure; or, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of City Council, declare the office of said office holder to be forfeited and vacant. 
12.  Unless prohibited pursuant to subsection 4 herein, the Mayor shall vote in the case of an alleged forfeitures of office pursuant to Section 4.06 (b) of this Charter or of an alleged violation of Section 4.07 of this Charter.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager and fix his or her compensation. He or she shall be chosen on the basis of his or her executive and administrative training, experience, ability and character. He or she need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of his or her appointment, but he or she must agree, prior to such appointment, to become a resident of the City within four months after the date of his or her appointment. If he or she thereafter fails to become a resident of the City within that four-month period, he or she shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her appointment and the office shall be declared vacant by announcement of the Mayor at the first meeting of the City Council following the expiration of the four-month period. The City Manager shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Council. He or she shall be employed for or relieved from his or her duties by a vote of a majority of the members of the entire City Council.  
Sec. 5.02. - Acting City Manager. 
By letter filed with the City Secretary the City Manager shall designate, subject to approval of the City Council, a qualified City administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of City Manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During any vacancy in the office of City Manager, the City Council may appoint an Acting City Manager to perform the duties of City Manager. During such absence, disability, or vacancy, the City Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve as Acting City Manager until the City Manager shall return or his or her disability shall cease or such vacancy is filled.  
Sec. 5.03. - Powers and Duties of City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. He or she shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all City affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. He or she shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  He or she shall appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the City, suspend or remove City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for, by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. He or she may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(b)  He or she shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The City Manager or their designee shall attend all City Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(d)  He or she shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the City Council, subject to enforcement by him or her or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(e)  He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the City Council. 
(f)  He or she shall submit to the City Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(g)  He or she shall make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision. 
(h)  He or she shall keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the City Council concerning the affairs of the City. 
(i)  He or she shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the City Council. 
(j)  He or she shall keep a written inventory of all real property and all permanent equipment belonging to the City, said inventory to be subject to annual audit. A system shall be established to control the use and replacement of expendable items. 
(k)  He or she shall have the authority to sign documents in the name of the City as authorized by the City Council. 
(Election of 4-7-79, 5-6-89, 5-13-06)  
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES OR AGENCIES 
 
Sec. 6.01. - General Provisions. 
(a)  Creation of Departments. The City Council may continue, discontinue or establish City departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies. 
(b)  Direction by City Manager. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the City Manager shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager. With the consent of the City Council, the City Manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.  
Sec. 6.02. - Operational and Personnel Policies. 
The City Manager shall be responsible for the preparation of operational and personnel policies. Personnel policies which affect the budget and employee discipline and/or adverse actions shall be approved by City Council. The City Council may accept and adopt such policies as proposed or may adopt them with such amendments as the City Council deems necessary or may reject them in their entirety and direct the City Manager to further consider the policies and present new proposals at a subsequent meeting. Operational and administrative policies shall be approved by the City Manager but shall be provided to City Council for their information.  
Sec. 6.03. - City Attorney. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney for an indefinite term and fix his or her compensation. The City Attorney must be a member of the State Bar of Texas. He or she shall serve as chief legal advisor to the City, including the City Council, and, subject to applicable rules of the State Bar of Texas, the City Manager, supervisors of City departments and other City officers and agencies. He or she shall represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter, ordinances of the City, or State laws. The City Council may retain an additional attorney or attorneys for the City when the City Attorney is absent or as other circumstances require.  
Sec. 6.04. - Judge of the Municipal Court. 
The City Council shall establish a Municipal Court and shall appoint a Judge (and may appoint one or more deputy Judges) of the Municipal Court of the City and fix his or her compensation. Sessions of the Municipal Court shall be held at such times as may be determined by the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
When the Judge is absent, disabled or unable to perform his or her duties for any cause, or his or her office becomes vacant by reason of death, removal or resignation and no deputy Judge has been appointed, the City Council may appoint a special Judge of said court who shall serve until the Judge of said court returns to his or her duties or a successor is appointed and qualifies or a deputy Judge is appointed and qualifies.  
Sec. 6.05. - Terms of Office of City Attorney and Municipal Judge. 
Neither the City Attorney nor the Judge of the Municipal Court shall have any specified term of office, but each shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Council. Either of such officers may be appointed to or relieved from office by a majority vote of the City Council.  
Sec. 6.06. - City Secretary. 
(a)  The City Council shall appoint a City Secretary who shall act as Secretary of the City Council and who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Secretary shall be the clerical officer of the City Council, and shall keep the minutes, agenda, ordinances and other official records of the City Council and the City. The City Secretary shall be the custodian of the official seal of the City, and shall have such other duties and powers prescribed in this Charter and by the City Council. The City Council will set the compensation for the City Secretary. The City Secretary shall report administratively to the City Manager but may be removed from office only by the City Council. 
(b)  Upon approval by City Council of the position(s), the City Secretary may hire a deputy or deputies. The Deputy or Deputies shall report directly to the City Secretary.  
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of the following September.  
Sec. 7.02. - Submission of Budget. 
The City Manager shall submit to the City Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message not later than fifty days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year.  
Sec. 7.03. - Audit. 
The City Council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each department of the City and shall have an annual financial statement prepared based on the audit. A complete audit shall be made at the end of each fiscal year, and at such other times as may be necessary, by an independent Certified Public Accountant who shall be selected by the City Council. The annual financial statement, including the auditor's opinion, shall be filed with the City Secretary and shall be available for public inspection. The auditor selected shall not maintain or keep any of the City accounts or records.  
ARTICLE VIII. - [LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK]  
ARTICLE IX. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 9.01. - City Elections. 
(a)  The regular City election shall be held annually on the uniform election date in November, or at such other times as may be authorized or specified by State Law, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. 
(b)  The City Council shall fix the place for holding such election. 
(c)  The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, order a special election, fix the date and place for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election.  
Sec. 9.02. - Candidates. 
(a)  Any person having the qualifications set forth for under Section 4.02 of this Charter shall have the right to file an application to have his or her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any one elective office. 
1.  Any such application shall be in writing, signed by such candidate, and filed with the City Secretary in accordance with the Texas Elections Code and this Charter. 
2.  An application filed in accordance herewith shall entitle such applicant a place on the official ballot. 
(b)  A candidate of the City Council shall specify the place number or position the candidate is seeking. 
(c)  A filing fee of five dollars, or such other amount as may hereafter be set by the City Council, must be paid to the City Secretary by each candidate upon presentation of his or her application. The filing fee shall be waived if the candidate states in writing that payment thereof will constitute a financial hardship.  
Sec. 9.03. - Determination of Election Results. 
In the event no candidate for an elective office receives a majority of the votes cast for that place in the general or special election, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates who received the greater number of votes. In the event a tie vote makes it impossible to determine the winning candidate or candidates, resolution of such tie shall be decided as provided in the Texas Election Code.  
Sec. 9.04. - City Council Ballots. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or became ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots in the order of Mayor, Councilmember-Place One, etc., without party designation, and the order of listing the candidates' names for each such office shall be determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the City Secretary. Early voting shall be governed by the general election laws of the State.  
Sec. 9.05. - Ballots for Ordinances and Charter Amendments. 
An ordinance or Charter amendment to be voted on by the City shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described (ordinance) (amendment) be adopted?" Immediately below such question shall appear, in the following order, the words "yes" and "no". Ballots shall include voting instructions. (Election of 5-13-06)  
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Sec.10.01. - General Authority. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the City Council. If the City Council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, the qualified voters shall have the power to adopt or reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the City Council of any adopted ordinance. If the City Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the qualified voters shall have the power to approve or reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
(c)  Recall. The qualified voters of the City shall have the power to petition for recall of the Mayor or any member of the City Council by name and Place.  
Sec. 10.02. - Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners' Committee; Affidavit. 
Any five qualified voters may commence initiative, referendum or recall proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and will circulate the petition and file it in proper form stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. The affidavit for recall must distinctly and specifically state the reason or reasons for which the petition for recall is predicated and include the other requirements set forth in Section 10.06(b). Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the City Secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.  
Sec. 10.03. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of Signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the number of voters registered to vote at the last general City election. Recall petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the number of voters registered to vote at the last general City election. 
(b)  Form and Content. All pages of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. For a petition signature to be valid, the petition must: 
(1)  contain in addition to the signature: 
(A)  the signor's printed name; and 
(B)  the signor's 
(i)  date of birth; or 
(ii)  voter registration number and the County of voter registration; and 
(C)  the signor's residence address (including street address and County of voter registration); and 
(2)  comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by State law. 
Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed ordinance or other subject matter of the petition. A recall petition must distinctly and specifically state the reason or reasons upon which the petition is predicated. 
(c)  Affidavit of Circulator. Each page of a petition shall have attached to it when filed the following notarized affidavit, with all blanks properly completed: 
"STATE OF TEXAS § 
CITY OF SCHERTZ § 
I, _________________________________________, being first duly sworn, on oath confirm that (i) I am one of the signers of the above petition, (ii) I personally circulated the foregoing page of said petition, (iii) there are __ signatures on such page, (iv) each of the signatures appearing on such page was signed in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been signed, (v) the same are the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and (vi) each signer had an opportunity to read the full text of the ordinance or other subject matter of the petition. 
Sworn and subscribed to before me, this the ______ day of ____________, 20__. 
Signed and Sealed by a Notary Public in and for State of Texas" 
(d)  Filing Recall Petition. Recall petitions shall be initiated and filed with the City Secretary within sixty days after the petitioners' committee files its affidavit. 
(e)  Filing Referendum Petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within sixty days after adoption by the City Council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.  
Sec. 10.04. - Procedure After Filing. 
(a)  Certificate of City Secretary; Amendment. Within twenty days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Secretary within two days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section 10.03, and within five days after it is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request City Council to review under subsection (b) of this Section within the time required, the City Secretary shall promptly present his or her certificate to the City Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  City Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the City Council. The City Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the City Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)  Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
Sec. 10.05. - Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance. 
When a referendum petition complying with all the provisions of Sections 10.03 and 10.04 is filed with the City Secretary the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(a)  there is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
(b)  the petitioner's committee withdraws the petition, or 
(c)  the City Council repeals the ordinance, or 
(d)  voters sustain the ordinance in an election.  
Sec. 10.06. - Action on Petitions. 
(a)  Action by City Council on Initiative or Referendum. When an initiative or referendum petition has been fully determined sufficient, the City Council shall promptly consider' the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article IV or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the City Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City at a special election. 
(b)  Action by City Council on Petition for Recall. The recall petition must be addressed to the City Council of the City, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he or she is charged. The officer whose removal is sought may, within five days after such recall petition has been presented to the City Council request that a public hearing be held to permit him or her to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the City Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five days nor more than fifteen days after receiving such request for a public hearing. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the City Council to order a recall election and fix a date for holding such recall election. 
(c)  Submission to voters. The special election on a proposed or referred ordinance or petition for recall shall be held on the earliest date permitted by State and federal law after the date of the final City Council vote thereon. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls.  
Sec. 10.07. - Results of Election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the City Council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Referendum. If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(c)  Recall. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall continue in office for the remainder of his or her unexpired term. If a majority of the votes cast at such election shall be for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he or she shall be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 4.06(c) of this Charter.  
Sec. 10.08. - Limitation on Recall. 
No Councilmember shall be subject to recall within six months of his or her election to office nor more than once during one term of office. A recall election need not be ordered by the City Council against any Councilmember on whom a petition is filed if his or her term of office is to expire within ninety days after the petition is filed with the City Secretary.  
Sec. 10.09. - Ordinances Passed by Petition, Repeal or Amendment. 
No ordinance which may have been passed by the City Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article may be repealed or amended by the City Council for a period of three (3) years from the date said ordinance became effective and then only upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3s) of the City Council.  
ARTICLE XI. - [LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK]  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Personal Financial Interest. 
For purposes of this Section term "City Official" means any individual subject to the requirements of Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 171. 
It is hereby prohibited for City Council members or a City Official to violate the rules and regulations regarding conflicts of interests as set out in the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 171.  
Sec. 12.02. - Charter Amendment. 
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City by a charter commission in the manner provided by law, by ordinance passed by a majority vote of the full membership of the City Council, or by a petition signed by not less than five percent of the qualified voters of the City. When a charter amendment petition shall have been filed in conformity with Section 10.03 of this Charter, the City Council shall, subject to applicable law, forthwith provide by ordinance for submitting such proposed amendment to a vote of the voters of the City. Any ordinance for submitting a charter amendment to the voters shall provide for submission of such amendments to the voters in accordance with applicable law. Not less than thirty days prior to such election the City Secretary shall make available at the City Offices a copy of the proposed amendment or amendments. If a proposed amendment shall be approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon, it shall become a part of the Charter at the time fixed therein. Each amendment shall be confined to one subject; and, when more than one amendment shall be submitted at the same time, they shall be submitted so as to enable the voters to vote on each separately.  
Sec. 12.03. - Charter Review Commission. 
The City Council shall periodically appoint a Charter Review Commission which shall consist of no less than 5 and no more than 11 citizens of the City. It shall be the duty of the Commission to: 
(a)  Inquire into the operation of the City government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision and to this end, public hearings may be held and the Commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the City to require the submission of any of the City records which it may consider necessary to the conduct of such hearing. 
(b)  Make any recommendations it considers desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of this Charter by the several departments of the City. 
(c)  Propose amendments to this Charter to improve its effective application to current conditions. 
(d)  Report its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the City Council. The City Council shall receive any report submitted by the Charter Review Commission, may comment on any proposed amendment recommendations made, and, if any amendment or amendments are presented as a part of such report, shall order such to be submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided in Section 12.04. 
(e)  The term of office of the Charter Review Commission shall be 180 days after the date of the first meeting, said first meeting to occur within forty-five (45) days of the date of appointment. If during this term no report is presented to the City Council, then all records of the proceedings of the Commission shall be filed with the City Manager and the Charter Review Commission shall be dismissed.  
Sec. 12.04. - Separability. 
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
Sec. 12.05. - State Law. 
References in this Charter to "State law" shall refer to applicable provisions of State law in effect from time to time.  
Sec. 12.06. - Headings. 
Headings and titles of Sections and subsections of this Charter are for convenience only and shall not affect the meaning of any provisions within such Sections.  
Sec. 12.07. - Penalty Clause. 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who by himself or with others violates any provision of this charter shall, in addition to any other penalty, be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more $500.00. City Council shall enact an ordinance enforcing this section. 
B.  Civil Penalty. Upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the City Council any person who by himself or with others violates any provision of this charter shall be, in addition to any other penalty provided for herein, subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 15-M-41 , 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 12.08. - Disaster Clause. 
In the case of a common disaster when a legal quorum of the City Council cannot otherwise be assembled due to multiple deaths or injuries, the surviving persons of the City Council, or highest surviving City official, if no elected official remains, shall, within 24 hours of such disaster, request the highest surviving officers of the Guadalupe County Commissioners Court to appoint a number of residents of Schertz, qualified to serve as City Council Members, equal to the number necessary to make a quorum to act during the emergency as the City Council. The newly appointed City Council shall call a City election within 15 days of their appointment, or as provided in the Texas Election Code, for election of the vacant offices, if for good reasons it is known a quorum of the present City Council will never again meet. If it is determined that a quorum of the City Council will meet again, the appointed Council Members shall serve in their position until such time as the Council Members may begin serving.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Schertz, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Schertz City Code." 
(Code 1976, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify ordinances, Tex. Local Government Code, § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Home Rule Charter of the City of Schertz adopted by the voters of the city at an election held on April 6, 1974, a copy of which is printed in the front of this Code, and any amendment thereto. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" or "city" shall mean the City of Schertz, in the County of Guadalupe, Bexar or Comal and State of Texas, whichever is appropriate to the context. 
Code. The words "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Schertz, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given, or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the date on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. Whenever the words "council," "this council," "the council" or "city council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
County. The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Guadalupe County, Bexar County or Comal County, Texas, whichever is appropriate to the context. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend to be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, board, department or commission, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Schertz." 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
References. A reference to any portion of a statute, ordinance or rule applies to all reenactments, revisions or amendments of the statute, ordinance, or rule. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Tex. Admin. Code. This refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
Tex. [subject] Code. This identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5429b-1, predecessor to Tex. Government Code, § 323.007. 
Working days. The term "working days" shall mean Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, Tex. Government Code, § 311.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1976, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Schertz, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Schertz, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1976, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for city officers and employees; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies; 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement; 
(7)  Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or otherwise relating to any easement; 
(8)  All ordinances concerning participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System; 
(9)  Any ordinance regulating zoning within the city and any amendments thereto as adopted under the Unified Development Code as printed in volume II, part II; 
(10)  Any ordinance regulating the subdivision of land and amendments thereto as adopted under the Unified Development Code. as printed in volume II, part II. 
And all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1976, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum monetary amount which is permissible for a home-rule municipality to apply under state law; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt penalties for violations of Code, Tex. Local Government Code, § 54.001.  
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1976, § 1-9)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city, Art. II; form of government, Art. III; city council, Art. IV; city manager, Art. V; other departments, offices or agencies, Art. VI; financial procedures, Art. VII; general provisions, Art. XII. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The corporate seal of the city shall be circular, with an appropriate design thereon, with such inscription as may be necessary to indicate that same is the corporate seal of the city. 
(b)  The city secretary shall be custodian of the corporate seal. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1; Ord. No. 16, 3-3-1959) 
Charter reference— Authority to use corporate seal, § 2.01. 
State Law reference— Adoption and use of seal, Tex. Local Government Code, § 51.016.  
Sec. 2-2. - Time and place of council meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first, second and fourth Tuesdays of each month, provided that the city council by motion or resolution or the city manager in consultation with the mayor may cancel any such regular meeting due to conflicting events or meetings or lack of need for a meeting so long as at least one regular meeting of city council is conducted each month. Regular meetings of the city council shall commence at 6:00 p.m. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the city council Chambers, 1400 Schertz Parkway in the City of Schertz, provided that from time to time a regular meeting of the city council may be conducted at a different time and/or at another location in the City of Schertz as designated by posted written notice of the city secretary. 
(b)  Any special meetings of the city council shall also be held at 1400 Schertz Parkway, in the city, unless otherwise designated by posted written notice of the city secretary. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2; Ord. No. 77-M-16, § 1, 12-6-1977; Ord. No. 88-D-4, § 1, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 10-M-27, § 1, 9-14-2010 ; Ord. No. 15-M-32 , § 1, 9-8-2015) 
Charter reference— Council to meet at least once each month at time and place prescribed by ordinance, § 4.09. 
State Law reference— Open governing and open meetings, Tex. Local Government Code, § 551.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-3. - Bonds of city officers—Generally. 
The bonds of all city officers who are required to give bond shall be made payable to the mayor and his successors in office, in such amounts as may in each case be provided. All such bonds shall be conditioned that the officer giving same will faithfully perform all the duties of his office which are or may be imposed on him according to state law and the ordinances of the city and that he will comply with all the lawful orders of the city manager and the city council and account for, and pay to the persons entitled to receive the same, all moneys coming into his hands by virtue of his office. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3; Ord. No. 9, 1-19-1959)  
Sec. 2-4. - Same—For specific officers. 
The city manager, city secretary, city treasurer and tax assessor and collector shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, give bond in such amount as is prescribed by the city council, but in no case shall any such bond be in an amount less than $2,500.00. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4; Ord. No. 281, 11-20-1972)  
Sec. 2-5. - General duty of city manager to advise council of financial condition and needs of city. 
The city manager shall keep the city council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5; Ord. No. 281, § 5(i), 11-20-1972) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 5.03(h).  
Sec. 2-6. - City manager's monthly financial reports. 
The city manager shall make a full written report to the city council, as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the yearly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6; Ord. No. 281, § 5(i), 11-30-1972) 
Charter reference— City manager's annual report, § 5.03(f).  
Sec. 2-7. - Designation and general powers and duties of purchasing agent. 
The city manager shall act as purchasing agent for the city and shall purchase all merchandise, material and supplies needed by the city and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be kept and from which they shall be issued as needed. The city manager may adopt such rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of business between himself, as purchasing agent, and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as the council may approve. 
(Code 1976, § 2-7; Ord. No. 281, § 5(j), 11-30-1972)  
Sec. 2-8. - Competitive bids for purchases and sales; bidder's security. 
All purchases, except as described in section 2-9, and all sales shall be made in accordance with state statutes in effect from time to time with respect to competitive bidding and competitive proposals, the notice and award process relating thereto, and exceptions, exemptions, and alternative procedures. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8; Ord. No. 02-M-9, § 1, 5-7-2002) 
Charter reference— Purchase procedure, § 7.08. 
State Law reference— Requirements for bids on city purchases and contracts, Tex. Local Government Code, § 252.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-9. - Emergency purchases. 
In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city manager may, with the consent of the city council, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such accident or avoiding such public emergency, but immediately afterwards, he shall file with the mayor a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Code 1976, § 2-9; Ord. No. 281, § 5(j), 11-30-1972)  
Sec. 2-10. - Time limitation on contracts for street lighting, public improvements, labor or supplies. 
The purchasing agent shall not let any contract for periods exceeding one year for street lighting, public improvements, labor or supplies. 
(Code 1976, § 2-10; Ord. No. 281, § 5(j), 11-30-1972)  
Sec. 2-11. - Nonliability in claims for property damage or personal injury. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within six months from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury of any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person was or is committed in connection with such injury. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city manager at the following location: 1400 Schertz Parkway, Schertz, Texas, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  The above written notice requirements shall be waived if within the six month period set forth in subsection (a) the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(f)  If any provision of this section or the application hereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without defeating the purpose or objective of the provisions, and to this end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(g)  Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, or any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 2-11; Ord. No. 88-D-4, § 1, 2-16-1988; Ord. No. 86-M-18, §§ 1—6, 8-5-1986; Ord. No. 89-M-19, §§ 2, 3, 8-1-1989) 
State Law reference— Six months notice of claim period, Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code, § 101.101; governmental liability, Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code, § 101.021.  
Sec. 2-12. - Indemnification of city officers, officials, department, board, commission or agency members and other city employees. 
The city indemnification policy shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 2-12; Ord. No. 86-M-26, 9-16-1986) 
State Law reference— Local government may provide legal counsel for defendant employees, Tex. Civil Practice and Remedies Code, § 102.004.  
Sec. 2-13. - City council is final body of appeal. 
(a)  Except to the extent otherwise explicitly set forth by state law or unless such authority has by ordinance been assigned to the city manager, any final determination by any city board, commission, or committee may be appealed to the city council by the person or entity that requested the matter to be acted upon by such board, commission, or committee, and the decision of the city council with respect to such appeal shall be conclusive. In such case, the city council may confirm or reverse the decision of such board, commission, or committee and issue a final decision, or it may require such board, commission, or committee to reconsider its action. 
(b)  All ordinances (including but not limited to the Code of Ordinances of the city and the Unified Development Code) and resolutions, or parts thereof, which are in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict, and the provisions of this article shall be and remain controlling as to the matters ordained herein. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-3-2004)  
Secs. 2-14—2-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-M-46 , § I, adopted Dec. 1, 2009 , repealed Ch. 2, Art. II, §§ 2-43—2-45, in its entirety. Former Art. II pertained to Citizens Advisory Committee. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Secs. 2-43—2-63. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-64. - Establishment, composition. 
There is hereby created an economic development commission of at least seven members to be composed of citizens of the city, or interested persons employed or owning businesses within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-70)  
Sec. 2-65. - Appointment of members. 
All members of the commission are to be appointed by the city council of the city. Members shall be appointed for two year staggered terms. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled by city council for the completion of a term of office. 
(Code 1976, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-66. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the economic development commission is to oversee the economic development activities of the city. The commission will provide economic development policy recommendations to the city council of the city on all matters related to economic development. Specific duties and objectives, in addition to bylaws, shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 2-72; Ord. No. 94-M-1, § 2, 1-4-1994)  
Secs. 2-67—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSPORTATION SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created a Transportation Safety Advisory Commission (the "Commission"). 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-73), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-92. - Purpose. 
The commission shall review safety issues relating to transportation in the city to improve the quality of life in the city through a citizen-government partnership that promotes safe and secure roads which provide and promote convenience, recreational and leisure activities, and continued beautification of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-74), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-93. - Duties. 
(a)  Subject to the approved budget of the city for the commission, the commission shall undertake the following activities: 
(1)  Coordinate and communicate with the city manager and the director of public works, and the planning and zoning commission, the Schertz Economic Development Corporation, and similar bodies in the city on matters related to transportation safety; 
(2)  Develop transportation safety materials, including but not limited to brochures, videos, profiles, fact sheets, and similar materials or information; 
(3)  Develop research materials related to transportation safety; 
(4)  Develop a transportation safety plan for the city; 
(5)  Review all existing and proposed traffic ordinances; 
(6)  Develop and sponsor transportation safety courses for the citizens of the city, including but not limited to defensive driving courses, bicycle safety courses, and child car seat inspections; 
(7)  Participate in appropriate fact-finding trips, conferences, and seminars related to transportation safety; and 
(8)  Review plans, plats, site plans, and master plans for traffic safety recommendations when requested by the city manager. 
(b)  The commission shall, at least semi-annually, report its activities and recommendations to the city council through the city manager. 
(c)  The commission shall undertake such additional duties and activities as may be approved from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-75), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-94. - Composition of commission; terms of members; alternate members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of nine regular members who are residents or employees of the city and who shall be appointed by the city council. Each regular member of the commission shall be appointed by the city council for a two-year term commencing on the expiration of the prior term of a regular member. 
(b)  In addition, the city council may from time to time appoint up to two additional persons as alternate members of the commission. Such persons shall also be residents or employees of the city and may be appointed for terms not exceeding two years. Such persons shall be designated by the city council as Alternate No. 1 or No. 2. Alternate members shall be entitled to receive notice of all commission meetings. Alternate members may comment on matters coming before the commission in the same manner that regular members may comment but, except as provided below, shall have no authority to vote and, unless serving in place of an absent regular member as provided below, shall not be considered in determining the presence of a quorum. 
(c)  In the absence from a meeting of the commission of up to two regular members, alternate members who are present (in alternating order if there is only one regular member absent) shall, for such meeting, be counted toward a quorum, vote, and have all other rights of the absent regular members (except any absent regular member's office on the commission). If the regular member for whom an alternate member is serving subsequently arrives at the meeting, he or she shall not participate in such meeting, and the alternate member shall continue to serve until the conclusion of such meeting. 
(d)  The city council may remove a regular member or alternate member of the commission at any time, with or without cause. 
(e)  In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of a regular or alternate member, the city council shall appoint a replacement regular or alternate member to serve for the remainder of such member's term. There shall be no limit on the number of terms an individual may serve on the commission as a regular or alternate member. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-76), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 ; Ord. No. 12-M-33, § 1(Exh. A), 1-8-2013 )  
Sec. 2-95. - Staff support and funding. 
(a)  The city shall provide staff support to the commission through the city manager in coordination with the director of public works, the chief of police, and a city council liaison, each of whom shall serve as ad hoc members of the commission. 
(b)  Funding for commission activities shall be provided by the city as a line item in the city budget. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-77), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-96. - Officers. 
The regular members of the commission shall select a chair to preside at meetings of the commission and a vice-chair to serve in the absence of the chair. The city manager shall provide a member of the city staff to serve as secretary for the commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-78), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-97. - Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at least quarterly. Special meetings may be called by the chair or by any two regular members of the commission. Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, which shall be required for the commission to conduct business. The vote of a majority of the members (including any alternate member or members acting in the absence of a regular member or members) present shall be required for any action to be effective. Meetings of the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. Notice of meetings shall be posted in accordance with such Act by the secretary. Minutes of commission meetings shall be prepared by the secretary, and such minutes shall be distributed to all regular and alternate members and shall be made available under standard city procedures to other interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-79), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-98. - Disqualification from voting. 
A regular or alternate member shall be disqualified from voting on a matter before the commission if such member has a personal or monetary interest with respect to the project being voted upon or if the member will be affected, personally or monetarily (other than as a member of the general public), by the outcome of the vote. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-80), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-99. - No Compensation. 
The regular and alternate members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of actual expenses attendant to the performance of their duties as authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-81), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-100. - Committees. 
The chair may establish permanent or special committees. Membership on committees may include individuals who are not regular or alternate members of the commission, but every committee shall be chaired by a regular member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-82), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Sec. 2-101. - Amendments. 
The city council may modify this article or the commission may recommend modifications to this article to the city council, but such modifications must be approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-02, § I(2-83), 1-26-2005; Ord. No. 08-M-51, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-M-45, § I, 12-15-2009 )  
Secs. 2-102—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, Tex. Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Definition of municipal records. 
Municipal records includes all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. The materials excluded from the term "local government record" in section 201.003 of the Local Government Records Act are not municipal records for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 1, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-122. - Additional definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any municipal record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of government operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any municipal record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-130 of this article. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-125 of this article. 
Records management plan means the plan established under section 2-126 of this article. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 2, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-123. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 2-121 of this article are hereby declared to be public property. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 3, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-124. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 4, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-125. - Designation of records management officer. 
The individual designated as records management officer shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the date of designation, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 5, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-126. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management plan on file with the city secretary is to be administered by the records management officer. 
(b)  The records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. The records management officer will coordinate with the city manager. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 6, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-127. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city manager and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Advise records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 7, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-128. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 8, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-129. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 9, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-130. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 10, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-131. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state library as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 11, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-132. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-131 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the records is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained from the records management officer. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 12, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-133. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that does not appear on a records control schedule or amended schedule may be destroyed only with the prior approval of the director and librarian of the state library, and the records manager has received the approved destruction authorization request. Persons desiring to destroy unscheduled records must strictly adhere to the guidance contained in the Local Government Records Act section 203.045. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 13, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-134. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-126, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-126. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 14, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 2-135. - Electronic record storage. 
The records management officer will also integrate the management of electronic records with other records and information resources management programs; incorporate electronic records management objectives, responsibilities, and authorities in pertinent directives; establish procedures for addressing electronic records management requirements, including recordkeeping requirements and disposition; and ensure that training is provided for users of electronic records systems in the operation, care, and handling of the equipment, software, and media used in the system. The records management officer will procure and maintain up-to-date guidance pertaining to all applicable electronic records storage systems, and will ensure all computer hardware adequately incorporates all technical characteristics necessary for reading, processing, and the timely disposition of stored records. The records management officer will also insure that all offices will specify the location and media on which electronic records are maintained on all file plans, and maintain inventories of electronic records systems to facilitate disposition instructions. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-13, § 15, 4-20-2004)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 109.31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
All words and phrases used in this chapter, which are defined in the alcoholic beverage code, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in such act. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1; Ord. No. 63, § 1-5, 12-16-1961)  
Sec. 6-2. - Permit to sell. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any liquor, beer or wine within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued in accord with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The annual fee for a permit under this section shall be the maximum amount which the city may collect under the provisions of the alcoholic beverage code. 
(c)  No holder of a permit issued under this section shall obtain any refund of the fee paid upon the surrender or nonuse of the permit. 
(d)  Upon payment of the applicable fee to the city secretary and exhibition to him, or a designated representative, of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such fee, the city secretary or designated representative shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit to engage in business in the city of the character described and authorized by the permit from the state held by such applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as such permit from the state remains in effect. 
(e)  Any person who shall fail to pay any fee prescribed in this section or secure any permit as prescribed in this section, before engaging in any business for which the payment of any such fee and securing of any such permit is required by the terms of this section, or who shall engage in any such business without authorizing the same, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day or portion of a day in which this section is violated by any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2; Ord. No. 63, § 1-5, 12-16-1961; Ord. No. 02-L-8, § 1(3-2), 5-7-2002)  
Sec. 6-3. - Hours for sale of mixed beverages and beer. 
(a)  The city council does herewith adopt for the city the hours prescribed for the sale of mixed beverages for counties having a population of 500,000 or more, as set out in the alcoholic beverage code. 
(b)  The city council does herewith adopt for the city the hours prescribed for the sale of beer for counties having a population of 500,000, as provided in the alcoholic beverage code. 
(c)  Late hour laws for the sale of mixed beverages and beer are herewith established as being from 12:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on allowable days of sale. 
(d)  A permit for late hour operation under this section shall be obtained from the city secretary prior to any such late hour operation. Any such permit may be revoked at any time by the city council, when deemed to be in the best public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3; Ord. No. 268, § 1-4, 8-3-1972) 
State Law reference— Hours of sale, mixed drinks, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 105.03; hours of sale for beer, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 105.05.  
Sec. 6-4. - Extended hours. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to consume any alcoholic beverages in a public place or to possess any alcoholic beverage in a public place for the purpose of consuming the same in such public place during the extended hours granted by the alcoholic beverage code. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for the holder of a retail dealers on-premises late hours license within the city to sell beer or offer the same for sale during the extended hours granted by the alcoholic beverage code. 
(c)  It shall be lawful for the holder of a private club late hours permit within the corporate limits of the city to permit persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages during the extended hours granted by the alcoholic beverage code. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4; Ord. No. 81-L-20, §§ 1—3, 7-21-1981)  
Sec. 6-5. - Schedule of fees. 
Under and by virtue of the authority granted in the alcoholic beverage code there are hereby prescribed and levied annual occupation taxes or license fees upon and there shall be collected from persons, firms, and corporations carrying on business within the limits of the city. Said fees, applicable per classification, are as established from time to time, in amounts not greater than permitted under state law. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5; Ord. No. 81-L-21, § 1, 7-21-1981; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
State Law reference— Local fee authorized, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 11.38; local license fee authorized, Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code, § 61.36. 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power to regulate places of public amusements, Tex. Local Government Code, § 215.074. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS AND SIMILAR ITINERANT ACTIVITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-L-19, §§ 1—7, adopted Aug. 5, 1975, did not specifically amend this Code; hence its inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 10-19—10-24, was at the discretion of the editors. 
State Law reference— Amusement Ride Safety and Inspection Act, Tex. Occupations Code, § 2151.001 et seq.; administrative rules to implement act, 28 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 5.9001—5.9014. 
 
Sec. 10-19. - Permit required. 
No carnivals, concessions, circuses or similar temporary activity, defined in section 10-20 as "carnival," shall be held in the City of Schertz, Texas, unless a permit has been approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-11; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 1, 8-5-1975)  
Sec. 10-20. - Definition of terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent shall be construed to mean the owner, manager, lessee or attorney of a carnival, as defined above, or the person authorized to correspond with the city in an official capacity. 
Carnival shall mean any itinerant carnival, circus, rodeo, fair, festival, roller rink, etc., in which there are games, amusements, concessions, rides, etc., and to which the public is welcome to attend for a fee, which is paid either for entry to the grounds or for participation in the amusements. 
Local civic organization shall mean any nonprofit or similar organization, whose primary function as an organization is not determined to be operating a carnival, and composed of membership mostly from Schertz or the surrounding Randolph subregion. It shall not mean a carnival, as defined above, sponsored by a local civic organization. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-12; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 2, 8-5-1975)  
Sec. 10-21. - Requirements for permit. 
The requirements for issuance of a permit will be as follows: 
(1)  All requirements of the zoning ordinance must be met, especially such that: 
a.  The area of the proposed carnival must be zoned compatibly with the carnival; 
b.  There must be adequate parking so that no street is rendered unable to be trafficked; and 
c.  Hours of operation will be set by the city manager at the time of issuance of permit. 
(2)  The city shall assess a permit fee upon issuance of the permit, at a rate as determined from time to time by ordinance, on a separate schedule, for each additional three-day period or fraction thereof, weekends and holidays included. If the agent wishes to operate beyond the expiration of the permit, he must get an extension at the rate and criteria as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(3)  Adequate provisions for law enforcement will be made before the permit is issued. This will include pay for police officers needed during and immediately before and after the operation of the activities and special fees required for unusual circumstances, as agreed on by the city manager, the chief of police, and the agent of the carnival. The assigned enforcement officer and any assistance that they might need are authorized to enforce this article and other relevant laws of the state. 
(4)  If the carnival is to be held on city property, the permit fee is not to be considered in lieu of any fee that may be required for the rental of city land, if there is a fee. The park department superintendent will notify the agent of any special rules pertaining to the use of city property. 
(5)  Adequate provisions for sanitation and public health must be shown upon application for the permit. 
(6)  Upon issuance of the permit, a $200.00 deposit shall be filed with the city by the agent to ensure that the area will be adequately cleaned up after the activity is over. Upon satisfactory completion of cleanup, and if all of the other conditions have been met, the city manager shall authorize release of the deposit to the agent. If adequate cleanup work has not been performed, or other fees have not been paid, the deposit will be used to complete the cleanup. 
(7)  An organization classified above as a local civic organization shall not be required to pay the permit fee nor a fee for use of city property, except as stated above, but the city reserves the right to require the permit fee if a professional carnival is sponsored by a local civic organization. However, the fee for use of city property may still be waived if there are other events going on sponsored by the local civic organization. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-13; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 3, 8-5-1975)  
Sec. 10-22. - Restrictions on games and activities. 
No activities sponsored by the carnival shall be arranged in a manner so as to create a disturbance or cause a crowd to become unruly. Any game of chance or skill shall not be contrary to the laws of the city or state, nor shall any such game be controlled, fixed or operated so as to deceive the public concerning the possibility of winning the offered prize. Rules shall be made clear at the beginning of each game and shall not be changed as the game progresses. The use of employees of the carnival to pose as players in order to attract customers shall be prohibited. Any ride, game or concession (except where prohibited or restricted by law) must be open to everyone, and all shall be subject to the same rules and regulations, thereby affording an equal opportunity to win or enjoy the activity. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-14; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 4, 8-5-1975)  
Sec. 10-23. - Health and sanitation. 
At all hours of operation, there must be adequate provisions made for sanitation facilities, and other means of insuring the public health and safety must be planned. Temporary facilities are permissible if they are properly maintained and if they are removed as soon as the carnival leaves the city. Such sanitation facilities and safety provisions may include, but are not limited to, restrooms, lights and access paths free of excessive mud or water. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-15; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 5, 8-5-1975)  
Sec. 10-24. - Revocation of permit. 
If it appears that the continued operation of the carnival shall endanger the public health or create a nuisance, or if any of the provisions of this article have been violated, the city manager may, and shall have the authority to, revoke the permit of the carnival and cause the activity to cease. The chief of police and his appointed officers shall enforce the revocation and see that all operations are closed and that all customers have left the premises. The agent may appeal to the city manager for restoration of the permit if it can be shown that the facts were misrepresented, or if there were extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the carnival that can be alleviated. If the permit has been revoked and is not reissued, the carnival shall clean up the area at the first available opportunity. Nothing shall deny the agent the right to appeal such a decision to a court of record. 
(Code 1976, § 3½-16; Ord. No. 75-L-19, § 6, 8-5-1975)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, adopted Aug. 25, 2015, amended Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-276, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter as set out herein. Former Ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-H-04, § I, adopted Jan. 29, 2008; Ord. No. 10-M-31, §§ 1(a)—(c), adopted Oct. 19, 2010; and Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2012. 
State Law reference— Health and safety of animals, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 821.001 et seq.; rabies control, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 826.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Animal: Any mammal/reptile, domestic or wild. 
Animal at large: Any animal, other than a cat that is part of the trap, neuter and return program or a registered, domesticated, free-roaming cat, not under restraint of a person who has care, custody, possession or control of the animal either on or off the premises of the owner; that is found to be outside a fence or enclosure on the property to which the animal belongs; or that is otherwise off the premises of the owner of the animal or person with care, custody, possession, or control of the animal. 
Animal control officer: Person designated and duly sworn by the city as an enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of the city and/or the state, and who holds a basic animal control officer certification. 
Animal shelter: Any facility operated by the city, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding, quarantining, or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter. 
Auctions: Place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded except for those facilities otherwise defined in this Code. This term does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners. 
Bite: Puncturing or tearing of the skin by an animal's teeth that could result in the exchange of blood and saliva. 
Cat: Any Felix Catus. 
Cat colony: A colony of free-roaming (homeless, stray, wild or un-tamed) cats that have been registered with the department and is maintained by a colony caretaker (who provides food, water and shelter) using trap, neuter and return methodology. 
Circus: Commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
City: The City of Schertz. 
City veterinarian: Person or persons appointed by the city council, licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Commercial animal establishment: Pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog or obedience training center, animal auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel. 
Commercial property: A tract of land and/or building zoned for, or utilized for, commercial or business uses in the city limits, including temporary commercial sites. 
Confined: A situation by which an animal is effectively prevented from being free to roam or run at large. 
Custodian: A person or agency that feeds, shelters, harbors, or has possession or control or responsibility to control an animal. 
Dangerous animal: Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings or domesticated animals without provocation, or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or injure human beings, or domesticated animals; or an individual animal which the local health authority has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition, likely to be harmful to humans or other animals. 
Dog: Any Canis Familiaris including hybrids. 
Domestic animal: Any animal normally adapted to live in intimate association with humans or for the advantage of humans. 
Ear tipping: A straight line cut of the tip of the left ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized to identify the cat as spayed/neutered. 
Exotic animals: Animals that are not livestock or typical domestic animals, including but not limited to the following: ferrets, pythons, boa constrictor, non-poisonous spiders, scorpions, or lizards. 
Feral: Any domestic animal that has escaped domestication and reverted back to a wild state. 
Feral cat: A cat that exists in a wild or untamed state, either due to birth or reversion to a wild state from domestication. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral cat is extreme fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are completely or substantially unsocialized to humans. 
Feral cat caregiver: A volunteer, uncompensated person who agrees to facilitate the trap, neuter and return program in accordance with this chapter and any rules and regulations established by the animal services manager and who is responsible for providing food, water and shelter for the cats in the trap, neuter and return program. 
Feral cat colony: A group of feral cats that congregate, more or less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed a part of it. 
Fowl: A bird of any kind: domestic or wild, cock or hen (Gallus Gallis). 
Foster: To provide care or nurture animals until a suitable home can be found in accordance with guidelines set by Schertz Animal Control and Schertz Human Society d.b.a. Homes For Pets. 
Free-roaming: Any animal not under restraint or kept in an enclosure. 
Grooming shop: Commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed. 
Guard dog: Any professionally trained dog that will detect and warn its handler that an intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured. Any dog that is utilized to protect commercial property. 
Guard dog permits: Issued for each commercial establishment where guard dogs are to be used or where guard dogs are kept or boarded. 
Guard dog training center: Commercial property where guard dogs are to be used, or where guard dogs are to be kept, boarded, bred, sold, let to hire, or trained for a fee for guard dog purposes. 
Handler: Any person who is responsible for and capable of controlling the actions of a guard dog, or training or transporting a guard dog. 
High risk animal: Animals which have a high probability of transmitting rabies including, but not limited to, skunks, bats, raccoons, coyotes, and species of foxes indigenous to North America. 
Housing facility: Any room, building, or area used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures. 
Humanely killed: To cause the death of an animal by a method which 
(1)  Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress; or 
(2)  Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness and death following such loss of consciousness. 
Hybrid: Any offspring of two animals of different species. 
Kennel or cattery: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs and cats, and/or a facility for keeping more than three animals of the same species. 
Impoundment: The collecting or confining of an animal due to city ordinance violation or because of a contract with a county, municipality or military base. 
Isolation: The separation of animals exposed or potentially exposed to rabies or other diseases. 
Licensed veterinarian: A veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners. 
Livestock: An animal raised for human consumption (e.g. goats, cows, pigs, poultry or sheep) or an equine animal. 
Local health authority: The officer designated by the city council under V.T.C.A. Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 826, as amended from time to time. 
LRCA: Local rabies control authority. 
Microchip: A permanent method of electronic identification that is implanted subcutaneously (just under the skin) between the shoulder blades at the back of an animal's neck. A microchip has a unique number that is detected using a microchip scanning device. 
Microchipped: An animal that: 
(1)  Has a microchip implanted; and 
(2)  The animal, owner and microchip are registered with a national microchip registry. 
Owner: Person who feeds/harbors an animal(s) for more than 72 hours without the presence of that animal being recorded in the records of the shelter as a stray animal. Persons caring for an animal at the request of an owner are not included in the definition of owner, but are required to keep the animal in compliance with this Code. An owner does not include a feral cat caregiver participating in an authorized trap, neuter and return program. 
Performing animal exhibitions: Spectacle, display, act, or event other than circuses and rodeos in which animals are used, and shall include animal amusement vendors such as, but not limited to, pony rides, commercial horseback pictures, etc. 
Person: Individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision, or agency, business trust, estate, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
Pet or companion animal: A domestic or tamed animal, kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Pet shop: Business establishment (sole proprietor, partnership or corporation), whether licensed or not by the city, where two or more species of animals including, dogs, cats, fish, birds, reptiles, or rodents are kept for sale or commercial barter. 
Positive control: Confined to a quarantine facility where the animal cannot make physical contact with other animals or humans, other than a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer, or shelter operator. 
Possible exposure to rabies: A bite received from any warm-blooded animal, animal to human or animal-to-animal is reason to suspect exposure rabies. 
Poultry: Any species of domesticated birds commonly kept for eggs and/or meat. 
Provocation: Any purposeful act that causes an animal to bite, scratch, or attack in protection of itself or its owner or its owner's premises. Entrance, in any manner, into an area where an animal is properly under restraint in compliance with city ordinances would be considered provocation, irrespective of the reason for such entrance. 
Public nuisance: Any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "Public Nuisance Animal" shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that 
(1)  Is repeatedly at large or stray; 
(2)  Damages the property or anyone other that its owner; 
(3)  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
(4)  Trespasses on school grounds; 
(5)  Chases vehicles; 
(6)  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to continued/ repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(7)  Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(8)  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(9)  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number and or type of animals maintained; or 
(10)  Attacks other domestic animals or humans. 
(11)  Quarantine: Strict confinement, for the purpose of preventing the spread of disease, under restraint by closed cage or padlock or in any other manner approved by the local health authority on the private premises of the animal's owner or at a facility approved by the Texas Department of Health. 
Quarantine period: That portion of the observation period during which an animal is physically confined for observation as provided for under the quarantine method and testing section of this chapter. 
Rabies: An acute viral disease of man and animal affecting the central nervous system and usually transmitted by an animal bite. 
Rabies vaccination: A protective inoculation given under the direction of a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine recognized and approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity and satisfies the requirement of state law. 
Registered microchip: A microchip that is registered with a company, organization or non-profit group that maintains microchip registration information, which includes identifying and contact information for animal owners. 
Restraint: A chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches an animal to a stationary object or trolley system, or a substantial fence or pen. 
Riding school or stable: A place that has available for hire, boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro, or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the above animals, including a racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo. 
Run at large: To be free of restraint while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
Scratch: A scrape left by the claws or nails of an animal that is of sufficient severity to break the skin and draw blood. 
Service animal: An animal having special training to assist/aid a person with disabilities. 
Sick animal: Any animal that appears to be suffering from an infectious, contagious, or communicable disease; or that is showing evidence of a physical disorder, or traumatic injury, or that has an elevated temperature. 
Small animal: Rabbits, guinea pigs, domestic mice, rats, hamsters, hedgehogs, gerbils, etc. 
State: The State of Texas. 
Stray: Animal running free or at large, with no physical or verbal restraint. 
Sterilization: The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of an animal to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Temporary permit: Not to exceed three consecutive days used for the temporary sale or give away of animal(s) at flea markets. 
Trap, neuter and return program: A nonlethal, humane alternative to deal with stray cats which are captured, spayed/neutered and returned back to their location in order to encourage the stabilization of the free-roaming cat population in the city. 
Un-owned animal: Animal for which an owner has not been identified. 
Unrestrained: Not restrained by leash or lead, physical or verbal restraint, or by a substantial fence or pen. 
Utility: Kept for the production of a useful product, or for its skill rather than for show or as a pet. 
Vaccination certificate: A document showing on its face that the animal described thereon has received a current inoculation in an amount sufficient to produce an immunity that satisfies the requirement of state law. It must show the date of the inoculation, duration of immunity approved for that vaccine, the name and address of the animal's owner, all other information required by state law and signed by a licensed veterinarian. 
Veterinarian: Person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Veterinary hospital: Establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian(s) for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Wild animals: Any non-domestic/tamed animal including, but not limited to, wolves, coyotes, panthers, lions, bobcats, cougars, black footed ferrets, skunks, armadillos, poisonous reptiles, raccoons, monkey (non-human primates), and any other animal typically found in a zoo except the following: 
(1)  Domestic dogs 
(2)  Domestic cats 
(3)  Livestock 
(4)  Poultry 
Wildlife: Any animal that typically occurs naturally in the wild state. 
Wild state: Living in its original, natural condition; not domesticated, regardless of state or duration of captivity. 
Zoo or zoological park: Facility other than pet shops or kennels displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 20-H-06 , § 2, 4-14-2020)  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL SHELTER; ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
 
Sec. 14-2. - Animal shelter. 
There shall be erected and maintained, under the supervision of the animal shelter supervisor of the city, a suitable building and kennels, to be known as the animal shelter, for the confinement of all animals seized, impounded, or surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The animal shelter shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and all animals taken up and impounded therein shall be properly fed and provided water. All animals shall be treated in a humane manner while under the custody of the shelter. The animal shelter supervisor is hereby designated as the health authority for the purpose of this chapter. General shelter procedures are as follows: 
(1)  Licensed impounded animals shall be kept for not more that 120 hours. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within 120 hours shall become the property of the city and shall become available for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(2)  Unlicensed impounded dogs and cats, other domestic animals and livestock shall be kept for not more than 72 hours after which time they become the property of the city. 
(3)  Wild cats, dogs or other animals may be kept zero to 72 hours at the discretion of the animal shelter supervisor or his or her designee. 
(4)  Sick or injured animals wearing no apparent identification through which ownership can be determined may be kept zero to 72 hours at the discretion of the animal shelter supervisor or his or her designee. 
(5)  If, by a license tag or other means the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the shelter shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by direct contact, telephone, mail, or other reasonable means. 
(6)  An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay all impounding fees, boarding fees and licensing fees according to the fee schedule. If no proof of a current rabies vaccination can be produced, the animal control officer, or an animal shelter operator may issue a citation for violation of this law. Impounding and boarding fees will increase with each impoundment occurring within a 12 month period. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-3. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  The office of animal control officer is hereby created to capture unrestrained dogs, and nuisance animals; and confine them in a humane manner at the shelter. 
(b)  The animal control officer is hereby empowered during the performance of his or her duties to capture and impound/quarantine any livestock, fowl, cats, dogs, or other domestic and non-domestic animals found running at large (stray) within the city limits and to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Animals that pose a threat to public health and safety, any wild animal kept illegally or animals that have been cruelly treated or abused shall be impounded by the animal control officer. 
(d)  The animal control officer may issue a citation to the known owner of an animal found to be at large. A person who is convicted of owning an animal at large shall pay a fine as established by the city municipal court. Subsequent convictions of this sub-section within a 12-month period shall increase from the minimum applicable fine. 
(e)  For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, and to enforce the same, duly authorized representatives (or employees) of the city may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law, which shall include but not limited to entry upon private unfenced property when in pursuit of any animal which he/she has reason to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE III. - MICROCHIPPING AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-H-06 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2020, changed the title of art. III from "licensing/permits" to "microchipping and permits." 
 
Sec. 14-4. - Dog and cat microchipping required. 
(a)  All residents of the city shall have their dog(s) and cat(s) implanted with a registered microchip. 
(b)  Newborn dog(s) and cat(s) must be implanted with a registered microchip before the animal attains four months of age. 
(c)  Newly acquired dog(s) and cat(s) must be implanted with a registered microchip within 30 days of ownership. 
(d)  New residents of the city shall have their dog(s) and cat(s) implanted with a registered microchip within 30 days of moving to the city, if the animal is not already microchipped. If the animal is already microchipped, the owner shall update their contact information. 
(e)  An animal is exempt from this requirement if it is determined to be medically unsuitable for microchipping by a licensed veterinarian, in writing, provided that: 
(1)  [If the] animal is determined to be medically unsuitable for microchipping, the owner shall have the animal permanently marked with an identifying tattoo by a licensed veterinarian; 
(2)  Proof of medical unsuitability for microchipping along with the identifying tattoo number and owner's or keeper's name, address and telephone number is provided to Schertz Animal Services within 30 days of tattooing; 
(3)  If there is a change in contact information, the owner or keeper of a tattooed animal shall update the contact information with Schertz Animal Services within 30 days of the date of the change in contact information; 
(4)  If there is a change in ownership of a tattooed animal, the previous owner or keeper shall be responsible for notifying Schertz Animal Services of the change within 30 days of the date of change in ownership; and 
(5)  If they reside in the city, the new owner or keeper shall be responsible for providing Schertz Animal Services with the new owner's or keeper's name, address and telephone number within 30 days after the change in ownership. 
(f)  If there is a change in ownership of a microchipped animal, the previous owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the microchip is no longer registered in the previous owner's name within 30 days of the date of change in ownership. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provision provided for in article X, special provisions. 
(h)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  At the time of the offense the person was using the dog or cat in a research program at an institution of higher education, which is accredited by the American Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care; or 
(2)  The dog or cat is being fostered by the resident, and has a microchip that is registered to the organization responsible for the animal; 
(3)  The dog or cat owner is a nonresident of this city and is keeping the animal in the city for fewer that 30 days; 
(4)  The dog or cat owner has been a resident of this city for fewer than 30 days; or 
(5)  The dog or cat had been abandoned or lost and the temporary owner has had the animal for fewer than 30 days. 
(i)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the animal is a feral cat in the city's trap, neuter and return program. 
(Ord. No. 20-H-06 , § 2, 4-14-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-H-06 , § 2, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 14-4 and enacted a new § 14-4. Former § 14-4 pertained to required dog and cat licensing, applications and tags, and derived from Ord. No. 15-H-27 , adopted August 25, 2015.  
Sec. 14-5. - Limiting the number of domestic animals. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to possess, own, or otherwise keep within the city more than three animals of the same species in any developed residentially zoned section or to keep more than six animals of the same species, excluding livestock, in an area zoned agricultural/residential which exceeds one acre except in cases of newly born or hatched litters or clutches under the age of three months old. 
(b)  Exception shall be made for fostering of animals by Schertz Humane Society d.b.a. Homes For Pets meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Letter from sponsoring agency 
(2)  Total of six animals of any species including personal pets 
(3)  Must have proof of rabies vaccination, valid city license and city permit 
(4)  Fostered animals allowed on premises no longer than 12 months 
(5)  Persons fostering must meet all requirements set forth by Schertz Humane Society d.b.a. Homes for Pets. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to commercial kennels, veterinary establishments, or animal hospitals operated by a licensed veterinarian, or pet shops and grooming shops located on property zoned for such purposes. Such establishments, however, must meet sanitation requirements and keep animals securely caged or penned. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-6. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment, kennel, stable, or cattery unless the establishment is located in a properly zoned area and unless a permit has first been obtained in compliance with this section. 
(b)  The city shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. The city may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protections of animals. 
(c)  When a permit applicant has shown that he or she is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the city, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee(s). 
(d)  The permit period shall begin with the date the permit is issued and shall be effective for a period of one year. Renewal applications for permits must be made 30 days prior to, and are due at the date of, the original permit. 
(e)  If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment or kennel, the new owner must apply for a new permit. Permits are not transferable. 
(f)  Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee as listed in Exhibit I, Fee Schedule [on file with the city clerk]. 
(g)  Every facility regulated by this chapter shall be considered a separate enterprise requiring an individual permit. 
(h)  Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats which handle less than ten animals may elect to license such animals individually. 
(i)  No fee under this chapter may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, government operated zoological park, school district, civic or charitable organization, but all other applicable regulations shall apply. 
(j)  Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in this section shall result in a fine. 
(k)  Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification of the permit fee. 
(l)  This section shall also apply to any person selling, or giving away any animal(s) at flea markets. A person may sell or give away animals at a flea market on a temporary basis not to exceed three consecutive days. Fees shall be payable as shown in Exhibit I [on file with the city clerk] upon obtaining a temporary permit. 
(m)  No animal shall be sold, bartered, traded, or given away on any roadside or public right-of-way. If sold, bartered, traded, or given away on any business parking lot written consent from the property owner and a permit from the city shelter is required. 
(n)  Temporary permits shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Vendor's name; 
(2)  Address including city; 
(3)  Telephone number; 
(4)  Type of animal to be sold or given away; 
(5)  Location of flea market; and 
(6)  Rabies and vaccination information. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-7. - License and permit issuance/revocation. 
(a)  The city may revoke any permit or license if the person(s) holding the permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(b)  Any person(s) whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such person and no part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the city shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept any reasonable time of the day and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner named on the permit or license. 
(d)  If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the city shall refuse to issue, or may revoke, a permit or license. 
(e)  No person(s) who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license 
(1)  As a guard dog company; 
(2)  For registration as a dog trainer; 
(3)  To operate a commercial animal establishment; or 
(4)  To be employed to work with dogs as a security officer by a business/contractor using dogs for protection. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-8. - Guard or sentry dog permits. 
(a)  Guard dog permit applications shall include the following information: 
(1)  The business name, address and telephone number of the commercial property where the guard dogs are to be used; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the dog's handler(s) who can be reached at any time during the day or night; 
(3)  The number of dogs to be used and a general description of their use; 
(4)  Description of the dogs, proof of their current vaccination and city license; 
(5)  The location of where the dogs are to be housed; and 
(6)  Any other information that the LRCA deems necessary by rules and regulations. Permit holders shall notify the LRCA if any information recorded as part of the permit application is changed during the course of the period for which the permit is issued. 
(b)  An animal control officer/shelter supervisor or his or her designee shall inspect the facilities where the guard dog is to be used and housed when the guard dog permit is applied for and when it is renewed. 
(c)  If the inspection reveals that the requirements of this section are met, a permit fee for each commercial property shall be paid to the city. The permit shall be displayed at the approved commercial property, and a rabies vaccination and the city license tag shall be affixed to the collar of each dog used. Nothing in this section shall exempt guard dogs from any of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Each permit shall be valid for the period of one year and must be renewed annually within 30 days prior to the expiration date. 
(e)  Each permit must be obtained prior to housing or utilizing guard dogs at the commercial properties where guard dogs are in use. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRAINTS, BITES, AND ANIMAL CARE 
 
Sec. 14-9. - Restraints. 
(a)  All dogs and other animals, except for those cats in a feral cat colony or registered, domestic free-roaming cats, shall be kept under restraint and shall not be allowed to run at large. 
(b)  No owner or feral cat caregiver shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animal(s) to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. 
(c)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal. 
(d)  The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated cat shall not permit the domesticated cat to roam. All free-roaming domesticated/owned cats must be spayed or neutered. 
(e)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animal(s) to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. Free-roaming cats that are found to be a public nuisance shall be impounded and the owner (if known) shall be contacted. Free-roaming domesticated cats shall be microchipped and/or always have a city license tag displayed on their collar. 
(f)  An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement: 
(1)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; 
(3)  In excess of three hours; or 
(4)  In the case of extreme weather conditions such as: 
a.  Outdoor temperature below 32 degrees Fahrenheit; 
b.  Heat advisory issued by local/state jurisdiction; or 
c.  Storm warnings issued by National Weather Service. 
(e)  In this section, a restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint 
(1)  Is a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the dog; 
(2)  Is not at least ten feet long; 
(3)  Is in an unsafe condition; or 
(4)  Will cause injury to the dog. 
This provision does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-10. - Trap, neuter and return program. 
In order to effectively and humanely control the feral cat populations within its jurisdictional boundaries, the city shall support a trap, neuter and return program in an effort to reduce the feral and free-roaming cat population over time without necessity of capture and euthanasia. The city may provide services to off-set the costs of trapping, neutering and vaccinating captured free-roaming cats that can be returned to an appropriate, controlled, protected, and authorized colony site. Left ear tipping shall be used on these cats in order to be identified as spayed or neutered and a vaccinated member of a managed colony. A photographic record adequate to identify the cat shall be obtained for all cats. This is part of the city trap, neuter and return program and maintained by the registered caregiver. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-11. - Registered caregivers. 
Registered caregivers shall attend one of the San Antonio Feral Cat Coalition workshops, and shall provide information about the colony to the animal control officer. Caregivers of a free-roaming cat or free-roaming cat colony shall be exempt under the provisions of license requirements and animal identification requirements by furnishing the animal control officer with a statement agreeing to the following conditions: 
(1)  Regularly feed free-roaming cat(s) colony including weekend and holidays, ensuring sanitary conditions at all times. Caregivers shall be responsible for properly disposing of fecal matter caused by the cats in the colony. Colonies shall be fed using bowls or pans. Food shall not be left out during hours of darkness to avoid attacking wildlife or vermin. 
(2)  Regularly and frequently trap the colony cats over the age of 12 weeks for purposes of sterilization. 
(3)  Identify all colony cats by having their ear tipped when under anesthesia for sterilization. 
(4)  All colony cats must be vaccinated for rabies, preferably with a three year vaccine. 
(5)  All colony cats with illness and/or injury that cannot be provided with treatment by the caregiver, shall be humanely euthanized by a veterinarian to prevent pain and suffering. 
(6)  Caregivers are not permitted to release sterilized, free-roaming cats on private or public property without the permission of the property owner. 
(7)  Any caregiver determined to be in violation of this section shall be issued a citation. 
(8)  Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony before eight weeks of age for domestication and placement. 
(9)  Maintain records and prepare quarterly reports on the following: 
a.  Number and location of managed colonies; 
b.  Total numbers of cats in colonies; 
c.  Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to the trap, neuter and return program and; 
d.  Number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-12. - Enforcement/trap, neuter and return. 
The city shall retain the following rights: 
(1)  The right to seize or remove cats from a colony that have not been vaccinated against rabies and/or which are demonstrating signs of disease or aggression. 
(2)  The right to seize or remove a cat or cats from a colony that are creating a public nuisance. These cats shall be removed from the colony and relocated or relinquished to the city. 
(3)  The right to seize and remove a colony of cats when a caregiver is unable to provide care and management of the colony and has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute caregiver. The city has the right to inspect the colonies at any time. 
(4)  The right to seize or remove cat(s) from a colony if medical care necessary to prevent pain and suffering has not or cannot be provided by a caregiver, or it the animal control officer has reason to believe that a cat in the colony has been cruelly treated. 
(5)  The right to remove cats from a colony suspected to have bitten a human being for the purposes of rabies quarantine and/or testing. 
The city has the right to reevaluate the program at any time and make revisions as needed. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-13. - Bites. 
(a)  Any animal within the city that bites, or otherwise attacks a person who is not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner or person having control of such animal, or who is not provoking or teasing such animal shall be deemed dangerous. The city may order, following the procedures listed below, that such animal be kept muzzled, kept within a sufficient enclosure, or that such animal be permanently removed from the corporate limits of the city, or that such animal be delivered to an animal control officer or the city animal shelter to be humanely euthanized. Any cat that is a part of the trap, neuter return program and that is involved in a rabies exposure incident, shall be submitted to the city for rabies testing and will not be returned to the colony. The following information shall be gathered: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of complainant and any other witnesses to the incident; 
(2)  Date, time and location of the incident; 
(3)  Description of the animal; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner; 
(5)  A statement that the animal attacked, bit, and/or killed a person or another animal; 
(6)  A statement that the animal has exhibited vicious propensities in past conduct (if known); and 
(7)  Other facts or circumstances of the incident. 
(b)  After a sworn complaint is filed with the local health authority it shall be investigated, and, if there is sufficient evidence, there will be a request to the municipal judge to set a time and place for a hearing. Notice shall be given of the hearing to the animal's owner by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall hold such hearing and shall determine at the hearing if the animal specified in the complaint should be ordered to be kept muzzled, kept within a sufficient enclosure, removed from the city limits, or destroyed for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. The municipal judge shall receive testimony at the hearing concerning the incident under investigation. To order the removal or destruction of the animal, or the muzzling or keeping of an animal in a sufficient enclosure for the public health, safety and welfare, the municipal judge may find: 
(1)  The animal attacked or bit a human being or attacked or killed another animal; 
(2)  The animal is the same animal that committed the acts in part (1) of this sub-section; 
(3)  Destruction or removal of the animal is necessary to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community; 
(4)  The animal attacked or bit a human being or another animal; or the animal has a known propensity to attack, bite, or injure human beings or domesticated animals because of temperament, conditioning, or training; or it is demonstrated by the local health authority that the animal has a dangerous disposition, likely to be harmful to humans or other animals; 
(5)  The animal is the same animal that committed the act in part (4) of this sub-section; and 
(6)  Muzzling or keeping of the animal in a sufficient enclosure or removal or destruction of the animal is necessary to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(d)  If the municipal judge orders muzzling, keeping within a sufficient enclosure, destruction or removal of the animal and the owner is not present at the hearing, he or she shall notify the owner of the decision by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the judge does not order destruction of, or removal of the animal, the animal shelter supervisor or designee shall, if the animal was impounded and if any required rabies observation quarantine period has been completed, return the animal to the owner upon payment of any fees due, with the understanding that any muzzling or keeping within a sufficient enclosure order must be followed as long as the animal remains within the city. 
(e)  The owner of an animal may appeal a destruction or removal order to a court of competent jurisdiction within five days of the decision of the municipal court. If the municipal judge receives written notice of the intent to appeal within five days of the decision, he or she shall suspend the destruction or removal order pending final determination of the court. If the filing of a petition in a court of competent jurisdiction within ten days of the order of destruction or removal perfects appeal, he or she shall suspend the destruction or removal pending the outcome of the appeal. In that event, the owner will have 48 hours' notice to pick up the animal if it was impounded and if any required rabies observation quarantine period has been completed and hold the animal pending the appeal. All fees due must be paid before the animal is released to the owner and the animal must be kept muzzled or within a sufficient enclosure if so ordered. Failure to claim the animal within 48 hours will result in the execution of the removal or destruction order. 
(f)  In the event that any animal is discovered in violation of any removal or destruction order described in (d) above, the animal shall be immediately seized and humanely euthanized. If any animal is discovered in violation of any muzzling or keeping within a sufficient enclosure the animal shall be seized and the person controlling such animal shall be prosecuted under the provisions of (g) below. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep on his or her premises or in or about his or her premises, or premises under his or her control, any vicious animal except as directed by this chapter. Upon conviction, harboring a vicious animal in violation of this chapter shall result in a fine. 
(h)  No part of this chapter shall preclude at any time the filing of complaint in the court of competent jurisdiction under the provisions of the State of Texas Dangerous Dog Act, V.T.C.A. Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Sub-Chapter A, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-14. - Care of and cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Animal cruelty is a state law violation punishable by fine and/or jail time in accordance with the Texas Penal Code. Animal care officials shall utilize the authority granted by V.T.C.A. Texas Health and Safety Code § 821.022, as amended from time to time, to seize and impound any animal that has been or is being cruelly treated. If the investigating animal care officer has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, pending a hearing before any court on the issues of cruelty and disposition of the animal, the seizure of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant is hereby authorized if such a delay endangers the life of the animal, or if it would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the animal needing immediate attention. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or caregiver of an animal to neglect an animal and fail to provide that animal with humane care and treatment including, but not limited to, access to an adequate supply of fresh air, species specific food, fresh water, exercise, adequate shelter, and with appropriate veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of each and every dog or cat kept in the city to have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian by the time the animal is four months of age and then according to the label recommendations of the approved rabies vaccine. It shall further be the duty of each owner or keeper to obtain a certificate from such veterinarian certifying that such animal has been vaccinated and produce that document for inspection by the animal control officer when requested. If the vaccination document cannot or will not be produced by the owner or keeper of such animal the animal control officer shall issue a citation for failure to comply with this section of this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal (whether owned or un-owned), or cause, instigate, or permit any dog fight, cock fight, bull fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(e)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal, or in case of impoundment by the animal control officer, allow the animal to remain in the animal shelter beyond a five day maximum after notification of impoundment of such animal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal, or a person charged with custody or care of an animal, to surgically alter an animal, including, but not limited to ear cropping, tail docking, and dewclaw removal, except when done by a licensed veterinarian. 
(g)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the appropriate law enforcement agency. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(h)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal. 
(i)  No person shall transport or carry on any public roadway any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle; and if traveling in an unenclosed vehicle (including, but not limited to convertibles, pick-up trucks, jeeps, and flatbed trucks), the animal shall be confined by a vented container or cage, or by chain, rope or other device cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on a single leash. 
(j)  No person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health or safety. Any animal care officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force, including the breaking of a side window, to remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it appears the animal's health or safety is endangered, and said neglected or endangered animal shall be impounded. 
(k)  No person shall place or set out steel jaw traps, spring traps with teeth, neck traps or any type of trap with a holding mechanism designed to cut, slice, tear or traumatize the entrapped prey, unless the use of such traps is specifically deemed necessary by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department or director of health for control of communicable disease. 
(l)  All animals shall be kept in a sanitary manner. Animal owners or caregivers shall collect and dispose of animal waste deposited by his or her animal(s). No owner or caregiver shall allow the accumulation of animal waste on any premises in a quantity sufficient to create an odor offensive to a person of normal sensibilities standing on adjacent property not owned by the subject animal's owner or caregiver, or which creates a condition conducive to the breeding of flies or other pests. 
(m)  An animal owner or keeper shall not walk an animal without a leash restraint or without otherwise having such animal under control, and shall not guide or take animals onto the yards or driveways of property not owned, leased or occupied by the animal owner for the purpose of allowing the animal to defecate, but shall keep the animal in the public right-of-way, and shall carry a container with implement for the sanitary removal of the animal's fecal matter from the public sidewalk and public right-of-way adjacent to any property with a structure or other improvements thereon. 
(n)  All persons residing in the city who own dogs or cats must keep such dog or cat at the registered residential premises permanently occupied and inhabited by said animal's owner or a licensed kennel. It shall be unlawful for said owner to keep their animal at any other location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE V. - SPAY AND NEUTER 
 
Sec. 14-15. - Mandatory spay/neuter of unrestrained dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner of a dog or cat, which has been impounded for being at large, shall have the animal spayed/neutered within 30 days following the animal's release from impoundment. 
(b)  The shelter supervisor is authorized to exempt an animal's owner from the requirements of subsection (a) if the owner proves to the satisfaction of the shelter supervisor that the animal meets or met one (1) of the conditions specified in subsection (e) below. 
(c)  The owner of a dog or cat required by subsection (a) to be spayed or neutered shall submit to the animal shelter certification that the procedure was performed and 
(1)  The certification shall be made on a form provided by the shelter and signed by the veterinarian who performed the procedure; and 
(2)  The owner shall deliver the certification to the shelter no later than the 40 th day following the animal's release from impoundment. 
(d)  Offenses. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of the dog or cat required by subsection (a) to be spayed/neutered and the person fails to have an animal spayed/neutered as required. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of the dog or cat required by subsection (a) to be spayed/neutered and the person fails to provide certification of the spay/neuter procedure as required by subsection (c). 
(e)  In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (d) it is an affirmative defense that 
(1)  At the time of the animal's impoundment 
a.  The animal was registered with a national registry, sporting dog, livestock dog, or working dog, and 
b.  The person was a member of a national breed club, local breed club, local all-breed club, or sporting or hunting club; and the person had not sold 12 or more intact dogs or cats in the preceding year. 
(2)  At the time of the animal's impoundment it was wearing a current city license tag, valid for that animal, and had not previously been impounded for being at large. 
(3)  The animal was at large at the time of its impoundment due to fire or due to the criminal or negligent acts of a third party who was not residing at the animal owner's residence. At trial, evidence of a fire or the criminal or negligent acts of a third party may be presented in one or more of the following manners: 
a.  A certified copy of a city police or fire report verifying the incident; 
b.  The affidavit of city police or fire personnel with direct knowledge of the incident; or 
c.  The testimony of city police or fire personnel with direct knowledge or the incident. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting spayed/neutered dogs and/or cats to run at large. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-16. - Authority to slay animals running at large. 
If any animal found running at large in violation of this chapter cannot be safely taken up and impounded, and/or causes threat to human life or other domestic animals, such animal may, if deemed necessary, be slain by any authorized police officer or animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE VI. - RABIES CONTROL AND QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS INVOLVED IN BITING INCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 14-17. - Enforcement. 
The civil and criminal provisions of the chapter shall be enforced by the person or agencies designated by the city. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer or an animal shelter employee in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-18. - Reports of exposure to rabies. 
(a)  Persons having knowledge of an animal bite or other attack on an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies or of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the city police department and/or the animal control officer. This report shall include the name and address of any victim and of the owner of the animal, if known. 
(b)  The owner of an animal that is reported to have bitten or to have attacked an individual, or that the owner knows or suspects to have bitten or to have attacked an individual, shall submit the animal for quarantine to the animal control officer or animal shelter. 
(c)  If a quarantined animal is found to be rabid, the animal shelter supervisor will cause to have the animal humanely euthanized. If an animal dies or is euthanized while in quarantine, the animal shelter will cause to have the head or brain of the animal removed and submit it to the nearest Texas Department of Health Laboratory for testing. 
(d)  If a quarantined animal is found to be free from rabies, the animal shelter supervisor shall release it to the owner following the quarantine period and the payment of all required fees and costs. 
(e)  The owner of an animal that is quarantined under this chapter shall pay the city the cost of the quarantine and any other fees associated with the animal's care. The animal shelter may sell and retain the proceeds, keep, or euthanize an animal that the owner or custodian does not take possession of on or before the seventh working day following the end of the quarantine period. 
(f)  Immediately after acquiring knowledge that his or her animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, it shall be the duty of the owner or keeper to cause such animal to be given anti-rabies treatment, and to impound such animal for a period of six months in a place approved by the LRCA or to have the said animal humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-19. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dog or cat that is four months of age or older within the city unless such dog or cat is currently vaccinated against rabies by the injection of an approved USDA anti-rabies vaccine by the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  Every owner of a dog or cat immunized against rabies as required herein shall procure a rabies vaccination certificate from the veterinarian administering the vaccine. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  The species, sex, age, weight, predominant breed, and color of the vaccinated animal; 
(3)  The vaccine type, producer, expiration date, and serial number; 
(4)  Date vaccinated; 
(5)  Rabies tag number; and 
(6)  Veterinarian's signature and license number. 
(c)  A veterinarian or person under the direct supervision of a veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat as required herein shall furnish the owner thereof with a metal tag approved by the animal control officer bearing a number corresponding to the number placed on the certificate and with lettering showing immunization and the year thereof. This tag shall be attached to the properly fitted collar of the dog or cat for which it is issued, and shall be worn at all times on the collar. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-20. - Quarantine method and testing. 
(a)  Animals involved in a biting/scratching incident for which an owner cannot be readily identified and or contacted expeditiously will be impounded. The animal shall be confined under positive control for ten consecutive days (240 hours) after the time of the bite. The animal will be isolated from other animals or possible victims. 
(b)  Every animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or every animal that a person could reasonably suspect as having rabies, or that bites any person within the city shall be impounded at once and held for observation and quarantined at an approved quarantine facility. The facilities must meet the minimum state quarantine facility standards and will be subject to inspection by the Texas Department of Health. 
(c)  The owner of any dog or cat that is reported to have rabies or symptoms thereof, or have been exposed to rabies, or to have bitten, any person within the city, or that the owner knows or suspects to be rabid or to have attacked an individual, shall submit such animal to the animal control officer or the animal shelter for a quarantine period of ten consecutive days (240 hours) at the owner's expense. The ten-day observation period shall begin on the day of the bite incident. Any such animal must be immediately surrendered to the animal control officer or animal shelter. The owner may choose to have the animal quarantined for the ten-day period at an approved quarantine facility in the greater Randolph area. 
(d)  In the event the owner of such animal described in (a) or (b) refuses to surrender such animal on demand, such action shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punishable by a fine. 
(e)  The owner of an animal quarantined under this section shall pay the quarantine facility the reasonable cost of the quarantine and any other fees associated with the animal's care, including the charges for preparation and shipment of the animal head or brain, if required, to the nearest Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies testing. If the owner chooses not to pay for quarantine, the animal shall be humanely euthanized and the brain submitted to the Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis, at the owner's expense. All quarantine related payment arrangements shall be at the discretion of the individual quarantine facility and the facility shall be responsible for the collection of money owed. 
(f)  The following quarantine procedures shall be observed: 
(1)  Biting animals and animals suspected of rabies that are placed in confinement for observation must be separated from all other animals in such a manner that there is no possibility of physical contact between animals. 
(2)  A responsible person will observe the quarantined animal twice a day and will notify the LRCA if clinical signs of rabies appear. 
(3)  At the discretion of the LRCA or his or her designee, the un-owned animal may be humanely euthanized for rabies diagnosis prior to the end of the quarantine period. 
(4)  The animal shelter supervisor or his or her designee may require a written agreement by the owner or the custodian at the time of quarantine and the animal may be disposed of according to terms of such agreement. 
(5)  If the biting animal cannot be maintained in secure quarantine or if the owner chooses not to pay for quarantine, the animal shall be humanely euthanized and the brain submitted to a Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis, at the owner's expense. 
(g)  Any animal quarantined at a certified quarantine facility shall be observed, by a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer, or LRCA, at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. If it is determined that the animal has clinical signs of the disease of rabies the animal shall be humanely euthanized and the head or brain submitted for testing. If the animal control officer, veterinarian, or LRCA determines that the animal does not exhibit the clinical signs of the disease of rabies, the LRCA shall provide a form to the veterinarian for his or her signature, certifying that the animal has been found to be free of the clinical signs of rabies at the end of the quarantine period. This form shall be returned to the LRCA at the end of the quarantine period. 
(h)  The owner of the animal may request permission from the animal control officer or LRCA for home quarantine if the following criteria can be met: 
(1)  Secure facilities must be available at the home of the animal's owner, and must be approved by the animal control officer or the LRCA. 
(2)  The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies and possesses a current city license tag. 
(3)  The animal was not in violation of any laws or ordinance at the time of the incident. 
(4)  The bite incident was a provoked attack. 
(5)  A licensed veterinarian, animal control officer, or the LRCA must observe the animal at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the home quarantine period, the person having possession of the animal must notify the city veterinarian, animal control officer and LRCA. At the end of the quarantine period the owner shall transport the animal by direct route to the veterinarian for final observation. Both observations by the veterinarian, animal control officer or the LRCA may be made at the location of the home quarantine if requested by the owner or required by the animal control officer or the LRCA. The release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing. 
(6)  The owner shall be responsible for paying all rabies observation fees to the veterinarian. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to violate the provisions and conditions of the home quarantine as required by the animal control officer. If the owner of the animal fails to abide by all provisions and conditions required by the animal control officer when the quarantine was granted and the animal is found in violation of these conditions the animal shall be immediately impounded and quarantined for the remainder of the observation period at an approved quarantine facility at the owner's expense. 
(i)  No dog or cat shall be released from quarantine unless 
(1)  The owner has an un-expired rabies vaccination certificate and license for the animal; or 
(2)  The animal has been vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and a license is obtained, at owner's expense. 
(j)  No wild animal will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely euthanized in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a Texas Department of Health certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-21. - Disposition of domestic animals exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Animals that have not been vaccinated and which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues shall be humanely euthanized or, if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal shall be immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for 90 days and given a booster vaccination during the third and eighth week of isolation. If the animal is under three months of age at the time of the second vaccination, an additional booster should be given when the animal reaches three months of age. 
(b)  Currently vaccinated animals that have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal should be humanely euthanized, or if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed vaccinated animal should be given a booster rabies vaccination immediately and placed in strict isolation for 45 days. These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccination is available. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE VII. - FOWL AND OTHER SMALL ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 14-22. - Stray. 
It shall be unlawful for any person keeping chickens, turkeys, geese, guineas, ducks, pigeons, or other fowl to permit or allow the same to run at large within the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-23. - Pen, coop or enclosure of fowl. 
It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, or other fowl to keep them in pens, coops or enclosures, which shall be a distance of at least 50 feet from every building/structure (other than the owner of such fowl) used for sleeping, dining or living and shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall also be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not to become offensive to neighbors or to the public. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-24. - Keeping rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, etc. 
It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, white mice, hamsters and other small animals to keep such animals in pens, coops or enclosures and such pens, coops or enclosures a distance of at least 50 feet from every building/structure (other than the owner of such small animals) used for sleeping, dining or living and shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not to become offensive to neighbors or to the public. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-25. - Not applicable to authorized veterinary hospitals. 
This article shall not apply to authorized veterinary hospitals for the treatment of fowl and other small animals. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Stray. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or person in charge of any livestock to allow said animal to be unrestrained or to allow or permit the same to run at large within the city. Horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, and cattle shall be kept in a stable, shed, pen, or other enclosure wherever located within the city, which shall be a distance of at least 100 feet, and all other livestock shall be a minimum distance of 1,000 feet, from every building/structure (other than the owner of such livestock) used for sleeping, dining, and living and shall be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not to be offensive to neighbors or to the public. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-27. - Impounding. 
The animal control officer shall take up or cause to be taken up, any such animal found to be at large or stray within the city, and shall impound any such animal in a suitable place provided for that purpose. Procedures for the Texas Agriculture Code Estray Act, as amended from time to time, shall be followed. A copy of this Act and procedures can be obtained at the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-28. - Care of livestock animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or torture a livestock animal, to seriously overwork an animal or to transport or confine a livestock animal in a cruel manner. 
(b)  Persons owning or caring for livestock must provide necessary food, water, care and shelter for a livestock animal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stake any livestock for the purpose of grazing upon or within the reach of any public street, alley, sidewalk or park, within the limits of the City of Schertz. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE IX. - WILD ANIMALS AND PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 14-29. - Keeping of wild (non-domesticated) animals. 
No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his/her premises any wild or vicious animal as a pet, for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, and veterinary hospitals. 
(1)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal. 
(2)  Only the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Office may give written permission for the keeping, care, and protection of an infant animal native to this area that has been deemed to be homeless. 
(3)  The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Office shall have the power to release or order the release of any infant wild animal kept, which is deemed capable of survival. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-30. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Enforcement. 
The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer or an animal shelter employee in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-32. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not exceeding $200.00. Each and every day of such violation shall be deemed a separate and complete offense. Subsequent convictions for any violation of this chapter within a 12 month period shall double the minimum applicable fine listed below, up to and including the maximum allowed by law. 
(b)  A judge who has jurisdiction of the offense, at his or her discretion, may dismiss a rabies vaccination violation or a registration/license violation if the defendant remedies the charge defect within ten working days of the date of citation, upon the assessment by the judge and payment by the defendant of an administrative fee of $20.00 for dismissal of a rabies vaccination violation, and $10.00 for dismissal of a registration/license violation. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-33. - Advisory committee duties. 
(a)  The Schertz Animal Care Advisory Committee shall consist of four members appointed by the city manager. The members of this committee shall include a licensed veterinarian, a municipal official, a shelter operator and one member of an animal welfare organization. 
(b)  The advisory committee shall meet at least three times a calendar year and shall assist in complying with the requirements of state and local laws. 
(c)  The advisory committee shall visit the animal shelter at times selected by the committee and make recommendations to the city manager concerning animal care services and shelter operating procedures. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-34. - City veterinarian duties. 
It shall be the responsibility of the city veterinarian(s) to inspect the animal shelter at least once a year. The city veterinarian will file a written report to the city manager and the Texas Department of Health. The report must include all conditions of the shelter, care of animals, structure and contents and inspection of records as required by the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE XI. - ANIMAL SHELTER OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-35. - Monthly reports of animal shelter. 
It shall be the duty of the animal shelter supervisor to report in writing monthly the total number of animals impounded and/or quarantined, the total number of animals redeemed or sold to private parties, and the total number of animals humanely disposed of under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-36. - Fee deposits. 
It shall be the duty of the animal shelter supervisor, or his or her designee to pay or cause to be paid all money collected by him or her under the terms of this chapter to the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-37. - Reclaiming before adoption. 
The owner of any impounded animal under this article may reclaim the same from the animal shelter at any time before adoption by paying all fees, fines and expenses of taking up and keeping such animal. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-38. - Records. 
The animal shelter supervisor shall keep a well-bound book or computer record in which he or she shall record a description of all animals impounded under this article, the date of impoundment, the date and the amount realized from the adoption, the fees and expenses due for impounding and keeping same, the name of the owner, if known, and the name of the adopter. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-39. - Redemption. 
At any time within 14 calendar days from the date of adoption, the owner of any animal impounded and sold under the provisions of this article shall have the right to redeem the same by paying to the purchaser double the amount paid for the animal in addition to his/her reasonable expenses incurred in keeping the same. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE XII. - ADOPTION 
 
Sec. 14-40. - Inoculation and sterilization of adopted animals. 
All dogs and cats adopted from the animal shelter shall be inoculated before adoption and sterilized according to age, with the following: 
(1)  Dogs. One dose as recommended by veterinarian to include Distemper-Hepatitis, Adenovirus Type 2, Parain-Fluenza, Parvovirus, and rabies vaccine according to age requirements, and any other serums directed by the consulting veterinarian. 
(2)  Cats. Feline 3-way (one dose includes Rhinotracheitis, Calici virus; and Panlenkopenia virus and Chlamydia Psittaci); rabies vaccine according to age requirement and any other serums directed by the consulting veterinarian. 
No unclaimed dog or cat shall be released for adoption from the animal shelter without being sterilized or without written agreement pursuant to section 14-45 from adopter guaranteeing that such animal will be sterilized within 30 days for adult animals and by the date an adopted infant female/male becomes six months old. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-41. - Examination by veterinarian. 
A veterinarian shall examine all animals adopted from the animal shelter for health conditions prior to adoption. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-42. - Medical treatment by veterinarian. 
Animals, other than dogs and cats, shall receive inoculations or other medical treatment as recommended by a veterinarian prior to adoption. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-43. - Fees passed on. 
All costs, debts and/or fees created by this article shall be passed on to the adopter and must be paid prior to receiving custody of the animal(s). 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-44. - Adoptions. 
Should the adoption not work out due to behavioral or other problems the adopted animal can be returned to the animal shelter, but no money shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-45. - Sterilization agreement. 
(a)  The sterilization agreement will contain the following: 
(1)  Date of the agreement; 
(2)  Names, addresses, and signatures of releasing agency and the new owner; 
(3)  A description of the animal to be adopted; 
(4)  The sterilization completion date; and 
(5)  A statement, printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization of the animal is required under Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 828, as amended from time to time, and that a violation of the agreement is a criminal offense punishable as a class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  The completion date in the sterilization agreement must be 
(1)  The 30 th day after the date of adoption in the case of an adult animal; or 
(2)  By the date an adopted infant male or female becomes six months old. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-46. - Sterilization required. 
(a)  Except as provided for by this section, a new owner who signs an agreement under section 14-45, shall have the adopted animal sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement. 
(b)  If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the next day thereafter that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(c)  A releasing agency may extend the deadline for 30 days on presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit on the number of extensions that may be granted under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-47. - Confirmation of sterilization. 
(a)  Each new owner who signs a sterilization agreement under section 14-45 shall deliver to the agency from which the animal was adopted a letter signed by the veterinarian who performed the surgery. 
(b)  The letter must be delivered in person or by mail not later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized. 
(c)  The letter must state that the animal has been sterilized, briefly describe the animal, and provide the date of sterilization. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-48. - Letter concerning animal's death. 
(a)  If an adopted animal dies on or before the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 14-45, the new owner shall deliver to the releasing agency a signed letter stating that the animal is dead. 
(b)  The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the animal's death, must describe the cause of death, if known, and provide the date of death. 
(c)  The letter required by this section is in lieu of a letter required by section 14-45. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-49. - Letter concerning lost or stolen animal. 
(a)  If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 14-45, the new owner shall deliver to the releasing agency a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. 
(b)  The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the animal's disappearance and must describe the circumstances surrounding the disappearance and provide the approximate date of the disappearance. 
(c)  The letter required by this section is in lieu of a letter required by section 14-45. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 14-50. - Notice of failure to receive letter. 
(a)  A releasing agency that does not receive a letter under section 14—45 or 14-46 before the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 14-45, shall cause a complaint to be filed against the new owner. It is a presumption under this law that the failure of the new owner to deliver to the releasing agency a signed letter required under section 14-45 or 14-46, is the result of the new owner's refusal to have the adopted animal sterilized. The new owner may rebut this presumption at the time of the hearing with the proof required under the above-mentioned sections. 
(b)  A releasing agency that does not receive a letter under Section 14-45 or 14-46, after the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 14-45 may promptly reclaim the animal from the new owner. 
(c)  A person may not prevent, obstruct or interfere with the right to reclaim an animal under this section. 
(d)  In the event of such reclamation the city shall have no obligation to repay fees previously paid pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
ARTICLE XIII. - FEE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Schedule of Fees. 
(See current copy of schedule of fees [on file in the office of the city clerk]) 
(Ord. No. 15-H-27 , § I, 8-25-2015)  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 2015, repealed Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-255. Section 2 of said ordinance reenacted Ch. 18 as set out herein. Former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-C-33, §§ 5-1—5-16, 5-25, 5-26, 5-35, 5-36, 5-45, 5-46, 5-55, 5-65, 5-66, 5-75, 5-76, 5-85, 5-95, 5-105, adopted Nov. 29, 2000; Ord. No. 02-C-07, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2002; and Ord. No. 13-C-08, §§ 1—3, adopted April 16, 2013. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, Tex. Local Government Code, § 214.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Scheduling inspections. 
(a)  Posting permit and plans. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the inspection card and plans in a conspicuous place on the premises. The inspection card and plans shall be protected from the weather and located in such a position as to permit the building official or designee or assigned inspector to conveniently make the required entries thereon. The permit holder shall maintain the inspection card and plans in such position until the certificate of occupancy or completion certificate is issued by the building official or designee or assigned inspector. 
(b)  Inspection requirements. A 24-hour notice is required before an inspection is desired, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. To insure a 24-hour service, all inspections must be called in by 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and shall include the permit number, address of the inspection site, contact information of the requester, and type of inspections being requested. Any inspections requested but unable to be performed on the requested day shall be given priority on the next business day. 
If a re-inspection has been called for and the second inspection revealed that the original turn down items have not been corrected in part or in whole, a 72-hour hold on the failed segment may be given before another re-inspection will be made. Each subsequent fail on the same re-inspection may be rescheduled no sooner than 72-hours which will not include weekends or holiday time periods. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-2. - Building contractors registration. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacements of any building, structure, swimming pool, or sign, whether permanent or temporary, obtain all the necessary permits. Such contractor shall be registered by the City of Schertz. 
(1)  Insurance required. It shall be the duty of all contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of general commercial liability insurance for claims for property damage, or bodily injury regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim. Coverage amount of liability insurance shall not be less than $300,000.00. The insurance shall run for a concurrent term with the registration. 
(2)  Application. A written application for a contractor's registration will be submitted to the building official or designee or assigned inspector on a form prescribed by the city along with the required initial fee and evidence of qualifications as follows: 
• Required initial fee; 
• Renewal fee as applicable; 
• Completed application; 
The building official or designee or assigned inspector, within 30 days from the receipt of the completed application, will issue the registration or give a written refusal setting out the reasons for refusal. 
(3)  Renewal. All renewals shall be due January 1, of each year. Failure to renew within 30 days after the renewal date will require the applicant to reapply for registration at the initial fee rate. 
(4)  Revocation. Any registration issued under this section may be revoked by the building official or designee or assigned inspector for failure to remedy unsatisfactory work, violations of the chapter, failure to obtain permits, or failure to obtain proper inspections in addition to any additional penalties provided by this chapter. 
(5)  Appeal. An applicant, whose registration has been denied or revoked, may appeal to the board of appeals within 30 days, in writing along with an established filing fee. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-3. - Electrical registration. 
No person shall install, repair or remove electrical wiring or devices unless he is licensed as an electrical contractor issued by the State of Texas who employs any of the listed tradesmen as established by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR). A licensed master, sign master, journeyman, sign journeyman, residential wireman, or journeyman lineman must directly supervise work done by an apprentice or sign apprentice. 
Directly supervise is defined as follows: 
(1)  Where a single family or duplex residential structure is under construction. The supervisor shall be on the property while any electrical work as defined by TDLR Rules and Law is underway. 
(2)  Where a commercial or industrial project is under construction. The supervisor shall be not less than one supervisor per 50,000 square feet or each story above the first floor or sub-floor over 50,000 square feet and shall be on the property while any electrical work as defined by TDLR Rules and Law is underway. 
A master, sign master, journeyman, sign journeyman, residential wireman, or journeyman lineman electrician may supervise not more than eight apprentice electricians for commercial construction and not more than four apprentice electricians for residential construction. 
Exception: 
(1)  A registration is not required of a homeowner who is doing electrical work on his own home. The homeowner may receive help from others to do such work, provided that the principal occupation of the person giving help is not that of an electrical contractor or electrician. 
(2)  A registration is not required of a person who is hired as a full-time employee to perform normal maintenance excluding alterations and additions of electrical systems in commercial establishments, provided that the person does not work as an electrician or electrical contractor for the general public. 
Renewal. All renewals shall be due January 1, of each year. Failure to renew within 180 days after the renewal date will require the applicant to reapply for registration at the initial fee rate. 
Revocation. Any registration issued under this section may be revoked by the building official or designee or assigned inspector for failure to remedy non-code compliant work, violation of the electrical code, failure to obtain a permit or failure to obtain proper inspections in addition to any additional penalties provided by this chapter. A complaint shall also be filed with the TDLR by the building official or designee or assigned inspector. 
Insurance required. It shall be the duty of all electrical contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of general liability insurance for claims for property damage, or bodily injury regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim. Coverage amount of liability insurance shall not be less than the amount mandated by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation Administrative Code Chapter 73.40 Insurance Requirements. 
(1)  Electrical contractors, electrical sign contractors, and residential appliance installation contractors are required to maintain at least the minimum general liability insurance coverage at all times to satisfy proof of financial responsibility. 
a.  The insurance must be at least $300,000.00 per occurrence (combined for property damage and bodily injury); 
b.  Be at least $600,000.00 aggregate (total amount the policy will pay for property damage and bodily injury coverage); and 
c.  Be at least $300,000.00 aggregate for products and completed operations. 
(2)  A license applicant or licensee shall file with TDLR a completed certificate of insurance or other evidence satisfactory to the department when applying for initial and renewal licenses and upon request of the department. 
(3)  Proof of the required general liability and workers' compensation insurance can be submitted on an industry standard certificate of insurance form with a 30-day cancellation notice. Workers' compensation coverage may be established by a certificate of authority to self-insure, or an applicant may state that it has elected not to obtain workers' compensation coverage. 
(4)  A licensed contractor shall furnish the name of the insurance carrier, policy number, name, address, and telephone number of the insurance agent with whom the contractor is insured to any customer who requests it. 
(5)  Insurance must be obtained from an admitted company or an eligible surplus lines carrier, as defined in the Texas Insurance Code, Chapter 981, or other insurance companies that are rated by A.M. Best Company as B+ or higher. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-4. - Mechanical registration. 
It shall be the duty of all mechanical contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of state license and insurance as required by the Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR), as referenced in State Law, Article 8861, TDLE-ACR-75.11/v.l/93. 
Insurance required. It shall be the duty of all Mechanical contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of general liability insurance for claims for property damage, or bodily injury regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim. Coverage amount of liability insurance shall not be less than the amount mandated by the TDLR Administrative Code Chapter 75.40 Contractor Insurance Requirements. 
(1)  Class A licensees must maintain commercial general liability insurance at all times during a license period: 
a.  Of at least $300,000.00 per occurrence (combined for property damage and bodily injury); 
b.  Of at least $600,000.00 aggregate (total amount the policy will pay for property damage and bodily injury coverage); and 
c.  Of at least $300,000.00 aggregate for products and completed operations. 
(2)  Class B licensees must maintain commercial liability insurance at all times during a license period: 
a.  Of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence (combined for property damage and bodily injury); 
b.  Of at least $200,000.00 aggregate (total amount the policy will pay for property damage and bodily injury coverage); and 
c.  Of at least $100,000.00 aggregate for products and completed operations. 
(3)  Insurance must be obtained from an insurance provider authorized to sell liability insurance in Texas pursuant to the Texas Insurance Code. 
(4)  A license applicant or licensee must file with TDLR a completed certificate of insurance or other evidence satisfactory to TDLR when applying for an initial license, changing a business name or affiliation, and upon request of TDLR. 
(5)  Requests to waive the insurance requirements because the license holder does not contract with the public must: 
a.  Be submitted in writing to TDLR; and 
b.  Contain a detailed explanation of the conditions under which the waiver is requested. 
(6)  A licensee who has received a waiver of insurance cannot perform or offer to perform air conditioning and refrigeration contracting under his license with the general public. 
(7)  A licensee or an air conditioning and refrigeration contracting company must furnish the name of the insurance carrier, policy number, name, address, and telephone number of the insurance agent with whom the licensee or company is insured to any customer who requests it. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015) 
State Law reference— State license requirements for air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, Tex. Occupations Code, § 1302.251 et seq.; municipal licensing and regulation of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, Tex. Occupations Code, §§ 1302.301—1302.303.  
Sec. 18-5. - Plumbing registration. 
It shall be the duty of all plumbing contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of state license and insurance as required by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners in accordance with, Vernon's Civil Statues, Article 6243-101. 
Plumbing supervision: 
A master, journey man, residential utilities installer, drain cleaner or tradesman plumber may directly supervise not more than eight apprentice plumbers for commercial construction and not more than four apprentice plumbers for residential. 
Directly supervise is defined as follows: 
(1)  Where a single family or duplex residential structure is under construction. The supervisor shall be on the property while any plumbing work as defined by Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners Rules and Law is underway. 
(2)  Where a commercial or industrial project is under construction. The supervisor shall be not less than one supervisor per 50,000 square feet or each story above the first floor or sub-floor over 50,000 square feet and shall be on the property while any plumbing work as defined by TSBPE Rules and Law is underway. 
Insurance required. It shall be the duty of all plumbing contractors who practice their craft within the City of Schertz, Texas to show proof of general liability insurance for claims for property damage, or bodily injury regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim. Coverage amount of liability insurance shall not be less than the amount mandated by the Texas Board of Plumbing Examiners Board Rules, Section 367.3 Requirements for Plumbing Companies, Responsible Master Plumbers (RMP); Certificate of Insurance. 
(1)  The certificate of insurance must: 
a.  Be written by a company licensed to do business in this state; 
b.  Provide for commercial general liability insurance for the RMP for claims for property damage or bodily injury, regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim an d shall include all types of plumbing that will be performed under the RMP' s license, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) plumbing; 
2.  Medical gas plumbing; and 
3.  Multipurpose residential fire protection sprinkler systems; and 
c.  Be in a coverage amount of not less than $300,000.00 for all claims arising in any one-year period; 
d.  State the name and license number of the master plumber for whom the coverage is provided; 
e.  State the name of the plumbing company for which the master plumber is acting as the RMP. 
1.  Insurance coverage specified in part (a) of this subsection, shall be maintained at all times during which a master plumber acts as a RMP. 
2.  The certificate of insurance form expires on the date that the insurance coverage, specified in section (a) of this subsection, expires. 
3.  The RMP shall furnish the TSBPE with a completed certificate of insurance form not later than ten days after the expiration on the previously furnished certificate of insurance form. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-6. - Building and standards commission. 
All appeals relative to the application and interpretation of the codes adopted in this chapter shall be to the building and standards commission as established under the Unified Development Code, Article 3, Boards, Commissions and Committees. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 17-S-50 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-13-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-S-50 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 13, 2018, amended § 18-6 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Board of appeal" to "Building and standards commission," as set out herein.  
Secs. 18-7—18-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-40. - Adopted. 
The International Building Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-41. - Amendments. 
The International Building Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Permits. 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. 
2.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
3.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
4.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, but not including service systems. 
5.  Swings and other temporary playground equipment accessory to one and two-family dwellings. 
6.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of R-3 - One and Two Family Dwellings as applicable in Section 101.2 and Group U occupancies of the International Building Code 2012 as defined in Chapter 3 - Use and Occupancy Classification. 
7.  Movable cases, countertops and partition not over (5) five feet (9) nine inches in height. 
Electrical: 
1.  Normal maintenance work, such as replacement of lamps, sockets, fuses, drop cords, snap switches, or other similar minor repairs as may be permitted by the building official or designee or assigned inspector; 
2.  Connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable existing permanently installed receptacles. 
3.  Replacement of a motor of the same horsepower and rating and installation of pressure devices and similar controls, when the electrical supply for the same has been properly installed by a licensed electrician. 
4.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmission, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply and the installations of towers and antennas. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance; 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Portable cooling unit; 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain-pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
105.3.1 Action on Application. 
Ref: Texas Local Government Code Section 214.904 Time for Issuance of Municipal Building Permit. 
1.  This section applies only to a permit required by a municipality to erect or improve a building or other structure in the municipality. 
2.  Not later than the 45th calendar day after the date an application for a permit is submitted the municipality must; 
a.  grant or deny the permit 
b.  provide written notice to the applicant stating the reasons why the municipality has been unable to grant or deny the permit application: or 
c.  reach a written agreement with the applicant providing for a deadline for granting or denying the permit. 
3.  For a permit application for which notice is provided under Subsection (2)(b), the municipality may grant or deny the permit not later than the 30th day after the date the notice is received. 
4.  If a municipality fails to grant or deny a permit application in the time required by Subsection (3) or by an agreement under Subsection (2)(c), the municipality: 
a.  may not collect any permit fees associated with the application; and 
b.  shall refund to the applicant any permit fees associated with the application that have been collected. 
Public right-of-way, alleys and easements. A permit shall not be given by the building official or designee or assigned inspector for the construction of any building or structure, or alteration of any building or structure that will encroach upon any right-of-way, alley, or utility or drainage easement. 
107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All group A, E and I occupancies as defined in the IBC, Chapter 3. 
The City of Schertz Building Inspection Division may send plans to an accredited third party review service at the City of Schertz's discretion to expedite the plan review process. 
109.2 Fees. Provide a copy of the contract or proposal signed by both the contractor and the person responsible for the property that the construction will occur on when requested by the Building Inspections Division to verify the value of the work for miscellaneous activities such as remodeling, re-roofing, and foundations. 
111.1 Use and Occupancy. New Certificate of Occupancy for Existing Structures. A certificate of occupancy is required of all commercial or industrial establishments and must be applied for prior to occupancy of the space. A new certificate is required if a business is relocated, ownership is changed, occupancy use and classification is changed or the name of a business is changed. Certificates of Occupancy are not transferable. 
The building official or designee or assigned inspector along with any other city staff required, shall inspect the building or structure and finding no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the Departments of Development Services, Engineering, Fire, Parks or Health and all applicable fees are paid, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
111.2. Certificate of Occupancy Issued. After the building official or designee or assigned inspector inspects a building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other laws that are enforced by this department, the building official or designee or assigned inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy that shall contain the following: 
1.  The building permit number; 
2.  The address of the structure; 
3.  The name and address of the owner; 
4.  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certification is issued based on approved City of Schertz Zoning determination. 
5.  The name of the building official or designee or assigned inspector; 
6.  Edition of the code under which the permit was issued; 
7.  The classification of use and occupancy in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of International Building Code; 
8.  Type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code; 
9.  The design occupant load; 
10.  If an automatic sprinkler system is required or not; 
11.  Any special stipulations or condition for occupancy. 
12.  The Zoning District in which the occupancy is located. 
113 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
202 Definitions. 
Applicable governing body as referenced within any code adopted under this chapter shall mean the City Council of the City of Schertz 
As Built Plans are plans submitted after the building is complete showing any alterations, additions or changes that have occurred after construction has begun. All alterations, additions or changes may require Building Division approval. 
Service Systems are electrical, fire, mechanical, plumbing or other services not associated with structural elements. 
508.4.4 Separation. Individual occupancies shall be separated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with Table 508.4 but in no case shall the fire barrier be less than (1) one hour where permitted with or without an automatic sprinkler system. 
1801.2.1 Design basis. All foundations shall be designed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas and all drawings and documentation must be signed and sealed per Texas Board of Professional Engineers rules. Design Engineers must be registered with the City of Schertz. Documentation shall include: 
1.  Design letter referencing soils report project numbers, date of report, and soils engineer name; specific location including lot, block and subdivision; specific design criteria including soil bearing capacity and design plasticity index or Post-Tensioning Institute parameters. The engineer shall also approve a concrete mix design with performance criteria based on soils and seasonal conditions. 
2.  Signed and sealed drawings clearly indicating the strand and reinforcement placement, pier size, depth, location, and reinforcing, beam size and location, and any special details. Design calculations must be included. 
3.  A representative of the design engineer must perform a pre-pour inspection and provide the City of Schertz with a signed and sealed document stating that the foundation has been inspected and approved. This inspection must take place prior to requesting a foundation inspection from the City of Schertz. A representative of the design engineer shall be present during placement of concrete to verify concrete mix design and seasonal conditions during placement, and to verify tensioning and elongation of cables if it is a post-tensioned foundation. 
5.  A letter from an engineer or surveyor indicating that rough grading of the lot occurred immediately after form removal, or after final tendon stressing if a Post-Tensioned slab, to maintain drainage away from foundation during the construction process shall be provided 
6.  The engineer must provide to the City of Schertz a Letter of Final Acceptance stating that the foundation has been placed in compliance with the design prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
7.  Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the engineer shall provide a letter indicating that a strength test was performed on the batch of concrete and the results of the concrete strength test were consistent with the acceptable range specified in the foundation design. Copies of relevant logs or test results from the concrete manufacturer shall also be provided. 
8.  After foundation construction, but prior to commencement of framing, the owner or applicant shall provide the building official of the City with a sealed certification from an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas and registered with the City of Schertz that the concrete has adequately cured to allow for framing of the first floor only to occur. Prior to placing any additional load on the slab the owner or applicant shall provide the building official of the City with a sealed certification from an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas that the concrete has adequately cured to allow an additional load to be placed on the slab, including framing above the first floor. In no event shall this be less than 3 days after completion of concrete placement. 
9.  If the foundation is a post-tensioned foundation, a letter shall be provided to the City that the foundation was designed after the engineer's consideration of (a) the Post-Tensioning Institute's Construction and Maintenance Manual for Post-Tensioned Slab-on-Ground Foundations, 3d Edition; (b) the Post-Tensioning Institute's Design of Post- Tensioned Slabs-on-Ground, 3d Edition with 2008 Supplement; and soil test conducted for the lot. 
10.  Post-Tensioned foundations must be inspected by a Post-Tensioning Institute (PTI) Slab-on-Ground Installer-Stressor or Level 1 or 2 Unbonded PT Inspector prior to placing a load on the slab or commencement of framing. Additionally, the Inspector must provide foundation design drawings, shipping lists, material certifications, jack certifications, stressing records, and concrete placement records (as described in the Post-Tensioning Institute's Construction and Maintenance Manual for Post-Tensioned Slab-on-Ground Foundations, 3d Edition) to the City. 
1803.1.1 General. Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner or applicant shall provide to the building official for the City a soil test (geotechnical investigation) for the lot signed, sealed, and made by a geotechnical engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. The soil test shall contain design recommendations. The soil test shall be conducted within the area where the building foundation is to be located and the owner shall provide a survey of the lot to the City indicating the location of the soil test. Such soil test report shall be referenced on the building permit application along with a signed and sealed statement from an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas that the foundation(s) on the lot was/were designed in consideration of the results shown in the soil test report for that lot. The owner(s) of the property shall provide a letter stating that no cut or fill was done subsequent to the soil test being conducted. 
1807.1(a) Foundation Walls, Retaining Walls and Embedded Posts and Poles. Construction of a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing of the wall to the top of the wall, constructed on public property or to be dedicated to the City as a public improvement, as a part of the overall subdivision civil plans and the Development Permit application process, shall require submission to, and approval by, the City Engineer of the City of detailed retaining wall design plans sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction of such wall. Construction of such retaining wall shall also require submission to, and approval by, the City Engineer of the City of a sealed engineering inspection report verifying the construction of the retaining wall in conformance with the retaining wall design plans in order to close out the Development Permit. 
Construction of a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing of the wall to the top of the wall, constructed on private property and that will not be dedicated to the City as a public improvement, as a part of the building permit application process, shall require submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of detailed retaining wall design plans sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction of such wall. Construction of such retaining wall shall also require submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of a sealed engineering inspection report verifying the construction of the retaining wall in conformance with the retaining wall design plans in order to close out the building permit. 
On lots with a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, in addition to the designated rear and side yard setbacks, a maintenance and access easement for the benefit of the adjacent property owners and the City on either side of the retaining wall, as necessitated by the design of the retaining wall and in accordance with the signed and sealed engineering plans, shall be required for retaining wall maintenance and to prevent any incursion into fill material. The required area of the easement shall vary according to the retaining wall design and adjacent property access and shall, at a minimum, include all of the fill area. Any incursion into a retaining wall fill for maintenance and construction of utilities shall require the submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of detailed design plans, sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction on such incursion. All other incursions are prohibited." 
PTI Level 1 or 2 Unbonded PT Inspector is a certified individual meeting the requirements of the IBC 2012, Section 1704 Special Inspections, Contractor Responsibility and Structural Observations, Table 1705.3 Required Verification and Inspection of Concrete Construction. 
1207 Sound Transmission Standards for High Noise Areas. All habitable portions of structures located within the 65 dBA as shown on Exhibit A attached, shall be designed and constructed to achieve either: 
1.  an outside to inside noise level reduction (NLR) of at least twenty-five (25) a-weighted decibels (dBA), or 
2.  be built to the standards set forth in subsection 2. below. 
Options for Compliance. Compliance may be demonstrated using one of the following methods: 
1.  Use simultaneous noise readings of instantaneous outside and inside noise levels in accordance with ASTM E 966 to ensure the structure achieves an outside to inside NLR of at least twenty-five (25) dBA; or 
2.  Utilize construction materials with a minimum tested or listed sound transmission class (STC) rating of forty (40), in accordance with ASTM E 90, for walls and ceilings, and with a minimum tested or listed STC rating for doors and windows as specified below, in accordance with the following construction methods: 
a.  Walls. The specific exterior wall assemblies listed below shall include the interior finishes set forth therein. Exception: Exterior wall assemblies or materials that have been tested or listed with a minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
i.  Brick veneer. When exterior walls are constructed using brick veneer, a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch gypsum drywall shall be applied as the interior finish, or a minimum of three and one-half (3- 1/2) inches of foam insulation shall be sprayed in as allowed by the building and fire code. 
ii.  Vinyl or cement sidings. When exterior walls are constructed using vinyl or cement sidings, a minimum of five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum drywall shall be applied as the interior finish, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of foam insulation shall be sprayed in as allowed by the building and fire code. 
iii.  Other assemblies and materials. All other exterior wall assemblies or materials shall have a tested or listed minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
b.  Roof/Ceiling Assemblies. Roof/ceiling assemblies shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of subsections (i) or (ii) below. 
Exception: Roof/ceiling assemblies or materials that have been tested or listed with a minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
i.  Ceilings with unconditioned attic space shall be insulated with a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch gypsum drywall on the interior ceiling side covered with a minimum of twelve (12) inches of blown in fiberglass insulation, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of spray foam insulation shall be applied to the underside of the roof deck as allowed by the building and fire code. 
ii.  Ceilings without attic space above shall be insulated with a minimum of five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum drywall on the interior side filled with a minimum of nine (9) inches of fiberglass batt insulation with a one (1) inch air space between the roof sheathing and the fiberglass, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of spray foam insulation shall be applied to the underside of the roof deck as allowed by the building and fire code. 
c.  Windows. The cavity between the wood framing and the window frame shall be insulated with fiberglass insulation or foam insulation to the depth of the window frame. 
i.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty (30). 
ii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than thirty percent (30%) but no more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty-two (32). 
iii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
d.  Doors. 
i.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty (30). 
ii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than thirty percent (30%) but no more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty-two (32). 
iii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
Exception: An exterior door may have a tested or listed STC rating of less than forty (40) when installed with a storm door which when combined, achieve a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
e.  Mechanical Systems. Mechanical ventilation systems (HVAC) shall provide minimum air circulation and fresh air requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors, or other openings to the exterior. 
i.  In-window, through-wall, or through-floor air conditioning, ventilating, or heating units may be used if: 
1)  the above insulation requirements for walls, ceilings, windows and doors are implemented, or 
2)  walls, ceilings, windows and doors have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
ii.  Evaporative coolers may be installed if the following is implemented to reduce sound entering through the unit: 
1)  Insert a duct extension with at least two (2) ninety degree (90°) "elbows" between the structure and the unit. 
2)  Add acoustically designed "up-ducts" in the ceiling of each room to allow proper circulation of air while windows are closed. 
Certification. 
1.  Prior to approval of final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all project applicants shall submit to the Building Inspection Division, a signed statement certifying compliance with this section from an accredited third party testing agency if sound attenuation is achieved per Section 1207.1. Options for Compliance or by a letter from the builder if sound attenuation is achieved per Section 1207.2. Options for Compliance. 
2.  A single certification statement for multiple structures in the same development may be used as long as the structures implement the same floor plans and construction methods. 
Definition: Accredited is defined as certified through the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP). 
A110.7 Inspection by Engineer of Record. The Engineer of Record may conduct required inspections in-lieu-of the building official unless precluded by State Law. Prior to issuance of a permit, the Engineer of Record must notify in writing the building official which inspections he will be conducted. The building official may require such documentation as he deems necessary, including assigned sealed letter by the Engineer of Record indicating the construction was per the approved plans and all applicable code requirements. The building official may require any additional documentation as he deems necessary and may also require notice at least 24 hours prior to the inspections. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 16-C-09 , § 1, 5-3-2016)  
Secs. 18-42—18-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS 
 
Sec. 18-60. - Adopted. 
The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-61. - Amendments. 
The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One-and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Schertz, Texas, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
Permits. 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one. 
2.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
3.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
4.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, but not including service systems. 
5.  Swings and other temporary playground equipment accessory to one and two-family dwellings. 
6.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of R-3 - One and Two Family Dwellings as applicable in Section 101.2 and Group U occupancies of the International Building Code 2012 as defined in Chapter 3 - Use and Occupancy Classification. Movable cases, countertops and partition not over (5) five feet (9) nine inches in height. 
7.  One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses on the same lot as a one or two family dwelling; provided the floor area is 120 square feet or less and the structure can be moved if necessary, except where located in a flood hazard area. 
a.  The foundation for a detached accessory structure, storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, if any, will require a flatwork permit; and the location and placement of the accessory structure shall comply with Article 8 of the Schertz Unified Development Code. 
b.  Areas located in floodplain hazard areas will require permits. 
8.  Replacement Fences on the property of a one or two family dwelling, provided they comply with the following criteria, except where located in a flood hazard area. 
a.  The fence complies with all of the applicable requirements of the City of Schertz Unified Development code including but not limited to height, location and materials. 
b.  The replacement fence is in the same location, the same height and of the same materials as the fence being replaced (e.g., a 6' wood privacy fence for a 6' wood privacy fence or a 4' chain link fence for a 4' chain link fence). 
c.  Foundations for arbors, if any, will require a flat work permit. The arbor shall not be located in any utility easement; and shall comply with the setback requirements of Article 8 of the Schertz Unified Development Code with the exception that an arbor may be attached to the main structure. 
d.  Areas located in floodplain hazard areas will require permits. 
Electrical: 
1.  Normal maintenance work, such as replacement of lamps, sockets, fuses, drop cords, snap switches, or other similar minor repairs as may be permitted by the building official or designee or assigned inspector; 
2.  Connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable existing permanently installed receptacles. 
3.  Replacement of a motor of the same horsepower and rating and installation of pressure devices and similar controls, when the electrical supply for the same has been properly installed by a licensed electrician. 
4.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmission, but does apply to equipment and wiring for power supply and the installations of towers and antennas. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance; 
2.  Portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Portable cooling unit; 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter; 
5.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain-pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
R105.3.1 Action on Application. 
Ref: Texas Local Government Code Section 214.904 Time for Issuance of Municipal Building Permit. 
1.  This section applies only to a permit required by a municipality to erect or improve a building or other structure in the municipality. 
2.  Not later than the 45 th day after the date an application for a permit is submitted the municipality must; 
a.  grant or deny the permit 
b.  provide written notice to the applicant stating the reasons why the municipality has been unable to grant or deny the permit application: or 
c.  reach a written agreement with the applicant providing for a deadline for granting or denying the permit. 
3.  For a permit application for which notice is provided under Subsection (2)(b), the municipality may grant or deny the permit not later than the 30th day after the date the notice is received. 
4.  If a municipality fails to grant or deny a permit application in the time required by Subsection (3) or by an agreement under Subsection (2)(c), the municipality: 
a.  may not collect any permit fees associated with the application; and 
b.  shall refund to the applicant any permit fees associated with the application that have been collected. 
Public right-of-way, alleys and easements. A permit shall not be given by the building official or designee or assigned inspector for the construction of any building or structure, or alteration of any building or structure that will encroach upon any right-of-way, alley, or utility or drainage easement. 
R106.1 Submittal Documents. 
Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following 
1.  All group A, E and I occupancies as defined in the IBC, Chapter 3. 
The City of Schertz Building Inspection Division may send plans to an accredited third party review service at the City of Schertz's discretion to expedite the plan review process. 
R108.3 Fees. Provide a copy of the contract or proposal signed by both the contractor and the person responsible for the property that the construction will occur on when requested by the Building Inspections Division to verify the value of the work for miscellaneous activities such as remodeling, re-roofing, and foundations. 
R109.5 Inspection by Engineer of Record. The Engineer of Record may conduct required inspections in-lieu-of the building official unless precluded by State Law. Prior to issuance of a permit, the Engineer of Record must notify in writing the building official which inspections he will be conducted. The building official may require such documentation as he deems necessary, including assigned sealed letter by the Engineer of Record indicating the construction was per the approved plans and all applicable code requirements. The building official may require any additional documentation as he deems necessary and may also require notice at least 24 hours prior to the inspections. 
R110.3 Certificate of Occupancy Issued. After the building official or designee or assigned inspector inspects a building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other laws that are enforced by this department, the building official or designee or assigned inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy that shall contain the following: 
1.  The building permit number; 
2.  The address of the structure; 
3.  The name and address of the owner; 
4.  A description of the building use; 
5.  The name of the building official or designee or assigned inspector; 
6.  Edition of the code under which the permit was issued; 
7.  The classification use of the structure; 
8.  Type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code; 
9.  If an automatic sprinkler system is required or not; 
10.  Any special stipulations or condition for occupancy. 
11.  The Zoning District in which the occupancy is located. 
R111.3 Authority to Disconnect Service Utility. 
1.  Portable Generators for residential home use where used to remove the one or two family dwelling from the public electric utility grid permanently are prohibited. 
Exception: During emergency situations where authorized by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
R112 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
R202 Definitions. 
Applicable governing body as referenced within any code adopted under this chapter shall mean the City Council of the City of Schertz 
As Built Plans are plans submitted after the building is complete showing any alterations, additions or changes that have occurred after construction has begun. All alterations, additions or changes may require Building Division approval. 
Residential Arbors are defined as trellises and not as a building when less than 200 square feet in size. Arbors shall be built without a solid roof covering; used only to support vegetation; or acting as a shadow box attached or unattached to the primary or secondary structure; or free standing anchored solidly into the soil or to a permanent foundation and capable of withstanding the environmental conditions as established in the International Residential Code. 
Service Systems are electrical, fire, mechanical, plumbing or other services not associated with structural elements. 
R106.1.4 Submittal documents. All foundations shall be designed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas and all drawings and documentation must be signed and sealed per Texas Board of Professional Engineers rules. Design Engineers must be registered with the City of Schertz. Documentation shall include: 
1.  Design letter referencing soils report project number, date of report, and soils engineer name; specific location including lot, block and subdivision; specific design criteria including soil bearing capacity and plasticity index or Post-Tensioning Institute parameters. The engineer shall also approve a concrete mix design with performance criteria based on soils and seasonal conditions. 
2.  Signed and sealed drawings clearly indicating the strand and reinforcement placement, pier size, depth, location, and reinforcing, beam size and location, and any special details. Design calculations must be included. 
3.  A representative of the design engineer must perform a pre-pour inspection and provide the City of Schertz with a signed and sealed document stating that the foundation has been inspected and approved. This inspection must take place prior to requesting a foundation inspection from the City of Schertz. A representative of the design engineer shall be present during placement of concrete to verify concrete mix design and seasonal conditions during placement, and to verify tensioning and elongation of cables if it is a post-tensioned foundation. 
4.  A letter from an engineer or surveyor indicating that rough grading of the lot occurred immediately after form removal, or after final tendon stressing if a Post-Tensioned slab, to maintain drainage away from foundation during the construction process shall be provided. 
5.  The engineer must provide to the City of Schertz a Letter of Final Acceptance stating that the foundation has been placed in compliance with the design prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
6.  Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the engineer shall provide a letter indicating that a strength test was performed on the batch of concrete and the results of the concrete strength test were consistent with the acceptable range specified in the foundation design. Copies of relevant logs or test results from the concrete manufacturer shall also be provided. 
7.  After foundation construction and prior to commencement of framing, the owner or applicant shall provide the building official of the City with a sealed certification from an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas and registered with the City of Schertz that the concrete has adequately cured to allow for framing of the structure. In no event shall this be less than 3 days after the completion of concrete placement. 
8.  If the foundation is a post-tensioned foundation, a letter shall be provided to the City that the foundation was designed after the engineer's consideration of (a) the Post-Tensioning Institute's Construction and Maintenance Manual for Post-Tensioned Slab-on-Ground Foundations, 3d Edition; (b) the Post-Tensioning Institute's Design of Post- Tensioned Slabs-on-Ground, 3d Edition with 2008 Supplement; and soils report conducted for the lot. 
9.  Post-Tensioned foundations must be inspected by a Post-Tensioning Institute (PTI) Slab-on-Ground Installer-Stressor or Level 1 or 2 Unbonded PT Inspector prior to placing a load on the slab or commencement of framing. Additionally, the Inspector must provide foundation design drawings, shipping lists, material certifications, jack certifications, stressing records, and concrete placement records (as described in the Post-Tensioning Institute's Construction and Maintenance Manual for Post-Tensioned Slab-on-Ground Foundations, 3d Edition) to the City. 
10.  Prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy, a final survey indicating final grade elevations and verifying positive drainage away from the foundation must be submitted to the City. 
R401.4.3 Soil Tests. Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner or applicant shall provide to the building official of the City a soil test (geotechnical investigation) for the residential lot made by a geotechnical engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. The soil test shall contain design recommendations. The soil test shall be conducted within the area where the building foundation is to be located and the owner shall provide a survey of the lot to the City indicating the location of the soil test. Such soil test report shall be referenced on the building permit application along with a signed and sealed statement from an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas that the foundation on the residential lot was designed in consideration of the results shown in the soil test report for that lot and that no cut or fill was done subsequent to the soil test being conducted. 
R404.4.1 Retaining Walls. Construction of a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing of the wall to the top of the wall, constructed on public property or to be dedicated to the City as a public improvement, as a part of the overall subdivision civil plans and the Development Permit application process, shall require submission to, and approval by, the City Engineer of the City of detailed retaining wall design plans sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction of such wall. Construction of such retaining wall shall also require submission to, and approval by, the City Engineer of the City of a sealed engineering inspection report verifying the construction of the retaining wall in conformance with the retaining wall design plans in order to close out the Development Permit. 
Construction of a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing of the wall to the top of the wall, constructed on private property and that will not be dedicated to the City as a public improvement, as a part of the building permit application process, shall require submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of detailed retaining wall design plans sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction of such wall. Construction of such retaining wall shall also require submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of a sealed engineering inspection report verifying the construction of the retaining wall in conformance with the retaining wall design plans in order to close out the building permit. 
On residential lots with a retaining wall in excess of four (4) feet in height, as measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, in addition to the designated rear and side yard setbacks, a maintenance and access easement for the benefit of the adjacent property owners and the City on either side of the retaining wall, as necessitated by the design of the retaining wall and in accordance with the signed and sealed engineering plans, shall be required for retaining wall maintenance and to prevent any incursion into fill material. The required area of the easement shall vary according to the retaining wall design and adjacent property access and structures and shall, at a minimum, include all of the fill area. All incursions are prohibited, including but not limited to the planting of trees, except that a fence may be constructed but shall require the submission to, and approval by, the building official of the City of detailed design plans, sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas, prior to commencing construction on such incursion. Additionally motor vehicles shall not be parked within the easement. 
R703.7.2 Exterior veneer support, R703.7.2.1 Support by steel angle, 703.7.2.2 Support by roof construction and R703.7.3 Lintels. Lintels shall be attached to the wood framing above all openings wider than 2 feet by fasteners as required by the design professional prior to a framing inspection being requested. 
R807.1 Attic Access. Attic access shall be provided by a ceiling pull down ladder capable of supporting (250) two hundred and fifty pounds. If an appliance is located in the attic, an opening large enough to remove the largest single section or the entire unit shall be installed with a walkway provided in accordance with the IRC or IMC. 
P2503.8.2 Testing. Backflow prevention devices used for residential lawn sprinkler systems shall be tested at the time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation 
P2603.3. Breakage and Corrosions Through Foundation Walls. Any pipe that passes under a footing or through a foundation wall shall be provided with a relieving arch, or a pipe sleeve shall be built into the foundation wall. The sleeve shall be two pipe sizes greater than the pipe passing through the wall. Pipes used for p-traps with in a foundation shall not be located within footings or beams. 
P2603.5 Freezing. All building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches below finished grade. 
P2609 Installation of Materials. Cellular core pipe for all underground use will require four (4) inches of granular material to encapsulate the pipe due to soil conditions in the City of Schertz. 
The following Appendixes are adopted: 
Appendix A - Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping 
Appendix B - Sizing of Venting Systems Serving appliances equipped with Draft hood, Category 1 Appliances, and Appliances listed for use with Type B Vents 
Appendix C - Exit Terminals of Mechanical draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems 
Appendix E - Manufactured Homes used as Dwellings 
Appendix G- Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs 
Appendix H - Patio Covers 
Appendix J - Existing Buildings and Structures 
Appendix K Sound Transmission 
AK 101 Sound Transmission Standards for High Noise Areas 
All habitable portions of structures located within the 65 dBA as shown on Exhibit A attached shall be designed and constructed to achieve either: 
1.  an outside to inside noise level reduction (NLR) of at least twenty-five (25) a-weighted decibels (dBA), or 
2.  be built to the standards set forth in subsection 2. below. 
Options for Compliance. Compliance may be demonstrated using one of the following methods: 
1.  Use simultaneous noise readings of instantaneous outside and inside noise levels in accordance with ASTM E 966 to ensure the structure achieves an outside to inside NLR of at least twenty-five (25) dBA; or 
2.  Utilize construction materials with a minimum tested or listed sound transmission class (STC) rating of forty (40), in accordance with ASTM E 90, for walls and ceilings, and with a minimum tested or listed STC rating for doors and windows as specified below, in accordance with the following construction methods: 
a.  Walls. The specific exterior wall assemblies listed below shall include the interior finishes set forth therein. Exception: Exterior wall assemblies or materials that have been tested or listed with a minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
i.  Brick veneer. When exterior walls are constructed using brick veneer, a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch gypsum drywall shall be applied as the interior finish, or a minimum of three and one-half (3- 1/2) inches of foam insulation shall be sprayed in as allowed by the building and fire code. 
ii.  Vinyl or cement sidings. When exterior walls are constructed using vinyl or cement sidings, a minimum of five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum drywall shall be applied as the interior finish, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of foam insulation shall be sprayed in as allowed by the building and fire code. 
iii.  Other assemblies and materials. All other exterior wall assemblies or materials shall have a tested or listed minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
b.  Roof/Ceiling Assemblies. Roof/ceiling assemblies shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of subsections (i) or (ii) below. 
Exception: Roof/ceiling assemblies or materials that have been tested or listed with a minimum STC rating of forty (40). 
i.  Ceilings with unconditioned attic space shall be insulated with a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch gypsum drywall on the interior ceiling side covered with a minimum of twelve (12) inches of blown in fiberglass insulation, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of spray foam insulation shall be applied to the underside of the roof deck as allowed by the building and fire code. 
ii.  Ceilings without attic space above shall be insulated with a minimum of five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum drywall on the interior side filled with a minimum of nine (9) inches of fiberglass batt insulation with a one (1) inch air space between the roof sheathing and the fiberglass, or a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches of spray foam insulation shall be applied to the underside of the roof deck as allowed by the building and fire code. 
c.  Windows. The cavity between the wood framing and the window frame shall be insulated with fiberglass insulation or foam insulation to the depth of the window frame. 
i.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty (30). 
ii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than thirty percent (30%) but no more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty-two (32). 
iii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all windows shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
d.  Doors 
i.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty (30). 
ii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than thirty percent (30%) but no more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of thirty-two (32). 
iii.  If the exterior windows and doors together comprise more than forty percent (40%) of the total exterior wall area, all exterior doors shall have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
Exception: An exterior door may have a tested or listed STC rating of less than forty (40) when installed with a storm door which when combined, achieve a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
e.  Mechanical Systems. Mechanical ventilation systems (HVAC) shall provide minimum air circulation and fresh air requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors, or other openings to the exterior. 
i.  In-window, through-wall, or through-floor air conditioning, ventilating, or heating units may be used if: 
1)  the above insulation requirements for walls, ceilings, windows and doors are implemented, or 
2)  Walls, ceilings, windows and doors have a minimum tested or listed STC rating of forty (40). 
ii.  Evaporative coolers may be installed if the following is implemented to reduce sound entering through the unit: 
1)  Insert a duct extension with at least two (2) ninety degree (90°) "elbows" between the structure and the unit. 
2)  Add acoustically designed "up-ducts" in the ceiling of each room to allow proper circulation of air while windows are closed. 
Certification. 
1.  Prior to approval of final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all project applicants shall submit to the Building Inspection Division, a signed statement certifying compliance with this section from an accredited third party testing agency if sound attenuation is achieved by Options for Compliance method 1.; or by a letter from the builder if sound attenuation is achieved by Options for Compliance method 2. 
2.  A single certification statement for multiple structures in the same development may be used as long as the structures implement the same floor plans and construction methods. 
Accredited is defined as certified through the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) 
Part VIII - Electrical. The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, Chapters 34 - 43, Electrical is repealed in its entirety and is replaced by reference with the National Electric Code (NEC) 2014 as published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) which is specifically adopted as if fully set forth herein. 
The following Appendix is adopted: 
Appendix P - Sizing of Water Piping System 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 16-C-04 , § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 16-C-09 , § 1, 5-3-2016; Ord. No. 19-S-22 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 18-62—18-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 18-80. - Adopted. 
The National Electrical Code, 2014 edition to include, revisions, amendments and corrections, published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code of the City of Schertz, Texas, subject to and including such amendments as herein shall appear. The State of Texas will mandate all future code editions through the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) as to the date of future adoptions. 
Note— This code in no way alters or repeals any additional requirements established by any other utility companies and/or cooperative for its members and/or consumers. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-81. - Amendments. 
The National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
210.11 Branch Circuits Required. No more than (12) twelve duplex receptacle outlets shall be installed per circuit serving general lighting circuits. 
210.11 Branch Circuits Required (C) (3) Bathroom Branch Circuits. If more than one bathroom group is to be installed, the required receptacle 15/20 volt-ampere 125 volt devices are to be GFCI protected. Exhaust fans and lighting shall be in compliance with 210.12 Arc-fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel and be located on a different circuit. 
210.19 Minimum Ampacity and Size. No branch circuit shall have wire smaller than 14 AWG. Maximum total length of the 14 AWG run is limited to (120) one hundred and twenty feet or a 5% voltage drop as allowed by Article II Branch-Circuit Ratings 210.19 Conductors -Minimum Ampacity and Size. Informational Note No. 4. This does not prohibit smaller wire for circuits 90 volts and lower for control circuits. 
210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets (B)(3) Kitchen Receptacle Requirements. No more than (4) four duplex receptacle outlets per kitchen countertop circuit. 
Refrigerators, freezers, microwaves, dishwashers, garbage compactors, and washing machines shall be located on dedicated individual circuits. Such receptacle outlets shall comply with 210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel and 210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection as needed. Garbage Disposals shall be permitted to be on the same circuit for a kitchen counter top circuit. 
210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets (D) Bathrooms. In dwelling units, at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in bathrooms with 900 mm (3 ft.) of the outside edge of each basin. The receptacle outlet shall be located on a wall or partition that is adjacent to the basin or basin countertop, location the countertop, or installed on the side or face of the basin cabinet. In no case shall the receptacle be located more than 300 mm (12 in.) below the top of the basin. Receptacle outlet assemblies listed for the application shall be permitted to be installed in the countertop. No light or fan switch, or receptacle outlet shall be closer than 3 feet to a shower or bathtub from the inside edge of the fixture. 
Exception: Where a Combination Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter/Arc Fault Circuit Interrupter over-current protective device is installed for the circuit supplying luminaires, switches, receptacles, and other electrical equipment located in the same room, and not directly associated with a bathtub or shower, no minimum clearances shall be required; but these devices shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Chapters 1 through 4 of the National Electrical Code covering the installation of that equipment in bathrooms. 
230.71 Maximum Number of Disconnects. An exterior disconnecting means shall be provided at each building serviced where more than two circuits supply the structure. A shunt trip device designed to de-energize the service disconnect equipment at all load side connections, is acceptable on the exterior of the structure at a location approved by the City of Schertz as an alternative means of disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 17-C-06 , § 1, 3-28-2017)  
Secs. 18-82—18-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 18-100. - Adopted. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-101. - Amendments. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
109 Means of Appeal. Means of Appeal is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
The following appendixes are adopted: 
Appendix A (IFGS) - Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping A.1 shall be altered as follows: for any gas piping system, or special appliance, or for conditions other than those covered by the tables provided in the code, such as longer runs, greater gas demands, or greater pressure drops, the size of each gas piping system shall be determined by standard engineering practices acceptable to the code official. 
Appendix B (IFGS) Sizing of Venting Systems Servicing Appliances Equipped With Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliance and Appliances Listed for Use With Type B Vents Appendix C (IFGS) Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-vent Venting Systems. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-102—18-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 18-120. - Adopted. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-121. - Amendments. 
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
109 Means of Appeal. Means of is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-122—18-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-140. - Adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-141. - Amendments. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the city of Schertz, Texas hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
109 Means of Appeal. Means of Appeal is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
305.3 Pipes Through Foundation Walls. Any pipe that passes under a footing or through a foundation wall shall be provided with a relieving arch, or a pipe sleeve shall be built into the foundation wall. The sleeve shall be two pipe sizes greater than the pipe passing through the wall. Pipes used for p-traps with in a foundation shall not be located within footings or beams. 
305.4.1 Sewer Depth. All building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches below finished grade. 
311.1 Toilet Facilities for Workers. Portable toilets shall be provided for construction sites so that the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed 500 feet. Exception: A single portable toilet may be used for small individual construction jobs when approved by the building official. 
312.10.2 Testing - Exception: Backflow prevention devices used for residential lawn sprinkler systems shall be tested at the time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation 
Table 702.3 Building Sewer Pipe. Cellular core pipe for all underground use will require four (4) inches of granular material to encapsulate the pipe due to the soil conditions in the City of Schertz. 
The following Appendixes are adopted: 
Appendix B - Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities 
Appendix C - Vacuum Drainage System 
Appendix D - Degree Day and Design Temperatures 
Appendix E - Sizing of Water Piping System 
Appendix F - Structural Safety 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 19-S-22 , § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 18-142—18-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 18-160. - Adopted. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-161. - Amendments. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
112 Means of Appeal. Means of Appeal is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or grass growth in excess of eight inches. 
302.7 Accessory Structures. All Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
No accessory structure shall be more than twenty (20) degrees out of vertical (using an (8) eight foot level) along any 20 feet of wall surface to obtain an accurate determination of the degrees from vertical. 
Fences and walls twenty (20) degrees or more in each directional run (vertical or horizontal) shall not have more than twenty-five (25) percent of any directional run (vertical or horizontal) to be of decayed or damaged material. 
The following Appendix is adopted: 
Appendix A - Boarding Standard 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-162—18-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 18-180. - Adopted. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
The State of Texas will mandate all future code editions through the Texas Comptroller's State Energy Conservation Office (SECO) as to the date of future adoptions. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-181. - Amendments. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code." 
C109 Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-182—18-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MANUAL OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 18-200. - Adopted. 
The Manual of Cross-Connection Control by the University of Southern California, Tenth edition published October 2009, by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, is hereby adopted and incorporated as the Backflow and Cross-Connection Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, subject to and including by reference as herein shall appear. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-201. - Amendments. 
The Manual of Cross-Connection Control, Tenth Edition, October 2009 is hereby amended as follows: 
Irrigation Back Flow Device Location. The residential irrigation RP or PVB shall be located immediately adjacent to the residential structure and shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest lawn sprinkler head. A Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter receptacle that is weather proof while in operation is recommended to be located immediately adjacent to the back flow device for the installation of a heat tape to prevent freezing. A rain sensor(s) shall be installed on all systems. 
The Commercial irrigation RP and PVB or other approved back flow devices shall be protected from traffic if not located immediately adjacent to the structure and shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest lawn sprinkler head. A Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter receptacle that is weather proof while in operation is recommended to be located immediately adjacent to the back flow device for the installation of a heat tape to prevent freezing. Freeze protection shall be considered in all designs. A rain sensor(s) shall be installed on all systems. 
Any RP or PVB located in a flood plain shall be 1 foot above the Design Flood Elevation (DFE) or designed in such a way that will prevent floodwaters from entering or accumulating within system components and to additionally ensure that floodwater does not contaminate the potable water supply system. (Ref: FEMA 348 November 1999) 
Adopting the backflow and cross-connection requirements in no way shall appeal or set aside any of the requirements of the International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-202—18-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 
 
Sec. 18-220. - Adopted. 
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-221. - Amendments. 
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
108 Means of Appea. Means of Appeal is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
The following Appendixes are adopted: 
Symbols 
Appendix B: Field Checklist for identifying Suction Entrapment Hazards shall be completed by the pool installer or his or her authorized agent. The information in the Appendix B shall be provided to the Inspector for final approval. 
Appendix C Warning - Drowning Hazard signage shall only apply to non-residential installation for signage and is only recommended for single and two family residential installations. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-222—18-239. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-240. - Adopted. 
The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition is hereby adopted with the amendments as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 18-241. - Amendments. 
The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Existing Building Code of the City of Schertz, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." · 
112 Board of Appeals. Board of Appeals is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Secs. 18-242—18-254. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 
 
Sec. 18-255. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish, or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of the detailed statement or drawings submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such persons shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense unless said violation is a violation of a regulation governing fire safety or public health and sanitation then by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. All such violations shall be prosecuted in accordance with section 1-8 General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations of the Schertz Municipal Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 15-C-20 , § 2, 10-13-2015)  
Chapter 20 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-S-15, § 1, adopted May 7, 2013 , enacted new provisions to read a herein set out. Said ordinance did not specifically amend the Code, hence, inclusion as a new Ch. 20, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATING A CEMETERY IN THE CITY 
 
Sec. 20-31. - Cemetery application. 
(a)  The city council hereby amends the City of Schertz Development Services Planning and Zoning Division Development Manual (the "Manual") by adding the cemetery application attached hereto as Exhibit A† in the zoning section of the manual. 
(b)  Completed cemetery applications shall be filed with the city council of the city by delivery of the cemetery application and the required fee to the city secretary. The city secretary shall promptly deliver a complete copy of such cemetery application to the development services office of the city. The city secretary shall stamp the cemetery application with the date and time of receipt and deposit the cemetery application fee with the finance department of the city. No cemetery application will be accepted by the city after September 1, 2014. 
(c)  In considering a cemetery application, the city council will consider the degree to which the proposed cemetery complies with at least the minimum design standards in the United States Department of Veterans Affairs National Cemetery Administration Facilities Design Guide in effect on the date of filing of the cemetery application and the cemetery's compatibility with the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive land plan. Note: If, after the city's approval of the cemetery application, final pre-construction/site plans submitted to the city for the cemetery do not comply with the design in the approved cemetery application, the cemetery will not be permitted, and the owner will be deemed to have withdrawn the cemetery application. 
(d)  The development or use of a cemetery within the boundaries of the city are subject to all ordinances and regulations of the city including but not limited to the unified development code of the city. 
(e)  No cemetery shall be developed or operated within the city unless the developer or operator, as applicable, shall receive from all state and local jurisdictions all licenses and permits required for such development or operation when required. The developer or operator, as applicable, shall promptly upon receipt deliver to the city a copy of all such licenses and permits issued by all entities other than the city. 
(f)  The fee for receiving and processing a cemetery application is $5,000.00. 
(g)  The requirements of this article may be modified only by adoption of an amending ordinance approved by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-15, § 1, 5-7-2013 ) 
Editor's note— † Exhibit A (Cemetery Application) is attached to Ord. No. 13-S-15 and is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Chapter 21 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2013 , enacted new provisions to read a herein set out. Said ordinance did not specifically amend the Code, hence, inclusion as a new Ch. 21, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21-1—21-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
 
Sec. 21-31. - Name. 
The name of the corporation is the "City of Schertz Economic Development Corporation". 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 1), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-32. - Authorization. 
The corporation is a nonprofit corporation and is an industrial development corporation under the Development Corporation Act, as amended, Title 12, Subtitle C1, Texas Local Government Code (the "Act") and shall be governed by Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act, as now existing or as may be amended and an election held in the city on August 9, 1997. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 2), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-33. - Duration. 
Subject to the provisions of section 21-43 hereof, the period of duration of the corporation is perpetual. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 3), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-34. - Purpose and limitations. 
(a)  The corporation is organized exclusively for the purposes of benefiting and accomplishing public purposes of, and to act on behalf of, the city, and the specific purposes for which the corporation is organized. It may issue bonds, notes, and other forms of debt instruments, and it may acquire, maintain, lease, and sell property, and interests therein, on behalf of the city as authorized by Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act to promote economic development within the city and the State of Texas in order to eliminate unemployment and under employment and to promote and encourage employment and the public welfare of, for, and on behalf of the city. The corporation may finance and undertake any such project, subject to the regulations and limitations set forth in Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act and an election held in the city on August 9, 1997. The corporation is authorized to issue bonds as permitted by the Act, provided, however, no bonds may be issued by the corporation and no project may be financed with bond proceeds or other revenues of the corporation unless such bonds or projects are first approved by the council. The corporation is a constituted authority and a public instrumentality within the meaning of the Act, the regulations of the United States Treasury Department, and the rulings of the Internal Revenue Service prescribed and promulgated pursuant to sections 103 and 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the corporation is authorized to act on behalf of the city as provided in the Act and this certificate of formation. 
(b)  In the fulfillment of its corporate purpose, the corporation shall have and may exercise the powers described in paragraph (a) of this section, together with all of the other powers granted to corporations that are incorporated under the Act and that are governed by Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 thereof, and, to the extent not in conflict with the Act, the corporation shall additionally have and may exercise all of the rights, powers, privileges, authorities, and functions given by the general laws of the State of Texas to nonprofit corporations under the Non-Profit Corporation Act (Texas Business Organizations Code, as amended). 
(c)  The corporation shall have the purposes and powers permitted by the Act pursuant to the authority granted in Article III, Section 52-a of the Texas Constitution, but the corporation does not have, and shall not exercise the powers of sovereignty of the city, including the power to tax (except for the power to receive and use the sales and use taxes specified in Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act) and the police power, except that the corporation shall have and may exercise the power of eminent domain when the exercise thereof is approved by the council and to the extent allowed by the City Charter. However, for the purposes of the Texas Tort Claims Act, as amended (Subchapter A, Chapter 101, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code), the corporation is a governmental unit, and its actions are governmental functions. 
(d)  No bonds, notes, or other debt instruments or other obligations, contracts, or agreements of the corporation are or shall ever be deemed to be or constitute the contracts, agreements, bonds, notes, or other debt instruments or other obligations or the lending of credit, or a grant of the public money or things of value, of, belonging to, or by the State of Texas, the city, or any other political corporation, subdivision or agency of the State of Texas, or a pledge of the faith and credit of any of them. Any and all of such contracts, agreements, bonds, notes, and other debt instruments and other obligations, contracts and agreements shall be payable solely and exclusively from the revenues and funds received by the corporation from the sources authorized by Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act and from such other sources as may be otherwise lawfully available and belonging to the corporation from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 4), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-35. - Financing. 
(a)  Before the consummation of the initial delivery of any bonds, notes, or other forms of debt instruments, the corporation shall obtain approval by the council. 
(b)  In the exercise of the powers of the corporation, the corporation may enter into loan, lease, trust, or other agreements as authorized by the Act that are necessary and appropriate to the fulfillment of the public purpose of the corporation, all of which agreements, and the specific uses, and the methods of withdrawal and expenditure of the proceeds of the bonds, notes, or other debt instruments, must be included as a part of the approval process of the council required by paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  In the exercise of the powers of the corporation, the corporation may not enter into any loan, lease, trust, or other agreement the effect of which would grant, convey, transfer, mortgage, encumber, pledge or assign a security interest or any other interest in any property owned by the city. Any agreement entered into by the corporation shall contain language substantially to the effect that any grant, conveyance, transfer, mortgage, encumbrance, pledge or assignment of property owned by the city is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 5), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-36. - No members. 
The corporation has no members and is a nonstock corporation. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 6), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-37. - Sales tax. 
Upon receipt from the city of the proceeds of the sales and use tax imposed under Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act, the corporation may use the proceeds as permitted by the Act as now existing or as may be amended and this certificate of formation. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 7), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-38. - Amendment. 
This certificate of formation may be amended at any time as provided in the Act, to make any changes and add any provisions which might have been included in this certificate of formation in the first instance or as may be permitted by subsequent changes in the law. Any amendment may be accomplished in either of the following manners: 
(1)  The members of the board of directors of the corporation shall file with the council a written application requesting approval of the amendments to this certificate of formation, specifying in such application the amendments proposed to be made. The council shall consider such application and, if it shall, by ordinance, duly find and determine that it is advisable that the proposed amendments be made it shall approve the form of the proposed amendments. The board of directors of the corporation may then amend this certificate of formation by adopting such amendment at a meeting of the board of directors and delivering such amendments to the Secretary of State; or 
(2)  The council may, at its sole discretion, and at any time, amend this certificate of formation and alter or change the structure, organization, programs, or activities of the corporation, or terminate or dissolve the corporation (subject to the provisions of the Act, and subject to any limitation provided by applicable constitutions and laws of the impairment of contracts entered into by the corporation) by ordinance adopting the amendment to this certificate of formation or certificate of dissolution at a meeting of the council, and delivering a certificate of amendment or dissolution to the Secretary of State, as provided in the Act. A restated certificate of formation may be filed with the Secretary of State as provided in the Act without the consent of the council. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 8), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-39. - Registered office and registered agent. 
The street address of the registered office of the corporation is 1400 Schertz Parkway, Schertz, Texas 78154, and the name of its registered agent at that address is John C. Kessel. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 9), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-40. - Board of directors; officers. 
(a)  The affairs of the corporation shall be managed by a board of directors which shall be composed of seven persons appointed by the council. The terms of the board of directors named in this amended and restated certificate of formation shall be as follows: Three of the directors shall be appointed to terms expiring May 31, 2013, and four of the directors shall be appointed to terms expiring May 31, 2014. Thereafter, the terms of directors shall be two years, expiring on May 31 of odd numbered and even numbered years, respectively. Directors may be appointed to succeed themselves. Each director must be a resident and qualified elector of the city. No employee or officer of the city or member of the council may be a director. A majority of the entire membership of the board, including any vacancies, is a quorum. The board shall conduct all meetings within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  The names and street addresses of the persons who are to serve as the directors as of the effective date of this amended and restated certificate of formation and the dates of expiration of their terms as directors, are as follows: 
Names 	Addresses 	Expiration
of Term 

Angelina I. T. Kiser 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2013 

Tim Brown 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2013 

Roy Richard, Jr. 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2013 

Grady Morris 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2014 

Marvin Thomas 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2014 

Matthew Duke 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2014 

Rosemary Scott 	1400 Schertz Parkway Schertz, TX 78154 	5/31/2014 
 
Each director shall serve until a successor is appointed. Directors are removable by the council at any time with or without cause. Any vacancy occurring on the board of directors (by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise) shall be filled by appointment by the council of a person who shall hold office until the expiration of the term. 
(c)  The directors shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as directors. 
(d)  The board of directors shall elect a president, vice president, secretary, and any other officers that the corporation considers necessary, to serve as executive officers of the corporation, as more specifically provided in the corporation's bylaws. The term of each officer's office shall expire on May 31st of each year. The city manager, or his designee, shall serve as the executive director of the corporation to provide administrative support services for the corporation, but the executive director shall not be a member of the board of directors. 
(e)  Meetings of the board of directors are subject to the Texas Open Meetings Act, as amended (Texas Government Code, Chapter 551), and the corporation is subject to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended (Texas Government Code, Chapter 552). 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 10), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-41. - Bylaws. 
The bylaws of the corporation have been approved by the council and shall be adopted by the corporation's board of directors and shall, together with this certificate of formation, govern the initial affairs of the corporation until and unless amended in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this certificate of formation. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 11), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-42. - Council approval. 
The city has specifically authorized the corporation by ordinance dated September 4, 2007 to act on its behalf to further the public purposes stated in such ordinance and this certificate of formation, and the city has by such ordinance approved the corporation's original articles of incorporation, as amended, and this certificate of formation. A copy of the ordinance is on file among the permanent public records of the city and the corporation. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 12), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-43. - Dissolution. 
(a)  The corporation shall not be dissolved, and its business shall not be terminated, by act of the council or otherwise, so long as the corporation is obligated to pay any bonds, notes, or other obligations and unless the collection of the sales and use tax authorized by Chapter 501, Chapter 502 and Chapter 505 of the Act is eligible for termination in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 505 of the Act. 
(b)  No action shall be taken pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section or pursuant to paragraph (b) of section 21-45 of this certificate of formation, in any manner or at any time that would impair any contract, lease, right, or other obligation theretofore executed, granted, or incurred by the corporation. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 13), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-44. - Not a private foundation. 
If the corporation is ever determined to be a private foundation within the meaning of section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"), the corporation: 
(1)  Shall distribute its income for each taxable year at such time and in such manner as not to become subject to the tax on undistributed income imposed by section 4942 of the Code; 
(2)  Shall not engage in any act of self-dealing as defined in section 4941(d) of the Code. 
(3)  Shall not retain any excess business holdings as defined in section 4943(c) of the Code; 
(4)  Shall not make any investments in such manner as to subject it to tax under section 4944 of the Code; and 
(5)  Shall not make any taxable expenditures as defined in section 4945(d) of the Code. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 14), 2-5-2013 )  
Sec. 21-45. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  No dividends shall ever be paid by the corporation, and no part of its net earnings remaining after payment of its expenses and other obligations shall be distributed to or inure to be benefit of its directors or officers, or any individual, private firm, or private corporation or association, except in reasonable amounts for services rendered. 
(b)  If, after the close of any fiscal year, the board of directors determines that sufficient provision has been made for the full payment of all current expenses, together with all amounts payable on the contracts, agreements, bonds, notes, and other obligations of the corporation, and that all of the terms, provisions, and covenants therein have been met, then any net earnings derived from sources other than the sales and use taxes collected for the account of corporation pursuant to Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act thereafter accruing in connection with projects financed pursuant to Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act, and lease payments received in connection with projects financed pursuant to Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act shall be used solely for the purposes permitted by Chapter 501, Chapter 502, and Chapter 505 of the Act and section 21-34(a) of this certificate of formation. 
(c)  If the corporation ever should be dissolved when it has, or is entitled to, any interest in any funds or property of any kind, real, personal or mixed, such funds or property or rights thereto shall not be transferred to private ownership, but shall be transferred and delivered to the city after satisfaction of debts and claims. 
(d)  No part of the corporation's activities shall consist of the carrying on of propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and the corporation shall not participate in any political campaign for or in opposition to any candidate for public office. 
( Ord. No. 13-M-04, § 3(Exh. B, Art. 15), 2-5-2013 )  
Chapter 22 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court and judge thereof, §§ 6.04, 6.05. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, general provisions, Tex. Government Code, § 29.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a municipal court of record to be known as the municipal court of record in the city which shall be comprised of its present municipal court. Any reference hereafter in this chapter to the court of municipal court shall be understood to mean the municipal court of record of the city. The court shall be deemed always open for the trial of causes. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-1), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have the following jurisdiction: 
(1)  Jurisdiction provided by general law for municipal courts; 
(2)  Jurisdiction over criminal cases arising under ordinances authorized by Tex. Local Government Code, §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903, and 401.002; 
(3)  Concurrent jurisdiction with a justice court in any precinct in which the city is located over criminal cases that arise within the territorial limits of the city and are punishable only by fine; 
(4)  Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 214, subch. A, or Tex. Transportation Code, ch. 683, subch. E; 
(5)  Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 54, subch. B, within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; and 
(6)  Authority to issue: 
a.  Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation, and 
b.  Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-2), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-3. - Appointment of judge. 
(a)  The court shall be presided over by one or more municipal judges. All municipal judges shall be appointed by the city council for a definite term of two years. Each municipal judge must be a resident of the state, a citizen of the United States, a licensed attorney in good standing and having two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the state. A judge is entitled to compensation from the city; the amount of such compensation is determined by the city council and cannot be diminished during the judge's term of office. Such compensation may not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court. A municipal judge may be removed from office by the city council for the reasons stated in the city Charter or, if the Charter does not provide for removal, as provided by the Constitution of the state or state statutes. 
(b)  A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is otherwise employed by the city. A municipal judge who accepts other employment with the city vacates his judicial office. 
(c)  If there is more than one municipal judge in the city, the city council shall appoint one of the judges as the presiding judge. If there is only one municipal judge, for purposes of this chapter, the municipal judge shall be the presiding judge. A presiding judge shall: 
(1)  Maintain a central docket for cases filed within the territorial limits of the city; 
(2)  Provide for the distribution of cases from the central docket to the individual municipal judges to equalize the distribution of business in the courts; 
(3)  Request the jurors needed for cases that are set for trial by jury; 
(4)  Temporarily assign judges or substitute judges to exchange benches and to act for each other in a proceeding pending in a court if necessary for the expeditious disposition of business in the courts; and 
(5)  During proceedings of the court, supervise and control the operation and clerical functions of the administrative departments of the court, including the court's personnel. 
(d)  The city council may appoint one or more qualified persons to be available to serve for a municipal judge who is temporarily absent. The municipal judges may exchange benches and act for each other in any proceeding pending in the courts. An act performed by any of the judges is binding on all parties to the proceeding. The presiding judge shall select one of the qualified persons appointed by the city council to serve as a substitute judge during the absence of a municipal judge. The substitute judge, while serving as a municipal judge, must meet the qualifications prescribed for the municipal judge and has all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of a municipal judge. If the judge of the municipal court is disqualified or recused in a pending case, the judge of another municipal court located in an adjacent municipality may sit in the case. A municipal judge may not sit in a case for another municipal judge under this section if either party objects to the substitute judge. An objection must be filed before the first hearing or trial, including pretrial hearings, over which the substitute judge is to preside. 
(e)  The municipal judge shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and the corporate limits (including extraterritorial jurisdiction) of the city. The judge may grant writs of mandamus, attachment, and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. A municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search warrants. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-3), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-4. - Appointment of municipal court prosecutor. 
The city council shall appoint a member of the State Bar of Texas as a prosecutor for the municipal court of the city. The city council may appoint one or more assistant prosecutors if it deems such appointments to be necessary. The appointments shall be for an indefinite period with the compensation being set by the city council. Such appointees shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-4), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-5. - Court clerk and other court personnel. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint the court clerk and may provide deputy clerks, warrant officers, and other personnel as needed for the proper operation of the municipal court. The wages and benefits for such personnel shall be set by the city manager in accordance with the personnel rules of the city, and, except as specifically set forth in this chapter, such personnel shall report to and be subject to supervision and discipline by the city manager. 
(b)  The court clerk and the deputy court clerks shall keep the records of the municipal court, issue process, and generally perform the duties that a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction performs for that court. In addition, the clerk shall maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county clerks are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts. The clerk and other court personnel shall perform their court-related duties under the direction and control of the presiding judge. The court clerk and other court personnel shall perform such duties in accordance with applicable statutes, the city Charter, city ordinances, city policies and the presiding judge's orders. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-5), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-6. - Authority of magistrate. 
A municipal judge also serves as a magistrate and is authorized to: 
(1)  Issue warrants of arrest upon receipt of a signed, sworn affidavit; 
(2)  Advise defendants and accused of their rights in criminal cases; 
(3)  Advise juveniles concerning their rights prior to being questioned in criminal matters and prior to signing written statements; and 
(4)  Issuing emergency protective orders in stalking and family violence matters. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-6), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-7. - Administration procedures to be prepared by municipal judge. 
The municipal judge shall prepare administrative procedures for the preparation and issuance of warrants, a warrant docket, the payment of fines and fees, arrest and confinement of defendants, release of defendants on bond, schedules of cases on the docket of the municipal court and other pertinent administration policies which provides for timely and efficient operation of the municipal court function. Such administrative regulations shall be approved by the city manager and shall contain strict controls pertaining to the collection of fines and fees and the payment of cash bonds so as to insure financial integrity. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-7), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-8. - Prosecutions to be by written complaint. 
(a)  All prosecutions in the municipal court shall be by written complaint. A citation for fine-only misdemeanor offenses shall be used as a complaint for defendants to plead not guilty, guilty, or nolo contendere except for public intoxication, which shall require a sworn complaint to initiate the proceedings. 
(b)  If a defendant enters a plea of not guilty, the municipal court shall file a sworn complaint. 
(c)  If a defendant fails to appear and the court issues an arrest warrant for the defendant, a sworn complaints shall be a requirement and shall be on file in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-8), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-9. - Collection of fines, fees and special expenses. 
The judge of the municipal court is authorized to assess, levy, and direct collection of fines, special expenses, and fees in connection with violations of state laws, city ordinances, warrants of arrest, and posting of cash bonds. 
(1)  The judge may designate violations of ordinances and laws within the jurisdiction of the municipal court which may be satisfied by payment of a fine at the municipal court clerk's office as prescribed within the limits of state law. 
(2)  The fines assessed in the municipal court, except for maximum and minimum fines set by state law, shall be at the discretion of the judge. Court costs shall be levied as directed by state law. In addition to fines and court costs, certain fees shall be collected as directed by state law and city ordinance. 
(3)  All such collections shall be deposited in the city treasury and distributed in accordance with the laws of the state and city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-9), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-10. - Warrants; failure to appear. 
(a)  Warrants of arrest issued shall be executed in the form and manner provided by law. After the arrest of a defendant, defendant shall be confined to jail until such times as said defendant is brought before the magistrate, posts bond in the form and manner required by law or pays the fines and fees assessed on the warrant for his arrest. 
(b)  In the event a defendant is released pursuant to his bond and fails to make his appearance on his scheduled court docket of the municipal court, such bond or bonds shall be forfeited in the manner provided by law, and a new and additional complaint for failure to appear shall be filed and the court clerk or deputies of the court shall then cause warrants to be issued on the charges for which the bond or bonds were posted. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-10), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-11. - Appeal. 
Appeals from the municipal court, including appeals from final judgments in bond forfeiture proceedings, shall be heard by the county court of the County (Bexar, Comal, or Guadalupe) in which the charged offense occurred on the basis of errors that are set forth in the appellant's motion for a new trial and that are presented in the transcript and statement of facts prepared from the proceedings leading to the conviction or appeal. In addition to the applicable transcript preparation fee (which shall initially be $25.00 but which may be set from time to time by the city council), which does not include the fee for the actual transcript of the proceeding, the court clerk and the deputies shall be authorized to charge the fee for the actual transcript of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-11), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-12. - Recording of proceedings. 
All proceedings taking place before the municipal court shall be recorded by a good quality electronic recording device. All recordings shall be kept for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial, or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording by an official court reporter who meets the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-12), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-13. - Seal of the municipal court. 
The city council shall provide the municipal court with a seal with a star of five points in the center and the words "Municipal Court in Schertz, Texas". The impress or imprint of the seal shall be attached to all papers, except subpoenas, issued out of the court and shall be used by each municipal judge or clerk to authenticate all official acts of the clerk and the judge. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-13), 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 22-14. - Commencement of operation. 
(a)  The court shall commence operating as a court of record on January 1, 2005. 
(b)  All cases filed in the court prior to such date, but not disposed of prior to that date, shall be tried in the Municipal Court of Record. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a case shall be deemed disposed of if the judge has entered a finding of guilty or the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. 
(d)  The court shall continue to function under its previous powers and authorities as a municipal court of the city until such date as the court of record commences operation. 
(Ord. No. 05-M-06, § I(12-14), 3-1-2005)  
Secs. 22-15—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter known as the fund, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P, art. 102.0172. 
(b)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-40, § 1, 12-1-2004)  
Sec. 22-32. - Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(a)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(b)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court or municipal court of record as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after October 1, 1999. 
(d)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal comptroller of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-40, § 2, 12-1-2004)  
Sec. 22-33. - Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(a)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the municipal court or the municipal court of record of the city, including: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; or 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(b)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-M-40, § 3, 12-1-2004)  
Sec. 22-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 22-35. - Short title. 
This article shall be cited as the "Notice of Violation Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-36. - Purpose. 
This article provides procedural and substantive rules relating to the issuance of citations by non-peace officers to defendants accused of violating criminal ordinances of the City of Schertz. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-37. - Application. 
This article applies to the issuance of citations alleging criminal violations within the jurisdiction of the city's municipal court. The procedures of this article apply only to offenses alleged to occur on or after the date of enactment. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-38. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Terms that are not defined below, but are defined elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in the Code. Words and phrases not defined in the Code or Ordinances shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa). The word "shall" is always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely directory. Headings and captions area are for reference purposes only. 
(b)  Specific. 
City means the City of Schertz, Texas. 
Notice of violation means when issued in the form set forth in section 22-41, shall also be known and treated as a citation, and the terminology is merely to distinguish forms issued by peace officers and shall not be afforded any legal distinction. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation, or other entity. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-39. - Relation to related laws. 
A citation issued pursuant to this article does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant to Article 14.06(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure or Section 543.003 of the Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-40. - Authority to issue notice of violations. 
Pursuant to this article, and the scope of their assigned duties, a notice of violation may be issued by any of the following individuals: 
(1)  Health inspector; 
(2)  City inspector; 
(3)  Building inspector or official; 
(4)  Code enforcement or code compliance officer; 
(5)  Public works inspector; 
(6)  Animal control officers; or 
(7)  Any other individual authorized to enforce the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-41. - Form and content of notice of violation. 
Notices of violation issued under this article must be in a form approved by the municipal judge that includes the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, date of birth, or driver's license number and physical description, and telephone number of the person cited; 
(2)  The offense for which the person is charged; 
(3)  The date and location of the offense; 
(4)  An appearance date; 
(5)  A statement requiring the person receiving the notice of violation to appear at a municipal court on or before the appearance date indicated on the notice of violation; 
(6)  A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to Article 27.14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for the person cited to provide the person's signature; and 
(7)  The signature of the person issuing the citation. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-42. - Pleading subsequent to issuance of a notice of violation. 
All pleas arising from the issuance of a notice of violation under this article shall be made pursuant to Article 27.14 of the Code of Criminal Procedures. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-43. - Issuance of notice of violation by mail. 
(a)  Notice of violation may be sent certified mail or regular mail consistent with applicable city ordinances and state law for the offense alleged. 
(b)  A notice of violation issued by mail must be in the same for and of the same content as that contained in section 22-41 to the extent practicable. 
(c)  No warrant shall be issued for failure to appear for any notice of violation issued under this article, unless further judicial action is taken as provided in subsection (d) or (e), below. 
(d)  If the notice of violation is by any manner other than personal delivery where a signature is obtained, the municipal court may issue a summons for the person with a copy of the complaint attached ordering the appearance of the person to appear in person, by legal counsel, or in a manner authorized by Article 27.14 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(e)  If a defendant fails to appear in response to a summons, a capias warrant may issue consistent with Article 23.03 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-44. - Ordinance violation of written promise to appear. 
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 22-42 on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-45. - Ordinance violation failure to appear. 
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 22-42 on or before the appearance date on the summons. Such a person may also be held in contempt, consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-46. - Interference or obstruction of issuance. 
A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a notice of violation under this article. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-47. - Providing false or fictitious name. 
A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an individual authorized to issue a citation under this article. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-48. - Deferred disposition. 
Any person, upon agreement with the prosecution, and by order of the municipal court, may receive deferred disposition on any city code violation. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-49. - Penalty. 
Each violation under this article is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 22-50. - Culpable mental state. 
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. O6-M-12, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Secs. 22-51—22-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUVENILE CASE MANAGER FUND 
 
Sec. 22-75. - Establishment of juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a juvenile case manager fund, the "fund," pursuant to Article 102.0174 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account in the general revenue account of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-M-01, § 1, 1-3-2006)  
Sec. 22-76. - Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(a)  The juvenile case manager fee shall be in the amount of $5.00. 
(b)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the city's municipal court of record as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the defendant; or 
(2)  The defendant receives deferred disposition, including deferred proceedings under Article 45.052 or 45.053 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(c)  In the event the judge makes a finding of financial hardship, the judge may waive the fee imposed by this article. 
(d)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the date of final adoption of this article. 
(e)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the City of Schertz or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal treasurer, who shall deposit the fee into the fund. 
(Ord. No. 06-M-01, § 1, 1-3-2006)  
Sec. 22-77. - Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(a)  The fund shall be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager employed under Article 45.056 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, to assist the municipal court working primarily administering the court's juvenile docket and supervising its court orders in juvenile cases brought under Sections 25.093 and 25.094 of the Texas Education Code. 
(b)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Schertz. 
(Ord. No. 06-M-01, § 1, 1-3-2006)  
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Tex. Government Code, § 418.001 et seq.; municipal programs, Tex. Government Code, § 418.103; local planning required, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.12; local government responsibility, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.23; requesting state assistance, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.24; local government control affirmed, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.26; relating to emergency management, Executive Order RP32 (January 28, 2004). 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 1, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid agreements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Tex. Government Code, ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 2, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the division of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of the organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during time of disaster. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 3, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judges of Bexar, Comal, and/or Guadalupe Counties and the mayors of other cities in those counties in the formation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management program for those counties, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 4, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-5. - Precedence of chapter. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 5, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-6. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other permission or for the loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 6, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-7. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 7, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Schertz, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 8, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 26-9. - Limitations. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 00-M-36, § 10, 12-19-2000)  
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2, adopted May 3, 2005, repealed chapter 30, articles I—VII, §§ 30-1—30-4, 30-21—30-24, 30-41, 30-61—30-67, 30-81, 30-82, 30-101, 30-121—30-125, in its entirety and enacted new provisons to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, chapter 30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05, §§ 2(7-1—7-4), (7-6—7-26) and exh.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Fire department; office of the fire chief—Created, appointed. 
The fire department is hereby established as a department of the city, and the person responsible for the day-to-day operations thereof shall be known as the fire chief. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-1), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-2. - Duties and powers of the fire chief. 
(a)  Administrative head. The fire chief or his designee, shall be the administrative head of operations, fire prevention, reserve/volunteer services, training, equipment and supporting services for the department. 
(b)  Enforcement and interpretation by fire chief. The fire chief is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the fire code, life safety code and other applicable fire-related ordinances of the city. The fire chief shall have the authority to render interpretations of these codes and ordinances and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of these codes and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Modifications by fire chief. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the fire chief shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the fire chief shall first find that: (i) special individualized reasons make the strict application of this chapter impractical, (ii) the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and (iii) such modification does not adversely impact health, life or fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the fire department. 
(d)  Appeal of actions by fire chief. Whenever the fire chief disapproves or refuses an application or a permit applied for under this chapter or when it is claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the fire chief's decision to the city manager, in writing, within 14 calendar days of the action complained of, along with any established filling fee. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-2), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-3. - Violation/penalty. 
Persons who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents directive of the fire chief, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-3), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-4. - Mutual/automatic aid protection. 
(a)  Cooperative arrangements. The fire chief and fire department personnel are hereby authorized and empowered to cooperate with, assist and receive assistance from the fire departments of neighboring cities which have entered into a mutual/automatic aid fire protection agreement with the city. Such mutual assistance to be at such time and under such circumstances as the fire chief of the city may deem appropriate. 
(b)  Agreements. The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements for mutual/automatic aid. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-4), 5-3-2005)  
Secs. 30-5—30-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 30-21. - Created, appointed. 
The office of the fire marshal is hereby created, and such official shall be appointed by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-6), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-22. - Responsibilities. 
The fire marshal must be a state-certified peace officer. The fire marshal, and his designee, shall perform such duties as prescribed by law and other ordinances. The fire marshal shall be the authority having jurisdiction concerning nuisances, arson, fire prevention and/or fire code matters. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-7), 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 15-C-21 , §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 30-23. - Duty to investigate fires. 
(a)  Investigation. The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and shall especially make investigations as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin within 24 hours, not including Sunday or any other recognized federal holiday, of the occurrence of such fire. 
(b)  Testimony. The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony on oath of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document pertinent thereto. 
(c)  Power to administer oaths. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witness before him. 
(d)  Power to summon witnesses. The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this chapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document pertinent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-8), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-24. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  Records. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this chapter. 
(b)  Monthly report. At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during such month. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-9), 5-3-2005)  
Secs. 30-25—30-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOTIFICATION REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 30-41. - Notification. 
(a)  Notice of fires, etc. Any person with knowledge shall immediately notify the fire department of any fire, explosion or any hazardous materials being released that is a threat to persons or property, or of any persons trapped or endangered that will require rescue measures and any situation that could result in a fire or explosion that could endanger persons or property. 
(b)  Notice of alarms. Any person with knowledge shall immediately notify the fire department of any fire alarm activation in the response district. Alarms may be silenced after it is determined by the fire department that there is no immediate threat to persons or property. No person other than fire department personnel may reset a fire alarm system after a response to the alarm has been made. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-10), 5-3-2005)  
Secs. 30-42—30-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS CODE 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Title. 
This article is, shall be known and may be cited as, the Fireworks Code of the City of Schertz. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-11), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-62. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. The following terms shall have the following meanings for purposes of this article. 
Fireworks. Any device, other than a novelty, intended to produce visible or audible effects, or both, by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. 
Consumer fireworks. Any fireworks device for use by the public that complies with the construction, performance, composition, and labeling requirements promulgated by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in Title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, in addition to any limits and other requirements set forth in the latest edition of NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display. 
Novelty. A device containing small amounts of pyrotechnic or explosive composition, or both, but not described as consumer fireworks. 
Person. Any natural person, association of persons, partnership, corporation or agent, officer, or representative thereof. 
(b)  Other definitions. Definitions of other terms associated with "fireworks" not specifically defined in this article, shall be as defined in the latest edition of NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, including all appendices. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-12), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-63. - Territorial applicability. 
This article shall be applicable and in force throughout the City of Schertz corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-13), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-64. - Fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, sell, offer or have in possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, ignite, or otherwise set in action any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture, assemble, store, have in possession with intent to use, discharge, ignite, or otherwise set in action any fireworks within 5,000 feet outside of the city's corporate limits. 
(c)  Packaged or unopened fireworks cannot be confiscated by the municipal authority. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-14), 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 15-C-21 , §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 30-65. - Public displays. 
(a)  General. The fire chief, fire marshal, or the designee of either may adopt rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised displays of fireworks by municipalities, associations, and other organizations. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator licensed and certified by the State of Texas. Such displays shall be of such composition, character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the fire chief, fire marshal or the designee of either after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. After such privilege shall have been granted, possession and use of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted to any person for such purpose shall be transferable. 
(b)  Application. Application for permits shall be made in writing to the fire chief, fire marshal, or the designee of either at least ten days prior to the proposed display. The applicant for such display shall at the time of application file a bond issued by an authorized surety company, conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or may result form or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of appropriate public liability insurance. The amount of such surety bond or insurance shall be not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(c)  Disposal. Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in safe manner for the particular firework. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-15), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-66. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use, sale, storage, or transportation of the following: 
(a)  Novelties, other than "sparklers", as listed in the latest edition of NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display; 
(b)  Fireworks or pyrotechnic devices used by a railroad or other transportation agency for signal or illumination purposes; or 
(c)  Blank cartridges for use in show or theater, for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic events, or for use by military organizations. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-16), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-C-21 , §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2015, repealed § 30-67, which pertained to seizure and disposal and derived from Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-17), adopted May 3, 2005.  
Secs. 30-68—30-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 30-81. - Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition (IFC-2012), as amended, revised and corrected, including Appendices B, C, D, F, H, I, and all future editions, revisions, amendments, and corrections, published by the International Code Council (ICC), one copy of which is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Schertz, subject to and including by reference such amendments as herein shall appear. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-18), 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 15-C-21 , §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2015)  
Sec. 30-82. - Amendments. 
The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition (IFC-2012) is hereby amended as stated below. 
Section [A] 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of City of Schertz, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section [A] 102.9 is amended by adding 102.9.1 Fire Chief Authorization as follows: 
[A] 102.9.1 Fire Chief Authorization The Fire Chief is authorized to make and enforce such rules and regulations for the prevention and control of fires and fire hazards as may be necessary from time to time to carry out the intent of this Code. 
Section 104 GENERAL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES, is amended by adding Section [A] 104.1.1 entitled Authority of the Fire Chief and the Fire Department and Section [A] 104.1.2 entitled Additional Duties and Police Powers of Fire Department Members as follows: 
[A] 104.1.1 Authority of the Fire Chief and the Fire Department. The Fire Chief is duly authorized to act by any means he deems necessary to protect life and property from fire hazards. The Fire Chief may delegate his power to any other member of the Fire Department. 
[A] 104.1.2 Additional Duties and Police Powers of Fire Department Members. In addition to the duties required or prescribed for members of the Fire Department in connection with the regular functions of such department, when so required by order of the City Manager in case of riots, floods, or other public emergencies or catastrophes or public danger of any sort, and all fires by order of the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief, Battalion Chief, or any Captain or Lieutenant of the Fire Department, each and all members of the Fire Department shall be and become vested with full Police powers and shall perform all duties required for the protection of persons or property or the preservation of public safety, peace and order. 
Section [A] 104.3 Right of Entry, is amended by adding subsection [A] 104.3.2 entitled Photographic Documentation to read as follows: 
[A] 104.3.2 Photographic Documentation. Members of the Fire Department making such examinations or inspections shall have the right, with proper credentials, and be authorized to take a reasonable number of photographs or videotapes for evidence and for records for use by the Fire Department to study hazards and scientific control for fire safety. 
Section [A] 105.4.2 Information on construction documents is amended by adding Section [A] 105.4.2.2 entitled Occupancy Classification Letter as follows: 
[A] 105.4.2.2 Occupancy Classification Letter. Two copies of a completed "Occupancy Classification Letter" (a.k.a. "Commodities Letter") or other approved Fire Protection report shall be submitted to the City for buildings or portions thereof that are to be used for any of the following purposes: 
1.  Warehousing or storage 
2.  Retail including rack display of products 
3.  Hazardous material storage and/or use 
4.  Manufacturing 
The Occupancy Classification Letter is required to be submitted 
1.  with the building permit submittal documents when seeking a building permit, 
2.  to the Fire Inspector during a Certificate of Occupancy inspection, or 
3.  at any other time when required by the fire code official. 
The Occupancy Classification Letter is to be prepared by the owner and/or tenant of the building/space in question or a registered design professional. It is to be signed, dated and on company letterhead. If the Occupancy Classification Letter is prepared by a registered design professional representing the owner and/or tenant of the building/space in question, the letter is to be countersigned by the owner and/or tenant. The Occupancy Classification Letter is to be kept on site at all times. Prior to a change in 1) the type or amount of hazardous material(s) used or stored, 2) the type or amount of storage or storage height or method, or 3) the manufacturing process, a revised Occupancy Classification Letter is to be submitted to the Fire Chief or his designee for review. 
Section 105.6 Required operational permits is amended by adding Section 105.6.47 Food Booths, and Section [A] 105.6.48 entitled Mobile Food Establishments as follows: 
[A] 105.6.47 Food Booths. 
An operational permit is required for the operation of a food booth. For permit to operate a food booth, see Section 320. 
[A]105.6.48 Mobile Food Establishments. 
An operational permit is required for the operation and maintenance of a mobile food establishment. Small, light weight vendor push carts, as determined by the fire code official, are not covered under this section. For permit to operate a Mobile Food Establishment, see Section 321. 
Section [A] 105.7.11 LP-gas is hereby amended as follows: 
[A]105.7.11 LP-gas. A construction permit is required for installation of or modification to an LP-gas system that contains 120 gallons or more. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered to be a modification and does not require a permit. 
Section [A] 108 Building and Standards Commission. 
All appeals relative to the application and interpretation of the codes adopted in this chapter shall be to the Building and Standards Commission as established under the Unified Development Code, Article 3, Boards, Commissions and Committees. 
Section [A] 110.2 Evacuation is amended by adding [A] 110.2.1 Removal of Occupants: 
[A] 110.2.1 Removal of Occupants. A member of the Fire Department is authorized to require the removal of occupants at a location when actual occupancy exceeds the permitted or posted occupant load. A person commits an offense if he refuses to obey an order to vacate. 
Section 111.4 (IFC-2012) Failure to comply. Such provision is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 111.4 (IFC-2012) Failure to comply "Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a violation of Class C Misdemeanor. Punishable by fine not to exceed $2000 per day and per offense" 
Section 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS is amended by adding definitions and modifying existing ones as follows: 
SECTION 202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Change of Occupancy is amended to read as follows: 
Change of Occupancy. A change in the purpose or level of activity, to include change of ownership, within a building that involves a change in application of the requirements of this code. 
Fire Lane is amended to read as follows: 
Fire Lane. Shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or his designee to remain free and clear of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by him as such, and may include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, or any fire hydrant. 
Fire Watch is amended to read as follows: 
FIRE WATCH. Qualified individuals are defined as State Certified Fire Inspectors assigned to the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Schertz, or, if approved by the Fire Marshal, Texas Certified Firefighters, Peace Officers, individuals employed by a private security firm, or other designated individuals whose sole duty when assigned a fire watch is to perform constant patrols of the premises and keep watch for signs of unwanted fire. A written log must be maintained and personnel must have at least one approved means of notifying the fire department of fire or other emergencies. 
Foster Care Family Home is added as follows: 
FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME shall mean a single independent residential occupancy that is the primary residence of the caregiver and licensed by the state to provide twenty four (24) hour care for six or fewer children (including those related to the caregiver) up to the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Mobile Food Establishment is added as follows: 
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall mean a mobile food operation using any heat producing equipment to cook, fry, or warm products for consumption from a motorized vehicle, towable trailer, or watercraft. 
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION. For the purposes of this code, certain occupancies are defined as follows: 
[BG] Residential Group R-3 is amended to add the following: 
[BG] Residential Group R-3. Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including: 
Foster Care Family Homes 
Special Event is added as follows: 
SPECIAL EVENT shall mean an indoor or outdoor event that, in the opinion of the Fire Code Official or their designee, meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Constitutes a use or occupant load ordinarily not permitted by the face of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  Requires the means of egress to be altered from a configuration that was previously approved by the Building Code Official, Fire Code Official, or their designee (e.g., installation of booths, curtains, partitions, tables/chairs, etc. or the locking of select doors to limit access to portions of a building or area). 
3.  Poses a condition that compromises any life safety systems that were previously approved by the Building Code Official, Fire Code Official, or their designee (e.g., reduced lighting, increased sound levels, installation of alternate interior finishes, etc.). 
4.  Poses a condition that reduces the effectiveness of public safety services of any kind (e.g., Conditions that result in reduced access to fire hydrants, sprinkler riser/pump rooms, Fire Department Connections, etc.)." 
Section 307.1 General is amended by adding Section 307.1.2 Carrying Burning Materials as follows: 
307.1.2 Carrying Burning Materials. No person in the city shall carry or cause to be carried, in any street or other thoroughfare, any burning coal or firebrands, unless the same is shut up in a covered vessel. 
Section 307.4 Location. Such provision is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.4 Location. The location and conditions for open burning shall be in accordance with rules established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and in effect at the time the permit is issued. Location and conditions shall be further restricted, as follows: 
1.  Forecasted wind speed of 15 mph or less; 
2.  Open burning shall not be allowed in residential areas on lot sizes less than three (3) acres; 
3.  Open burning shall not be allowed on days subject to an "Air Quality Health Alert" or other air quality warning." 
4.  Failure for permit holder to keep a control burn under control through negligence, which activates an emergency response by Fire Department will require the permit holder to pay for the cost of the fire response in accordance to fees set forth in Exhibit-1- Fee Schedule. 
Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices is amended by deleting exception 2 and 3 and renumbering as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet (3048 mm) or combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two- family dwellings. 
Section 308 OPEN FLAMES is amended by adding Section 308.5 entitled Fire Hazard Prohibited as follows: 
308.5 Fire Hazard Prohibited. In Group R, Division 1 & 2 occupancies, a person shall not construct, erect, install, maintain or use any incinerator or barbecue pit or so burn any combustible material as to constitute or occasion a fire hazard by the use or burning thereof or as to endanger the life or property of any person thereof. 
The use or burning of any such devices under the following conditions shall constitute a fire hazard and is strictly prohibited: 
1.  Within 10 linear feet of any combustible surface, including but not limited to decks, porches, balconies, walls, or verandas. 
2.  Beneath any balcony, porch, roof overhang, deck, or veranda. 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS is amended by adding a new Section 319 PARADE FLOATS to read as follows: 
Section 319
PARADE FLOATS 
319.1 Decorative Materials. Decorative material on parade floats shall be noncombustible or flame retardant. 
319.2 Fire Protection. Motorized parade floats and towing apparatus shall be provided with a minimum 2-A, 10-B:C-rated portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator. 
319.3 Exhaust Pipes. Motorized float exhaust pipes must be extended past the exterior of the float and be clear of all decorative material. 
319.4 Escape Hatch. Motorized floats shall be equipped with a quick escape hatch from interior driver compartments. 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS is amended by adding a new Section 320 FOOD BOOTHS as follows: 
Section 320
FOOD BOOTHS 
320.1 Permits. For permit to operate a food booth, see Section 105.6.47. It shall be unlawful to operate a food booth without a permit. 
320.2 Fire Extinguishers. One 2A-10 BC fire extinguisher shall be required for all food booths. Booths containing deep fat fryers shall have a class K portable fire extinguisher for up to four fryers having a maximum cooking medium capacity of 80 pounds each. For every additional group of four fryers having a maximum cooking capacity of 80 pounds each, an additional class K extinguisher will be required. For individual fryers exceeding 6 square feet in surface area, class K extinguishers will be installed in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations. All fire extinguishers shall have a current (within a year) inspection sticker from a licensed extinguisher company or provide proof that the extinguisher is new (store receipt). 
320.3 Location. Food booths utilized for cooking shall have a minimum of 10 feet clearance on two sides. Booths shall not be placed in fire lanes unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. Booths shall not be placed within 10 feet of amusement rides or devices. 
320.4 Cooking equipment location. Barbeque pits shall not be located within 10 feet of combustible materials. Barbeque pits shall not be located under the food booth canopy. 
320.5 Acceptable Cooking Sources. The following are the only approved cooking sources for food booths: 
1.  Wood or charcoal 
2.  Propane 
3.  Natural Gas 
4.  Electricity 
320.6 Generators. Fuel tanks shall be of adequate capacity to permit uninterrupted operation during normal operating hours. Generators shall be isolated from contact with the public. Storage of gasoline is not allowed in or near generators or food booths. 
320.7 Decorations. All decorative material shall be at least six feet away from any open flame, cooking element, or heat source or be flame resistant. 
320.8 Escape route. All concession stands shall have a minimum of a three ft. aisle for emergency escape. 
320.9 Propane. All equipment used in conjunction with propane tanks must be UL Listed for the purposes in which they will be used. Tanks shall be secured to prevent falling. Tanks shall only be white or aluminum in color. Only one spare tank will be allowed in a food booth. Emptied propane tanks are to be removed from the site immediately after use. Regulators shall be attached to the tanks as close as possible. Leaks can be detected using a soap and water solution. Tank shutoff valves and/or additional shutoff valves shall be accessible and away from the cooking appliance(s). Propane tanks shall not be within five feet of an ignition source. Propane tanks shall not be located within 10 feet of a building door or window. 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS is amended by adding a new Section 321 MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS to read as follows: 
Section 321
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
321.1 Permits. 
321.1.1 It shall be unlawful to operate mobile food establishments without a permit as required by Section 105.6.48. Annual mobile food establishment permits must be displayed in a visible location in or on the mobile food establishment. 
321.1.2 Mobile food establishments left on site for more than 24 hours at carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other public events will be subject to Food Booth permit requirements, inspections, and fees as set forth in Section 320 and Section 105.6.47 of this code in addition to any fees associated with the annual mobile food establishment permits. 
321.2 Fire Extinguishers - Fire extinguishers are required in mobile food establishments in accordance with sections 321.2.1 through 321.2.4 
321.2.1 All mobile food vendors shall have at minimum one (2A10BC) portable fire extinguisher mounted in a conspicuous place within the kitchen area. 
321.2.2 Mobile food vendors with portable generators shall have a (3A40BC) portable fire extinguisher. 
321.2.3 All portable fire extinguishers shall be serviced, inspected, and tagged annually. 
321.2.4 In addition to any other required fire extinguisher, all mobile food vendors who deep fat fry shall have a class K portable fire extinguisher for up to four fryers having a maximum cooking medium capacity of 80 pounds each. For every additional group of four fryers having a maximum cooking capacity of 80 pounds each, an additional class K extinguisher will be required. For individual fryers exceeding six square feet in surface area, class K extinguishers will be installed in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations. 
321.3 Use of LPG - Liquefied Petroleum Gas usage shall comply with sections 321.3.1 through 321.3.5. 
321.3.1 L.P. Gas containers shall be located and secured on the exterior of the mobile food establishment, open to atmosphere or if containers are kept in compartment, said compartment must be separate from the interior food preparation area. Access must be from the exterior of the unit and compartment floor and exterior door must be vented to the atmosphere. 
321.3.2 All mobile units with propane shall post a "NO SMOKING" sign next to or directly above the propane bottle and visible to the public. Such sign shall be posted with a minimum of four inch lettering. 
321.3.3 Any hose used to pipe L.P. Gas to a device shall be listed by UL, FM, or other approved agency and listed specifically for LP Gas service. All couplings, fittings, and any other devices shall meet the requirements for LP Gas Service as outlined in the International Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 58 and 54, or be deemed unapproved and removed from service. 
321.3.4 LPG tanks shall be located outside the mobile food establishment a minimum of five feet from the primary means of egress. 
321.4 Baffles and Closures 
321.4.1 All deep-fat fryers shall have a steel baffle between the fryer and surface flames of an adjacent appliance or shall maintain a 16 inch separation distance. The baffle, if installed, shall be eight inches in height. 
321.5 Emergency Egress. Emergency egress shall comply with Sections 321.5.1 through Section 321.5.2.2 
321.5.1 Mobile food establishments shall have a clear, unobstructed height over the aisle-way portion of the unit of at least 74 inches from floor to ceiling, and a minimum of 30 inches of unobstructed horizontal aisle space. 
321.5.2 Should travel distance from any portion of the interior exceed 10 feet, the mobile food establishments shall have a minimum of two exits located remote from each other and so arranged as to provide a means of unobstructed travel to the outside of the vehicle. 
321.5.2.1 A secondary means of egress shall be located remote of the main exit door, with an unobstructed minimum passage of 24" X 24 " to the outside. The bottom of this secondary means of egress shall not be more than four feet above the vehicle floor or a readily accessible horizontal surface capable of supporting a weight of 300 pounds minimum opening to the outside. 
321.5.2.2 The latch mechanism of any exit facility shall be operable by hand, and shall not require the use of a key or special knowledge for operation from the inside. The secondary exit shall be labeled with the word "EXIT" with two inch minimum letters on contrasting background. 
321.6 Generator Refueling 
321.6.1 Refueling of generators shall be performed in an approved location not less than 20 feet from the mobile food establishment. Fuel shall be stored in a UL or FM approved flammable liquid safety container in an approved location. Generators shall be grounded in an approved method. Generators shall not be refueled in areas occupied by the public. 
Section 405.2 Frequency is amended by adding a new Section 405.2.1 Fire Drill Records to read as follows: 
405.2.1 Fire Drills for E Occupancies. The operator of premises housing an E Occupancy shall conduct fire drills: 
1.  Without warning; 
2.  In a manner requiring: 
a.  all students to immediately leave the structure upon hearing the fire drill signal; 
b.  a roll call by classes outside the structure; and 
c.  doors to be closed as each area is evacuated; 
3.  In a manner simulating fire conditions; 
4.  In a manner prohibiting students from running or playing; 
5.  If approved, in a manner permitting security persons to remain inside the structure during drills; 
6.  Which include: 
a.  Complete checks of each section of the structure; 
b.  The use of varying evacuation routes; 
c.  Occasional simulation of blocked exits; 
d.  Provisions for calling the fire department; and 
e.  The use of varying drill times; 
7.  During weather which does not pose a health threat to students; 
8.  As an exercise in discipline and procedure, rather than speed; and 
9.  By pulling a manual pull station. 
Section 405.2 Frequency is amended by adding a new Section 405.2.2 Fire Drills for E Occupancies to read as follows: 
405.2.2 Fire Drills for E Occupancies. FIRE CHIEF'S POWER TO ORDER FIRE DRILL. The Fire Chief may require a fire drill at any E Occupancy at any time. 
Section 503.1.1 Buildings and facilities is amended by adding Section 503.1.1.1 Access from adjacent lot as follows: 
503.1.1.1 Access from adjacent lot. Where fire apparatus access roads for a building or buildings are provided from an adjacent lot, a fire lane easement or ingress/egress easement is required to be recorded on the adjacent lot's plat that is providing the common access. The adjacent lot's plat is to clearly show the easement graphically. 
Exception: In lieu of the graphical easement, a note may be placed on the plat that, at a minimum, states, the following: "Ingress and egress shall be provided between all adjacent lots for adequate fire department vehicle access per the City of Schertz Fire Code. The cross access shall not be blocked nor may this note be taken off the plat without written permission from the City of Schertz Director of Development Services and the Schertz Fire Department Fire Marshal." 
Section 503.2.1 Dimensions is amended by adding Section 503.2.1.2 Mountable Curbs are added to read as follows: 
503.2.1.2 Mountable Curbs. Mountable curbs are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal. 
Section 503.2.3 Surface is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface. Drivable grass surfaces, or other alternative drivable surfaces, are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal or his designee and in accordance with all of the following conditions: 
1.  Sealed documents indicating compliance with the provisions of 503.2.3 shall be submitted by a registered design professional for review. 
2.  The drivable grass surface, or alternative drivable surface, shall not be used as the primary access to the site. 
3.  The surface shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds. 
4.  Blue traffic reflectors shall be provided on each side of the surface every 20 feet to clearly mark its boundaries. Vegetation on and surrounding the surface shall be maintained such that said reflectors are visible at all times. 
5.  Sod is not permitted to be placed over the drivable base. 
6.  If the surface proposed is to be used as the aerial apparatus access road for the facility, concrete curbing, or other approved edging, shall be installed along both sides of the portion to be used as such for enhanced lateral stability. A registered design professional shall design said curbing. Sealed drawings of the design shall be provided to the Fire Department and Development Services for review. 
7.  If sand or other free-flowing fill is used as a main structural component for the surface, concrete curbing or other approved edging shall be installed along both sides of the surface for material containment. A registered design professional shall design such curbing. Sealed drawings of the design shall be provided to the Fire Department and Development Services for review. 
A signed letter from the manufacturer shall be provided to the Fire Marshal certifying that the installation meets all requirements in the manufacturer's installations prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
8.  The surface shall be maintained in proper working order at all times when utilized as a required fire lane. Should the surface become damaged or fall into disrepair, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall be authorized to require the repair and re-certification of said surface. 
Section 503.2.4 Turning radius is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be determined by the fire code official. 
The turning radii of a fire apparatus access roadway shall require a minimum of 50 feet outside radius and a minimum of 25 feet clear distance to the inside radius on all turns in excess of 30 degrees. 
Section 503.2.5 Dead Ends is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.5 Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with approved provisions for the turning around of fire apparatus. Turn arounds approved by the Fire Marshal or as permitted by Appendix D are acceptable. 
Exception: Where the building is equipped throughout with an approved sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3, the maximum length of dead-end fire apparatus access roads shall be increased to 200 feet. This increase shall not be applicable to Groups H and I Occupancies, buildings with occupancies having High-Piled Combustible Storage and high-rise buildings. 
Section 503.2.7 Grade is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.7 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 12%. 
Section 503.3 Markings is repealed and replaced with a new Section 503.3 Markings as follows: 
503.3 Markings. Such provision is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Striping, signs or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs, and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
503.3.1 Striping — Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lined of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at twenty five feet (25') intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical and horizontal of the curb. 
503.3.2. Signs — Signs, when approved by the fire code official, shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be twelve inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs shall be on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two inch (2") tall lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief. 
Section 503.6 Security gates is hereby amended by adding the following language and adding a new Section 503.6.1 Direction of Swing to read as follows: 
503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire chief. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation to include a fire department specific key switch, lock, or box. Upon loss of power to electric gate operators, a secondary power source or clearly marked and identified manual release shall be provided. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
503.6.1 Direction of Swing. Security gates installed across a Fire Apparatus Access Road shall swing in the direction of travel towards the building or open horizontally to avoid backing up of Fire Apparatus and to allow for an expedited response. 
Section 503 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS is amended by adding Sections 503.7 Fire Marshal Authority to Designate Fire Lanes, 503.8 Summons to be Issued for Parking Violation, 503.9 Removal of Vehicle by Property Owner, 503.10 Removal of Vehicle by Fire Chief, and 503.11 Abandonment of Fire Lane to read as follows: 
503.7 Fire Marshal Authority to Designate Fire Lanes. The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on designated premises where such areas must be free of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready access to buildings therein, in case of fire or other emergencies. The Fire Marshal's designation of such fire lanes does not obviate the owner of such property of their responsibility to maintain the area. Further, owners of the private property or their designated representative may request that additional fire lanes be designated by the Fire Marshal. 
503.8 Summons to be Issued for Parking Violation. A summons or notice to appear in answer to a charge of parking in violation of this section specifying the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation, may be issued by any police officer or any inspector in the Fire Prevention Bureau of the Fire Department. 
503.9 Removal of Vehicle by Property Owner. Except an authorized emergency vehicle, the owner of private property, or their agent, may have any motor vehicle that is parked in a legally designated fire lane removed and stored at either their own expense or that of the vehicle operator. 
The owner of the premises, or their agent, who has a vehicle removed and stored, is not liable for damages incurred as a result of removal or storage, if the vehicle is removed by a vehicle wrecker service insured against liability for property damage incurred in towing vehicles and is stored by a storage company insured against liability for property damage incurred in the storage of vehicles. 
503.10 Removal of Vehicle by Fire Chief. Any vehicle parked in any designated fire lane may be removed at the vehicle owners' expense upon the authorization of the Fire Chief under the following conditions: 
1.  When the vehicle is in violation by parking in a fire lane, or 
2.  When a vehicle blocks the ingress/egress of a business, theater, night club, apartment complex, gymnasium or a place of assembly, or 
3.  When a vehicle's presence threatens the life safety of the public by impeding the ability of the fire apparatus and emergency medical equipment to respond to an emergency. 
The Fire Chief shall cause such vehicle to be removed by the towing service operating under a contract with the city and shall further cause such vehicle to be impounded in one of the Police Department Vehicle Storage sections. 
503.11 Abandonment of Fire Lane. No owner, manager or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without the written permission of the Fire Marshal. 
Section 505.1 Address Numbers is amended to read as follows: 
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of six inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). For buildings with individual suites, the suite numbers shall be a minimum of four inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
Section 505 PREMISES IDENTIFICATION is amended to add sections 505.3, 505.3.1 and 505.4 as follows: 
505.3 Multi-Building Complexes. Office, industrial and apartment complexes shall be identified by name and number on a display board at the main entry roadway. 
505.3.1 Multi-Address Complexes. Office and industrial complexes with multiple addresses contained within shall post all addresses so that they are visible from 
505.5 Tenant identification. Each occupied tenant space provided with a secondary exit to the exterior or exit corridor shall be provided with tenant identification by business name and address. Letters and numbers shall be posted on the corridor side of the door, be plainly legible and shall contrast with their background. 
Exception: Tenant identification is not required for anchor stores. 
Section 506 KEY BOXES, is amended to add Sections 506.2.1 Key Box Access and Removal of Keys and 506.3 Key Box Location and Contents as follows: 
506.2.1 Key Box Access and Removal of Keys. The Fire Department shall have the only key to the key box. Removal of any key by other than the authorized Fire Department personnel shall be a violation of this Code. 
506.3 Key Box Location and Contents. Required key boxes shall be located as follows and as approved by the Fire Marshal: 
1.  Between eight feet and 10 feet to the side of the main entrance level to the building and near fire riser room, or as approved by the Fire Marshal. 
The key box shall contain designated keys essential to emergency operations including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Elevator keys capable of accessing all floors in the building 
2.  Stairway keys 
3.  Fire control station keys 
4.  Alarm System keys 
Section 507.3 Fire flow, is amended to read as follows and Section 507.3.1 Fire Flow for Rural Isolated Areas is added to read as follows: 
507.3 Fire flow. Fire Flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be as per Appendix B of the International Fire Code or other approved method as determined by the Fire Marshal. When utilizing Table C105.1 to determine number and distribution of fire hydrants, and the flow requirement falls between the values on the table, the flow requirement shall be rounded up to meet the higher value. 
Section 507.4 Water supply test is amended to read as follows: 
507.4 Water supply test. Adequacy of the water supply shall be determined by an approved flow test that is conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project site unless otherwise approved by the Code Official. The flow test shall be as follows: 
1.  The flow test shall have been conducted no more than 12 months prior to the date of construction document submittal to the City of Schertz. 
2.  The flow test shall be conducted in accordance with the 2010 edition of NFPA 291, Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants, and any other applicable local, state, or national standards and/or requirements. 
3.  The flow test results shall be submitted with the construction documents. 
4.  If the water supply piping is not yet constructed, hydraulic calculations for the proposed piping design shall be submitted. The calculations shall be based on the flow test conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project site and shall verify that the piping design provides the minimum require fire flow at no less than 25 psi residual. Upon completion of construction and prior to final certificate of occupancy, a flow test shall be conducted to verify the results of the calculations. 
Section 507.5.3 Private fire service mains and water tanks is amended by adding Section 507.5.3.1 Private fire service main as follows: 
507.5.3.1 Private Fire Service Main. Private fire mains as used in this Code are the pipe and its appurtenances on private property between Schertz, other public water system, or other sources of water and the base elbow of private fire hydrants or the rise for automatic sprinkler or standpipe systems. When connected to a public water system, the private fire main begins at a point designated by the public water utility. When connected to a gravity tank or pressure tank, the private fire main begins at the inlet side of the tank check valve. 
Section 507.5.5 Clear spaces around hydrants is amended to read as follows: 
507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants. A 3-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants, except as otherwise required or approved. The clear space around hydrant and the access to the hydrant will be no more than eight percent slope. 
Section 507.5 Fire Hydrant Systems is amended by adding Sections 507.5.7 Design Criteria for Water Mains and 507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Installation Criteria as follows: 
507.5.7 Design Criteria for Water Mains. 
1.  Where the fire service mains are used to supply required fire hydrants, the mains shall be sized to flow the required fire flow as determined by Section 507.3. 
2.  Where the fire service mains are used to supply required fire hydrants plus fire sprinkler and/or fire standpipe systems, the mains shall be sized to flow the larger of the fire hydrant flow demand as determined by Section 507.3, the fire sprinkler demand as determined by Section 903.3 or the fire standpipe demand as determined by Section 905.2. 
3.  The required number of fire hydrants for the fire flow determined by Section 507.3 shall be specified in Appendix C, Table C105.1. 
4.  When sizing the fire service main, the distribution of the fire flow among the required fire hydrants (as determined by item no. 1 or 2 above) shall be as determined by the Fire Marshal, but in most cases shall have no less than 1,000 gpm at the hydraulically remote fire hydrant with the remaining fire flow equally distributed among the remaining required fire hydrants. 
5.  Main Size: 
5.1 Minimum diameter for public water mains shall be six inches in single-family residential areas and eight inches in all other areas. Larger mains may be required to accommodate fire flow requirements. 
5.2 Private fire mains shall be hydraulically calculated. 
6.  Water pressure in private fire mains shall not be less than thirty-five pounds per square inch (35 psi) with no hydrants in use. When hydrants are in use supplying the required fire flow, water pressure in the main at the fire hydrant discharge level shall be not less than 25 pounds per square inch (25 psi) residual. 
7.  Except for specific requirements of this code, all hydrants and mains required for private protection shall be designed, constructed, and operated in conformance with the local water purveyor's criteria, specifications and regulations for public fire hydrants and mains on public streets and NFPA 24. 
Section 510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure is amended to read as follows: 
510.5.3 Acceptance Test Procedures. When an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 90 percent. Testing will be accomplished by a licensed third party contractor. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of 20 approximately equal test areas. 
2.  The test shall be conducted using a calibrated portable radio of the latest brand and model used by the agency talking through the agency's radio communications system. 
3.  Failure of a maximum of two nonadjacent test areas shall not result in failure of the test. 
4.  In the event that three of the test areas fail the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor shall be permitted to be divided into 40 equal test areas. Failure of a maximum of four nonadjacent test areas shall not result in failure of the test. If the system fails the 40-area test, the system shall be altered to meet the 90 percent coverage requirement. 
5.  A test location approximately in the center of each test area shall be selected for the test, with the radio enabled to verify two-way communications to and from the outside of the building through the public agency's radio communications system. Once the test location has been selected, that location shall represent the entire test area. Failure in the selected test location shall be considered failure of that test area. Additional test locations shall not be permitted. 
6.  The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified during annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner shall be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values. 
7.  As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the signal booster. This test shall be conducted at time of installation and subsequent annual inspections. 
Section 510 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage is amended to add sections 510.7 Five Year Test and 510.8 Qualifications of texting personnel as follows: 
510.7 Five Year Test. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance. The procedure set forth above shall apply to such tests. 
510.8 Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC general radiotelephone operator license. All test records shall be retained at the inspected premise by the building owner and a copy submitted to the Schertz Fire Rescue within 30 days of when the test has been conducted. In the event the test shall fail to comply with the minimum requirements of the City, appropriate repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted until tests meet the minimum requirements of the City. Proof of current license shall be submitted along with third party testing. 
Section 901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance is amended by adding Section 901.6.3 Maintenance Agreement as follows: 
901.6.3 Maintenance Agreement. A maintenance agreement, as defined by Section 202, with a licensed fire protection company shall be provided to the Fire Marshal for each fire protection system at all times. Proof of a maintenance agreement shall be provided during any system acceptance test. Agreements for testing and inspection only as defined by Section 202 shall not be credited with having met this requirement. 
A fire watch will be performed at all times that a system is taken out of service. Except for emergencies, the fire code official shall be given 72 hours notice before a system is voluntarily taken out of service. When, at the discretion of the Fire Chief or his designee, there is a life safety issue, uniformed employees of the Schertz Fire Department or other fire watch personnel as approved by the Fire Chief or his designee shall perform a fire watch. Fire watch personnel shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification to the fire department dispatch and their sole duty shall be to perform constant patrols and watch for safety hazards and occurrences of fire. The cost of the fire watch shall be at the current overtime rate for fire inspections and shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/contractor to pay. The fire watch fee shall be paid to the City of Schertz within 30 days before final approval is granted on system work. 
Section 903.1 General is amended by adding Section 903.1.3 High Volume Low Speed Fans in new and existing buildings as follows: 
903.1.2 High Volume Low Speed Fans in new and existing buildings. The use of High Volume Low Speed (HVLS) or High Volume Low Velocity (HVLV) fans in fire sprinklered areas of new and existing buildings shall only be permitted as follows: 
1.  HVLS fans are permitted in rack storage and palletized storage arrangements up to twenty (20) feet in height in buildings with thirty (30) feet or less ceiling clearance, when Early Suppression Fast Response (ESFR) sprinklers are used to protect the storage array. 
2.  HVLS fans are permitted in light-hazard and ordinary-hazard occupancies as defined in NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
3.  HVLS fans are not permitted in sprinklered areas with palletized storage greater than twelve (12) feet in height protected by control mode sprinklers. 
4.  IN all cases, HVLS fans are required to be designed and installed to shut down automatically on any fire alarm signal. This includes automatic shut down upon sprinkler system waterflow alarm or any manual or automatic fire alarm detection device provided in the space. 
5.  In all cases, the clearance between the HVLS fans and the ceiling sprinklers and the top of storage shall be in compliance with the obstruction and clearance rules of NFPA 13. 
Exception: When a technical opinion and report is provided in accordance with Section 104.7.2, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall analyze the opinion and report and may approved the use of HVLS or HVLV fans in additional areas when it is determined that the effectiveness of the fire sprinkler system is not compromised. 
Section 903.2 Where Required is amended to read as follows: 
1.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all levels of any new Group A (Assembly), B (Business), E (Educational), F (Factory), H (Hazardous), I (Institutional), M (Mercantile), and S (Storage) occupancies of more than 10,000 square feet or where more than two stories in height or where the combined floor area on all floors, including mezzanines exceeds 10,000 square feet, and throughout all R-3 (Residential) occupancies of more than 5,000 square feet or more than two stories in height. The calculated area shall include all occupied space and exclude garage if separated from the resident and its attic space, by one-hour firewall (according to International Building Code-2012 ED. - Table 719.1 (2)) and also exclude any detached building. 
2.  Such systems shall be in compliance with International Building and Fire Codes and installed in accordance with the most current edition of NFPA 13, NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R, as applicable. If this ordinance is in conflict with the above listed codes then the more restrictive shall prevail. 
3.  The requirements of this section shall apply to existing buildings as follows: 
A.  Existing buildings (Except Group R-3) exceeding 10,000 square feet. Existing buildings, other than Group R-3, with useable floor space exceeding 10,000 square feet, are exempt from automatic sprinkler requirements until such time as: 
B.  Any addition, renovation, remodeling, or other action results in any increase in useable floor space; or 
C.  Any renovation or remodeling project involves 25% or more of the building; or 
D.  Any change in Occupancy Group. 
E.  Existing buildings (Except Group R-3) 10,000 square feet or less. Existing buildings, other than Group R-3, with useable floor space of 10,000 square feet or less, are exempt from automatic sprinkler system requirements until such time as: 
F.  The building is modified to increase useable floor space to more than 10,000 square feet; or 
G.  The occupancy group changes to Group R-3 and useable floor space exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
H.  Existing Group R-3 buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet. Existing Group R-3 buildings with useable floor space exceeding 5,000 square feet are exempt from automatic sprinkler requirements until such time as: 
I.  Any addition, renovation, remodeling, or other action results in any increase in useable floor space; or 
J.  Any renovation or remodeling project involves 25% or more of the building; or 
K.  The occupancy group changes to other than Group R and useable floor space exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
L.  Existing Group R-3 buildings 5,000 square feet or less. Existing Group R-3 buildings with useable floor space of 5,000 square feet or less, are exempt from automatic sprinkler system requirements until such time as the building is modified to increase useable floor space to more than 5,000 square feet. 
Section 903.2.1 Group A is hereby amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception: A one-story detached open pavilion consisting of only a roof and supporting columns that meets all of the following criteria shall not require fire sprinklers. 
1.  The detached open pavilion is a Group A2, Group A3, or Group A4 Occupancy. 
2.  The detached open pavilion shall be less than 10,000 ft 2 in area. 
3.  The detached open pavilion shall be separated from adjacent structures by minimum of 30 feet. 
4.  The detached open pavilion is open on at least three sides and open a minimum of 50% of the perimeter of the area covered. In order to be considered "open" for the purpose of this exception, an open side shall be at least 50% open with the open area uniformly distributed to prevent the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases. 
5.  The detached open pavilion shall have a minimum of 300% of the total number of required exits and a minimum of 300% of total exit minimum width or required capacity based upon the occupant load of the pavilion. 
Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3 is hereby amended by adding a condition to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet (1115 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
4.  Any Group A-3 occupancy that serves alcohol shall comply with the fire sprinkler requirements for Group A-2 Occupancies in section 903.2.1.2. 
Section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections is amended to read as follows: 
The location of fire department connections shall be in accordance with Section 912.2, as amended. 
Section 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS is amended by adding a new exception to Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms and a new Section 903.7 Separation from Non-Sprinklered Areas as follows: 
Exception: Valves located outside buildings or in a vault that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
903.7 Separation from Non-Sprinklered Areas. Unless otherwise exempted by the 2012 International Building Code (IBC) or 2012 International Fire Code (IFC) or required to be of a higher fire resistive construction by the IBC or IFC, a minimum of one hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with the 2012 International Building Code shall be between 
Section 905.3.9 Building Area is amended to read as follows: 
In buildings exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet or wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's interior area is more than two hundred feet (200') of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. 
Exception: Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
Section 906.2 General requirements is amended by adding Section 906.2.2 Travel distance as follows: 
906.2.2 Travel distance. Travel distance is calculated from a point in the occupancy to the location of fire extinguisher located on the same floor level in accordance with the maximum distances listed in Table 906.3(1) or Table 906.3(2). 
Travel distance is calculated per floor when determining travel distance to a fire extinguisher in multi-story buildings. 
Section 906 PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS is amended by adding Section 906.5.1 Conspicuous Locations in Group R occupancies as follows: 
906.5.1 Conspicuous Locations in Group R occupancies. In addition to other areas listed herein or in NFPA10, fire extinguishers in R occupancies may also be placed in any of the following location to satisfy the requirements: 
1.  On a wall in the unit; 
2.  Inside a closet or pantry as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher inside; 
3.  Inside a mechanical closet as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider; or 
4.  Inside storage closets as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider and there is no locking device on the door that requires a key or combination to open it. 
Section 907.1 General is amended by adding Section 907.1.4 Testing of Fire Alarm Systems as follows: 
Section 907.1.4 Testing of Fire Alarm Systems. The following are required at the time of fire alarm acceptance testing unless approved by the Fire Marshal or his/her designee: 
1.  The written statement required by NFPA 72, section 4.5.1.2 
2.  A copy of the Record of Completion as required by NFPA 72, section 4.5.2.1 
3.  A copy of the Texas Department of Insurance Fire Alarm Installation Certificate 
4.  Approved plans bearing the original stamp and signature of the fire alarm plan reviewer 
5.  Original permit is on site. 
6.  Proof of current licensing of the technician performing the tests. 
7.  Written approvals from the AHJ if partial installation inspections are requested by the contractor or technician. 
8.  Site specific software for software based systems. 
9.  Written sequence of operation. 
10.  All testing equipment necessary to conduct the test (i.e. decibel meter, flashlight, intelligibility meter, etc) 
Section 907(IFC-2012) Fire alarm and detection Systems is amended by adding an exception to Section 907.2.3 (IFC-2012) Group E, (Educational). 
Exception: Group E occupancies housed in one room with an occupant load of less than 50. 
Section 907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system is hereby amended to read as follows: 
907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units. The automatic smoke detection system requirement is met only by the installation of smoke or beam detectors whenever possible. If environmental conditions do not allow the installation of smoke detectors, fire alarm heat detectors may be used on a limited basis when approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
Section 907.2.9.1 Manual Fire Alarm System is hereby amended to repeal exception 2. 
Section 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures is amended by adding Section 907.2.24 High Occupant Load as follows: 
907.2.24 High Occupant Load. In addition to the requirements listed in other sections of this Code, any occupancy having an occupant load of 1000 or more shall be provided with a manual fire alarm system. 
Exception: Open Parking Garages 
Section 907.3.5 Fire Alarm Systems - Emergency Control is hereby added to read as follows: 
907.3.5 Fire Alarm Systems - Emergency Control. At a minimum, the following functions, where provided, shall be activated by the fire alarm system: 
1.  Elevator capture and control in accordance with ASME/ANSI A17.1b, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 
2.  Release of automatic door closures and hold open devices. 
3.  Stairwell and/or elevator shaft pressurization. 
4.  Smoke management and/or smoke control systems. 
5.  Initiation of automatic fire extinguishing equipment. 
6.  Emergency lighting control. 
7.  Unlocking of doors. 
8.  Emergency shutoff of gas and fuel supplies that may be hazardous provided the continuation of service is not essential to the preservation of life. 
9.  Emergency shutoff of audio systems for sound reinforcement or entertainment (i.e. music systems, systems for announcement and broadcast which are separate from public address systems) provided that such systems are not used to issue emergency instructions. 
10.  Emergency shutoff of systems used for the creation of displays or special effects (i.e. lighting effects, laser light shows, projection equipment) 
Section 907.4.2.1 Location is amended to add an exception: 
907.4.2.1 Location. Manual fire alarm boxes shall be located not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the entrance to each exit. Additional manual fire alarm boxes shall be located so that travel distance to the nearest box does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). 
Exception: Where construction of the building prohibits the proper installation of a manual fire alarm box (e.g. glass walls, interior brick or rock walls), a manual fire alarm box shall be allowed to be located in the normal path of egress, where approved by the Fire Marshal or his/her designee. 
Section 907.5.1 Presignal feature, is amended to read as follows: 
907.5.1 Presignal features and positive alarm sequences. A Presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence as defined in NFPA 72 shall not be installed unless approved by the fire code official and the fire department. Request to use a Presignal feature or a Positive Alarm Sequence must be submitted in writing to the Fire Marshal and approval granted before installation. Where a Presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence is provided, a signal shall be annunciated at a constantly attended location approved by the fire department, in order that occupant notification can be activated in the event of fire or other emergency. When approved by the fire code official, the Presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence shall be implemented in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72. 
Section 907.5.2.1 Audible alarms is amended by adding Sections 907.5.2.1.3 Testing of Audible Alarms in occupancies other than group R and 907.5.2.1.4 Testing of Audible Alarms in Group R occupancies as follows: 
907.5.2.1.3 Testing of Audible Alarms in occupancies other than group R. Audibility levels for all occupancies other than Group R shall be in accordance with the public mode requirements of NFPA 72, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The audiometer will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including bathroom doors and balconies, shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Levels shall be taken in the most remote areas of the occupancy first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
4.  Initial readings to confirm the average ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
5.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and readings in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
907.5.2.1.4 Testing of Audible Alarms in Group R occupancies. Audibility levels for all Group R occupancies shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 907.5.2.1.1, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The audiometer will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including the bathroom and balcony doors shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Ambient sound level shall be established with the television set at 50 percent of maximum volume, showers running, bathroom exhaust systems running, and air conditioning units running. 
4.  Levels shall be taken in the most remote area of the dwelling or sleeping unit first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
5.  Initial readings to confirm the ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
6.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and readings in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
Section 912.3.1 Locking Fire Department Connection Caps is amended to read as follows: 
Section 912 FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS is amended by adding Section 912.2 Fire Department Connections & Section 912.7 Fire Department Connections as follows: 
Section 912.2 (IFC-2012) Fire Department Connections. "With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscape, fire department connections shall be so located that fire apparatus and hose connections to supply the system will not obstruct access to the building for other fire apparatus. Fire department connections shall be located not more than 120 feet and no closer than 30 feet from the nearest fire hydrant connected to an approved water supply and shall be approved by the fire marshal." 
912.7 Fire Department Connections. Sprinkler system and standpipe fire department hose connections shall be as follows: 
1.  Within forty (40) feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or access roadway; 
2.  Within 120 feet of an approved fire hydrant measured per hose lay criteria in Section 507.5.1.2. 
3.  Minimum of two feet above finished grade and a maximum of four feet above finished grade for standard inlets and minimum of 30 inches at lowest point above finished grade and maximum of four feet above finished grade for the five inch "Stortz" inlet; 
4.  The Fire Code Official shall approve the location of freestanding fire department connections. Freestanding FDCs must be physically protected against impact per the requirements of Section 312 or other approved means. 
5.  Where provided, the five inch "Stortz" inlet shall be installed at a 30 degree angle pointing down; 
6.  Fire department connections for H occupancies will be freestanding remote and located as determined by the Fire Code Official; and 
Section 1003 GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS is amended by adding Section [B]1003.8 Special Provisions as follows: 
[B]1003.8 Special Provisions. Rooms in E occupancies used for kindergarten or daycare, children five or under, classified as an E occupancy shall not be located above or below the first story. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Basements or stories having floor levels located within four feet, measured vertically, from adjacent ground level at the level of exit discharge, provided 
Section [B] 1006.3 Emergency power for illumination is amended by adding Section 1006.3.2 Illumination in Group E as follows: 
1006.3.2 Illumination in Group E. Group E occupancies shall have emergency lighting in interior stairs, corridors, window-less areas with student occupancy, shops, and laboratories. 
Section 1008.1.9.4 Bolt Locks is amended by removing exceptions 3, 4, and 5 to read as follows: 
1008.1.9.4 Bolt Locks. Manually operated flush bolts or surface bolts are not permitted. 
Exceptions: 
1.  On doors not required for egress in individual dwelling units or sleeping units. 
2.  Where a pair of doors serves a storage or equipment room, manually operated edge or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. 
Section 1103.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is amended to read as follows: 
1103.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings. Existing buildings that do not have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building, shall be equipped with such coverage according to one of the following: 
1.  Emergency responder radio coverage as required in section 510 of this code is installed within a time frame established by the adopting authority. 
2.  An approved alternative method of emergency responder communication within the building is provided within a time frame established by the adopting authority. 
Section 1103.8.2 Interconnection is amended by altering the two exceptions as follows: 
1103.8.2 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not undergoing alterations. 
2.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposes the structure. 
Section 1103.8.3 Power source is amended by adding one new exception as follows: 
1103.8.3 Power source. Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: 
1.  In all R-2 occupancies, smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated if added to comply with 1103.8. 
Section 2301 GENERAL is amended by adding Section 2301.7 Portable Service Stations as follows: 
2301.7 Portable Service Stations. 
1.  No person shall own, operate or maintain a tank used for the storage of flammable liquids maintained on skids or a similar type stand which is designed or intended to be used for dispensing flammable liquids into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles owned by the public. 
2.  The foregoing provisions of this article are intended to prohibit the use of so-called portable service station or similar units constructed to dispense flammable liquids to the motoring public and designed so that the unit can be easily picked up and moved. 
Section 2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches is hereby amended as follows: 
2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches. An approved, clearly identified and readily accessible emergency disconnect switch shall be provided at an approved location to stop the transfer of fuel to the fuel dispensers in the event of a fuel spill or other emergency. An emergency disconnect switch for exterior fuel dispensers shall be located within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of, but not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) from, the fuel dispensers. For interior fuel-dispensing operations, the emergency disconnect switch shall be installed at an approved location. Such devices shall be distinctly labeled as; EMERGENCY FUEL SHUTOFF. Signs shall be provided in approved locations and be a minimum of 18 inches high and 24 inches wide. 
Section 2303.2.1 Additional Emergency disconnect switches for attended self-service is hereby added as follows: 
2303.2.1 Additional emergency disconnect for attended self-service. Attended facilities shall have an additional emergency disconnect switch located inside the building for attendance use at a location approved by the fire code official. 
Section 2306.2.1.1 Inventory Control for underground tanks is amended to read as follows: 
2306.2.1.1 Inventory Control for underground tanks. 
Accurate daily (normal working days only) inventory records shall be maintained and reconciled on all Class I, II or III-A liquid storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or piping. The records shall be made available for inspection by the Fire Marshal, and shall include, as a minimum, records showing by product: daily reconciliation between sales, use, receipts, and inventory on hand. If there is more than one system consisting of a tank(s), serving pump(s), or dispenser(s) for any product, the reconciliation shall be made separately for each tank system. 
1.  Daily inventory shall be maintained for each tank system at each location by the operator. The inventory records shall be kept for a minimum of the past 12 months at the premises. 
2.  Inventory shall be based on the actual daily measurement and recording of tank product and water levels and the daily recording of actual sales, use and receipts. Daily measurements shall be made by gauge, gauge stick or by readout from an automated gauging system. The inventory records shall include a daily compilation of gain or loss. The mere recording of pump meter reading and product delivery receipts shall not constitute adequate inventory records. 
3.  The operator of the location shall be held responsible for notifying the owner or person(s) in control of the facility to take action to correct any abnormal loss or gain not explainable by spillage, temperature variations or both causes. 
4.  The Fire Marshal may require the operator of an underground tank storage system to test the system for tightness, at the operator's expense, when accurate daily inventory records have not been maintained as required or when in his judgment conditions indicate possible leakage of product from the location of such tanks. 
5.  The Fire Marshal may require copies of Class I, II and III-A liquid storage tank inventories, deliveries or receipt of product sales and dip gauge stick readings or other control measures in addition to copies of any tank tightness or line leakage test results from the station operator, agent, or terminal management. 
6.  When a service station tank is found to be leaking, its contents shall be removed immediately. If any investigations or tests indicate the source of such loss, the owner shall take immediate action to correct the system failure and remove dangerous spillage from the environment. 
7.  The Fire Marshal may order the closure of a Service Station by barricading if necessary and the emptying of contents from storage tanks should the operator of a service station be unwilling to cooperate with the Fire Department during the search for the source of such leakage or should the Fire Marshal determine that a hazardous condition exists that merits such action. 
Section 2306.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside, above grade is amended by adding Sections 2306.2.3.1 Inspections, 2306.2.3.2 Required Access, and 2306.2.3.3 Fire Hydrant Access as follows: 
2306.2.3.1 Inspections. An inspection of the installation shall be conducted prior to loading the tank with fuel. 
2306.2.3.2 Required Access. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not be more than 150 feet from fire apparatus access roads as measured by an approved route. 
2306.2.3.3 Fire Hydrant Access. A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not be located more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant as measured by an approved route. 
Section 3301.3 Address numbers, is added to read as follows: 
3301.3 Address numbers. Buildings under construction shall place address numbers and/or building numbers in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property with minimum six inch numbers. 
Section 3314.3 Furniture, Fixtures, and Equipment is hereby added as follows: 
3314.3 Furniture, Fixtures, and Equipment. In buildings where an automatic sprinkler system is required, furniture, fixtures, and equipment shall not be stored in the building until the system has been tested and approved by the fire code official and monitoring of system is active. 
Exception: As approved by the fire code official. 
Chapter 52 COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS is hereby amended by adding section 5206 Construction and Protection Requirements as follows: 
5206 Construction and Protection Requirements. 
1.  Handling and storage of large quantities of waste paper, rags, or other combustible materials shall not be allowed in a building of any type in excess of 1500 square feet area unless the building is protected with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Handling and storage building for waste paper, rags or other combustible materials shall not exceed one story in height unless of Type I construction and fully protected with approved automatic sprinkler system. 
3.  No loose waste paper, rags, trash or rubbish of any kind, or similar combustible materials shall be allowed on the premises on the outside of any building. 
4.  Bales, waste paper, rags, and other combustibles in baled lots shall be stored in buildings. Said buildings shall be required to have aisles when 25,000 cubic feet or more of such materials are stored. Baled materials, if stored outside of buildings, shall not be stored within 25 feet of any building. EXCEPTION: Baled materials may be stored within 25 feet of a building's outside wall when a wall sprinkler curtain is provided on the building. 
Section 5003.4.1 Material Safety Data Sheet Submittal is added to read as follows: 
5003.4.1 Material Safety Data Sheet Submittal. The Fire Marshal may require that information on the nature of any and all potentially hazardous material be submitted to the Fire Department on the Standard Material Safety Data Sheet provided by the U.S. Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
Section 5601.1.3.1 Unlawful Possession of Fireworks, 5601.1.3.2 Instigating or Aiding a Minor to Violate the Ordinance Prohibiting Fireworks, and 5601.1.3.3 Summons to be issued for Violation of Fireworks Ordinance are added to read as follows: 
5601.1.3.1 Unlawful Possession of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport or manufacture fireworks or pyrotechnics of all kinds in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the City. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or manufacture fireworks or pyrotechnics of all kinds in any quantity area extending 5000 feet beyond the City limits. 
Packaged or unopened fireworks cannot be confiscated. 
Exception: A state or federally licensed importer or distributor established within said 5000 foot area prior to the enactment of this section and using area for storage or for distribution to governmental agencies or federal or state licensees or permitees. 
5601.1.3.3 Summons to be issued for Violation of Fireworks Ordinance. A summons or notice to appear in answer to a charge of illegal possession or use of fireworks in violation of this section specifying the location of such violation, the date and time of such violation, and the name and address of the offender, may be issued by any Police Officer, Arson Investigator, Fire Inspector or by any Firemen who has been assigned to citation duties by the Fire Chief. 
Packaged or unopened fireworks cannot be confiscated. 
Section 5601.2 Permit required is amended by adding new Section 5601.2.6 Prohibited Explosives as follows: 
5601.2.6 Prohibited Explosives. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport or manufacture any of the explosives listed in Section 5601.3 any quantity, within the corporate limits of the City, or to store, sell, use or offer for sale such explosives within 5000 feet beyond the City limits unless authorized by the Fire Marshal. 
Section 5704.2.12.2 Testing of underground tanks is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.12.2 Testing of underground tanks. 
Each tank shall be tested for tightness hydrostatically or pneumatically at not less than three pounds per square inch or not more than five pounds per square inch for 60 minutes. Pneumatic testing shall not be used on a tank containing flammable or combustible liquids or vapors. 
Section 5704.2.12.2 Testing of underground tanks is amended by adding Sections 5704.2.12.2.1 Existing Tanks and Piping and 5704.2.12.2.2 Alternate Test Method as follows: 
5704.2.12.2.1 Existing Tanks and Piping. Existing underground storage tanks and piping shall be tested for leakage every five years at the owner's or operator's expense or when the Fire Marshal has reasonable cause to believe a leak exists. A log or record shall be kept and the log shall be made available for inspection by the Fire Marshal when requested. Notice of test shall be provided in writing to the Fire Marshal by the owner or operator. 
Appendix D FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS is hereby amended to read as follows: 
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all the following criteria: 
1.  Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm). Where a fire apparatus road consists of a divided roadway, the gate width shall be not less than 14 feet. 
Appendix D FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS is hereby amended by amending section D106.3 Separate Access Roads to read as follows: 
D106.3 Separate Access Roads. The requirement for two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads are met with the following conditions: 
1.  A minimum of two separate entrances into the complex are made from the street or public way. 
2.  The distance between the two entrances are equal to not less than one half the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses, as per 2012 IFC, section D104.3. 
Exception: Where it is physically impossible to be one half the diagonal dimension apart, the access road will be approved if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The two separate fire apparatus access road must be separated as far as physically and practically possible. 
b.  The two separate entrances must be a minimum of 150 feet apart measured in a straight line between accesses. 
3.  The two separate entrances are allowed to share a common path of travel on the complex site so long as blockage in any one area of this path does not block access from both the primary and secondary access simultaneously. The two separate entrances are allowed to share a common path of travel on the complex site so long as blockage in any one area of this path does not block access from both the primary and secondary access simultaneously. Each of the two separate fire apparatus roads shall meet the requirements of the 2012 IFC, section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
Article VI — LIFE SAFETY CODE is amended to read. 
Section 30-101 Life Safety Code Adopted. 
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2015 Edition, as amended, revised and corrected, including all future editions, revisions, amendments and corrections, published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), one (1) copy of which is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the Life Safety Code of the City of Schertz subject to and including by reference such amendments as herein shall appear. NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2015 Edition, shall be used in conjunction with the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-19), 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 15-C-21 , §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 17-S-50 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-13-2018)  
Secs. 30-83—30-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LIFE SAFETY CODE 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2003 Edition, as amended, revised and corrected, including all future editions, revisions, amendments and corrections, published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), one (1) copy of which is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the Life Safety Code of the City of Schertz subject to and including by reference such amendments as herein shall appear. NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2003 Edition, shall be used in conjunction with the International Fire Code, 2003 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-20), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-102. - Predominant codes. 
When there is a conflict between the two codes adopted in section 30-101, the more restrictive requirement, as reasonably determined by the fire chief in consultation with the city manager, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-21), 5-3-2005)  
Secs. 30-103—30-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FEES 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Hazardous materials operations service fees. 
This section shall only apply to business or commercial property owners or generators and shall not apply to residential properties. 
(a)  The fire department shall send an invoice to the owner/occupant of the property or generator of hazardous materials at which fire operations services are required. The property owner/occupant or generator shall remit full payment of such fees upon receipt. 
(b)  The city may recover weighted hourly salaries per hour per employee and/or include additional labor, equipment, supplies, or any additional cost incurred in the emergency response and mitigation of a hazardous materials operation. 
(c)  The city may also include in its fees for hazardous materials operations services a 15 percent administration fee. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-22), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-122. - Special events fees. 
Special event sponsors within the city limits shall be charged for any and all services required by the fire department, as determined by the fire department in its sole discretion, working in conjunction with the city's special events personnel, including, but not limited to standby fire apparatus, personnel, and vehicles. Such special events fees shall be due and payable with the special events permit application, and shall be in addition to any fees incurred for other fire department services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-23), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-123. - Low water crossing fee and fines. 
A fee of $400.00 shall be assessed against any individual that a fire unit of the City of Schertz Fire Department rescues or attempts to rescue at a low-water crossing that is clearly marked by city barricades or gates. In addition, venturing past a barricade onto a flooded road is punishable by a maximum fine of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-24), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-124. - Fee collection. 
(a)  Fees shall be collected for services provided inside the city limits as well as those provided outside the city limits of Schertz. 
(b)  Fees that are the result of any actions listed in sections 7-121 and/or 7-122 are the responsibility of the property owner or occupant and are due and payable immediately upon receipt of an invoice from the fire department or its authorized agent. 
(c)  The fire department shall utilize applicable incident report information for the assessment and collection of fees. 
(d)  The fire department shall coordinate with Schertz EMS for applicable fee collection along with utilizing fire records management for the collection of any additional fees not collected by development services. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-25), 5-3-2005)  
Sec. 30-125. - Fee exhibit. 
Various fire department related fees are set forth on Exhibit 1 to this article. 
Exhibit 1 
Hazardous materials operations service fees. 
(a)  Communications. The following fees for dispatching shall be charged for fire department response: 
1.  Dispatch fee, $75.00. 
15 percent administration fee. 
(b)  Apparatus. The following fees shall be charged for emergency response operations. 
1.  Class A pumper, $250.00 per hour. 
2.  Aerial apparatus, $300.00 per hour. 
3.  Tanker apparatus, $175.00 per hour. 
4.  Rescue truck, $150.00 per hour. 
5.  Command unit, $75.00 per hour. 
6.  Rescue boat, $150.00 per hour. 
7.  Rehab unit, $75.00 per hour. 
8.  Staff vehicle, $75.00 per hour. 
9.  Brush truck, $150.00 per hour. 
NOTE: Non-emergency, standby and returning to services fees will be charged at one-half the hourly rate: 
(c)  Personnel. The following fees for personnel shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Firefighter, $15.00 per hour. 
2.  Haz-mat tech, $20.00 per hour. 
3.  Haz-mat operation, $15.00 per hour. 
4.  Fire inspectors, $20.00 per hour. 
5.  Fire investigators, $25.00 per hour. 
6.  Incident commander, $30.00 per hour. 
(d)  Haz-mat. The following fees for Haz-mat supplies shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Absorbent, $15.00 per bag. 
2.  Drum liners, $8.00 each. 
3.  Lite-dri, $20.00 per 50 lb. bag. 
4.  Top-sol, $30.00 per bag. 
5.  Barricade tape, $20.00 per roll. 
6.  Poly sheeting, $50.00 per roll. 
7.  Plug and patch kit, $30.00 each. 
8.  Disposable coveralls, $20.00 each. 
9.  Latex gloves, $5.00 pair. 
10.  Disposable goggles, $10.00 pair. 
11.  Broom, $40.00 each. 
12.  Shovel, $50.00 each. 
(e)  Protective equipment replacement. The following fees for damaged or contaminated protective equipment shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Helmet, $350.00 each. 
2.  Nomex hood, $25.00 each. 
3.  Bunker coat, $650.00 each. 
4.  Bunker pants, $650.00 each. 
5.  FF boots, $120.00 pair. 
6.  FF gloves, $45.00 pair. 
(f)  Firefighting agents. The following fees for specialized fire protection supplies shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  AFFF foam, $35.00 per gallon. 
2.  Class A foam, $20.00 per gallon. 
3.  Light water, $20.00 per gallon. 
4.  Micro-clean, $30.00 per gallon. 
5.  Star-dust, $25.00 per 15 lb. bag. 
(g)  Firefighting equipment replacement. The following fee for damaged or contaminated equipment shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Hose 1.0" (each 50'), $101.00. 
2.  Hose 1.75" (each 50'), $115.00. 
3.  Hose 2.5" (each 50'), $145.00. 
4.  Hose 3.0" (each 50'), $225.00. 
5.  Hose 5.0" (each 100'), $685.00. 
6.  Hose 1.0" booster (each 50'), $270.00. 
7.  SCBA air mask (each), $240.00. 
8.  SCBA air mask complete (each), $2,300.00. 
9.  SCBA spare cylinders (each), $570.00. 
10.  12' roof ladder (each), $275.00. 
11.  14' roof ladder (each), $335.00. 
12.  24' extension ladder (each), $525.00. 
13.  35' extension ladder (each), $925.00. 
14.  A-frame combo ladder (each), $414.00. 
15.  PASS alarm (each), $200.00. 
16.  Portable radio (each), $2,500.00. 
17.  Fog nozzle 1.5-1.75" (each), $625.00. 
18.  Fog nozzle 1.0" (each), $510.00. 
19.  Fog nozzle 2.5" (each), $680.00. 
20.  Fog nozzle 2.5" master (each), $825.00. 
21.  Stacked tips w/shaper (each), $566.00. 
22.  Deluge monitor w/o pie and tips(each), $2,080.00. 
23.  Foam aerator tube (each), $396.00. 
24.  8' attic folding ladder (each), $230.00. 
25.  10" attic folding ladder (each), $255.00. 
Note: This list is not all-inclusive of equipment that may be damaged or contaminated during the course of a response effort. Additional equipment that is not herein listed may be charged at actual replacement costs. 
(h)  Rescue equipment used. The following fees for rescue equipment used shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Spreaders, $125.00 per hour. 
2.  Cutters, $125.00 per hour. 
3.  Ram(s), $125.00 per hour. 
4.  Porta power, $55.00 per hour. 
5.  Ajax cutting tool, $35.00 per hour. 
6.  Saws-all, $65.00 per hour. 
7.  Air impact tools, $85.00 per hour. 
8.  Oxygen with mask, $90.00 per hour. 
9.  Air bags, $175.00 per hour. 
(i)  Fire equipment used. 
The following fees for fire equipment used shall be charged for operations response: 
1.  Camera w/pictures (each set), $35.00. 
2.  Cellular phone w/long dist. Chg., $25.00. 
3.  Command light, $250.00. 
4.  Tripod light (each), $25.00. 
5.  Hand lights (each), $15.00. 
6.  Water extinguisher (each), $15.00. 
7.  ABC extinguisher (each), $40.00. 
8.  CO2 extinguisher (each), $40.00. 
9.  Chain Saw (per hour), $40.00 
10.  Rescue (K-12) saw (per hour), $40.00. 
11.  Generator (per hour), $45.00. 
12.  PPV fans (per hour), $50.00. 
13.  Halligan tool, $20.00. 
14.  Bolt cutters (HD), $20.00. 
15.  Salvage covers (each), $25.00. 
16.  Hall runner (each), $15.00. 
17.  Rolls of plastic (each), $30.00. 
18.  Gas plug/gasoline plug kit, $45.00. 
19.  Explosive meter, $180.00. 
20.  SCBA (each), $75.00. 
21.  Refill SCBA bottle (each), $8.00. 
22.  Barricade/scene tape, $20.00. 
23.  Tank, portable/fold-a-tank, $150.00. 
24.  Flappers/fire brooms (each), $10.00. 
25.  K-Tool, $20.00. 
26.  Stokes basket w/bridle, $85.00. 
27.  Windshield tool, $10.00. 
28.  Kendrix extrication device, $95.00. 
A7.002. Fire prevention service fees. The following fees for inspection activity shall be charged to the owner or occupant of the property at which such services are requested, and shall be due and payable at the time such services are requested. The following fees are hereby established for obtaining permits from the Schertz Fire Prevention Bureau. All payments will be made by check or credit card payable to the City of Schertz or in cash: 
1.  Certificate of occupancy inspection for existing structure, $30.00. 
2.  License inspections, $50.00. 
3.  Fire suppression system installation, $100.00. 
4.  Fire alarms, $50.00. 
5.  Re-inspection, $45.00. 
6.  Smoke control system plan(for each review), $75.00. 
7.  Flammable or combustible liquid tanks (for each review), $150.00. 
8.  After hours fee beyond the hours of 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. for inspector per hour per inspector, $60.00. 
9.  Plan review fees (construction) (per hour), $50.00. 
10.  Fireworks display. A permit fee of $250.00 is required for a public fireworks display. This fee does not include firefighter labor and equipment charges for fire safety standby. Firefighter and equipment standby will be charged according to Section A 7.001 of Exhibit 1. All city sanctioned events are exempt from these fees. 
11.  Operational permits, $50.00. 
a.  Tents. 
b.  Cutting and welding. 
c.  Explosives. 
d.  Flammable storage. 
e.  Carnivals and fairs. 
f.  Battery systems. 
g.  Combustible dust product options. 
h.  Cryogenic fluids. 
i.  Haz-mat. 
j.  Lumber yards. 
k.  Spraying and dipping. 
l.  Storage of tires. 
m.  Open or controlled burns in commercial or residential development, $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 05-C-19, § 2(7-26), 5-3-2005)  
Chapter 34 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of home-rule municipalities to protect public health, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 122.066; authority of home-rule municipalities concerning sanitation and health, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 341.081. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Appointment of health official. 
The health official shall be appointed by the city manager. All activities of the health official shall be coordinated through the director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-1, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-2. - Duties and powers of the health official. 
(a)  Generally. The health official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and other related ordinances of the city. The health official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Health official qualifications. The health official shall either: 
(1)  Be a Registered Professional Sanitarian in Texas or a Sanitarian-in-Training as defined in Title 25, Section 265.142 of the Texas Administration Code, or 
(2)  Meet the Food and Drug Administration Voluntary National Retail Food Regulatory Program Standards basic curriculum and field training elements, as accepted by the Texas Department of Health. 
(c)  Assistant inspector appointment and qualifications. The director of development services, with the approval of the city manager, may appoint such additional officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. Such employees shall hold a code enforcement license issued by the Texas Department of Health and have such powers as are delegated by the health official. 
(d)  Inspection agencies. The director of development services is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the city's established requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(e)  Fees and salary. The fees, salary, or both for the health official shall be set in the annual budget of the inspection department approved by the city council. All fees shall be as set forth in section 34-3 of this chapter, as modified from time to time. 
(f)  Reports. The health official shall give attention to the health and sanitary conditions of the city and report to the city manager and the city council once each month, making recommendations as necessary conducive to the cleanliness of the city and the general health of the citizens. 
(g)  Right of entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, or delay the health official, deputies, inspectors, or officers in the discharge of any duties under this chapter or to refuse to comply with the orders of the health official. The health official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(h)  Orders of correction. The health official shall have the authority whenever, in his or her opinion, a nuisance detrimental to health exists to cause the same to be abated or removed. 
(i)  Appeals. The city manager shall hear and decide on all appeals or orders, decisions, or determinations made by the health official relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter. 
(j)  Liability. The health official and other city employees charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall not be held personally liable for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or omission while performing the duties required by this chapter, so long as such health official or other city employee is acting in good faith and without malice. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-2, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-3. - Permit fees. 
Exhibit 1. 
Fees 
(1)  Food and/or beverage establishment permits fees:* 
1—3, $100.00 
4—6, $200.00 
7—10, $300.00 
11—20, $400.00 
21 plus, $500.00 
Exception: Nonprofit organizations will pay a permit fee of $100.00 regardless of the number of employees or volunteers. 
(2)  Temporary food and/or beverage establishment permit fees, $50.00. 
(3)  Frozen dessert and frozen beverage machines, $125.00. 
(4)  Individual charge for food handler's class, $14.00. 
(5)  Mobile venders, $150.00. 
(6)  Swimming pool permits, $75.00. 
Note: * Based on number of employees 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, Exh.1, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, Exh. 1, 7-3-2007) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-H-32, Exh. 1, adopted July 3, 2007 amended information in the Code set out at the end of Chapter 34 as Exhibit 1. FEES. Since this ordinance was not specifically amendatory and the fees set out herein affect different sections within this chapter the information herein has been set out as a new section 34-3, at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 34-4—34-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 437.004(d). 
 
Sec. 34-22. - Adoption of Texas Food and Beverage Establishment Rules. 
A person operating a food establishment, vending machine, mobile food establishment, temporary event, farmers market, or farmers market vendor booth shall comply with this chapter and, the city adopts the Texas Administrative Code Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 228 (Texas Food Establishment Rules) and Chapter 229, Subchapter N (Current Good Manufacturing Practice And Good Warehousing Practice In Manufacturing, Packing And Holding Human Food). 
(Ord. No. 07-H-32, II, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 17-M-10 , § 1, 3-7-2017)  
Sec. 34-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in the section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized agent or employee means the health official and any deputies, assistant inspectors, or other officers representing the City of Schertz pursuant to this article. 
Food and/or beverage establishment means a food and/or beverage service establishment, a retail food and/or beverage store, a temporary food and/or beverage establishment, a mobile food and/or beverage unit and/or a roadside food and/or beverage vendor. 
Food and/or beverage handler means any person, including cook, cook's helper, waiter, waitress, dishwasher, bartender, barmaid, busboy or any other person, whether compensated or not, engaged in the delivery, storing, preparation, dispensing or serving food or beverages for human consumption, or who engages in the handling, use, cleaning or preparation for use of any pots, pans, grills, skillets, plates, trays, eating and drinking equipment/utensils, or similar wares on which such foods or beverages are prepared, dispensed or served. 
Permit means a license to operate a food and/or beverage establishment within the City of Schertz for a specified period of time for a stated fee as established in section 34-3 of this chapter. 
Regulatory authority means the City of Schertz. 
State rules means rules described in section 34-22. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
Temporary food establishment means a food establishment that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-3, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-24. - Inspection of food and beverage establishment. 
(a)  In addition to the rules adopted in section 34-22, the City of Schertz adopts by reference the provisions of current rule or rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in Title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 217, Milk and Dairy, subchapter C, rules for Manufacture of Frozen Desserts; rule 217.65, Examination and Standards for Frozen Desserts. 
(b)  As often as deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article and the state rules, the health official shall inspect every food and/or beverage establishment that is located within the city at least twice annually. The person operating the food and/or beverage establishment shall, upon request of the health official, permit access and allow the inspection of all parts of the establishment. 
(c)  In case of any items of violation identified by or brought to the attention of the health official, the person in charge of such establishment shall be advised of the violation. A second inspection will be made after a lapse of sufficient time, as the health official deems sufficient for correction of the violation. Any violation of the same provision on such second inspection shall call for an immediate suspension of the food and/or beverage establishment permits. 
(d)  In the interest of public clarification, the results from compiling the inspection report will be converted to a letter grade with the letter "A" being the highest level of food service operation and "F" being lowest. The criteria for the various certificates are: 
Grade "A" Attain sanitation score of 90 or above; 
Grade "B" Attain sanitation score of 89 - 80; 
Grade "C" Attain sanitation score of 79 - 70; 
Grade "D" Attain sanitation score of 69-60; 
Grade "F" Attain a sanitation score of 59 or below. 
(e)  An inspection certificate shall be issued and a copy shall be posted by the establishment and posted immediately at some conspicuous location near the front of the premises where it will be clearly visible to all patrons. The certificate shall not be defaced and may not be removed by any person except the health official. Violation of this section shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00 per day that the certificate is removed, moved or defaced and/or suspension of the food establishment permit for 30 days. The health official shall permit the owner to correct any noncritical infractions within no more than 24 hours. If the health official determines that the infraction is of an immediate threat to the public health, there shall be no grace period for correction. Repeat violations may result in higher point deduction. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-4, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007; Ord. No 12-H-14, §§ 1, 2, 6-26-2012 )  
Sec. 34-25. - Food handler sanitation training course. 
It shall be unlawful for any employer to employ any person to be employed as a food handler without such employee having completed a city food handler sanitation training course within two weeks of employment or the next such course scheduled thereafter. Satisfactory completion of a city food handler sanitation training course constitutes authority to permit a person to accept employment or work in, around, or about all food and beverage establishments for a period of one year. Exception: All volunteers within a nonprofit organization shall not be required to attend such course, but all food preparation and serving activities must be directly supervised by someone who has satisfactorily completed a City of Schertz food handler sanitation training course. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-5, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 34-26. - Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or questionable food or drink. 
(a)  Samples of food, drink and other substances shall be taken and examined by the health official as often as he deems necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness and deleterious qualities. The health official may condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or deleterious. 
(b)  Any food which appears to the health official to be of a questionable nature from the standpoint of wholesomeness or possible deleterious quality may be held for further examination by attaching a "City of Schertz Retained" tag to the item(s) foodstuffs so retained and may not be removed or disturbed without the permission of the health official. The city health official shall promptly proceed by examination, laboratory or otherwise to determine the wholesomeness of such food. As soon as such wholesomeness has been determined, such food must be immediately released. If however, such food is found to be unwholesome or deleterious, the health official must promptly condemn such food as herein stated and shall file petition in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunction to restrain the owner from selling such condemned food and to obtain order for destruction of such unwholesomeness or deleterious food or drink. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-6, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 34-27. - Procedure when infection suspected. 
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any food and beverage establishment employee, the health official is authorized to require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food and beverage establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closing of the food and beverage establishment concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists in the opinion of the health official. 
(3)  Adequate medical examination of the employee and of his associates with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-7, 3-4-2003)  
Sec. 34-28. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food and/or beverage establishment, or temporary food and/or beverage establishment without a valid food and/or beverage establishment permit issued by the city. All permits expire on September 30 of each year and are due and payable on October 1 of each year. Permits are not transferable from one establishment to another or from one person to another. Permits must be posted in a conspicuous place. 
(b)  All permits may be suspended or revoked by the health official upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, following which, unless corrections are immediately made, action may be instituted in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a restraining order or permanent injunction preventing such person from operating unless immediate compliance with the provisions of this article is obtained. Revocation of a permit for any cause whatsoever is still affected by the issuance of the statement that the permit may be made at any time and will be approved provided that full compliance of the provisions of this article is accomplished. 
(c)  Whenever a food and/or beverage establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food and/or beverage establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the city for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food and/or beverage establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work area, and the type of model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The city will approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the rules contained in this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion prior to opening for business; each new establishment will be inspected by the health official to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § 7½-8, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-29. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any other requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 03-H-09, § III, 3-4-2003; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007)  
Secs. 34-30—34-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, adopted July 28, 2015, repealed Ch. 34, Art. III, §§ 34-47—34-65, and reenacted a new article as set out herein. Former Art. III pertained to municipal solid waste collection, recycling, and household hazardous waste collection and disposal program and derived from Ord. No. 13-F-03, § I(1—19), adopted March 5, 2013. 
 
Sec. 34-47. - Solid waste program established. 
The city's solid waste collection, transportation and disposal program is hereby established for all residents and businesses of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-48. - Purpose of chapter; duties of property owners and occupants. 
The accumulation of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush and other refuse constitutes a public nuisance, a health hazard, a fire hazard and a safety hazard. Therefore, it shall be required that owners and tenants of private residences, private commercial buildings and businesses, and the occupants of all private noncommercial buildings which accumulate refuse, deposit their garbage, rubbish, brush, and other refuse for removal by the agent designated by the city. Such owners, renters and occupants shall maintain the premises of the buildings and property free of accumulations of all other waste materials and nuisance materials. Such owners, renters and occupants shall not allow materials intended for recycling to create a nuisance on the premises of buildings and properties. All waste materials shall be disposed of in a place and by methods deemed appropriate by the city. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a method of collecting and disposing of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush, and other refuse, and to maintain neighborhood quality and aesthetics and maintenance of property values by providing for the general health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-49. - Residential and commercial occupants must use services of franchisee. 
It is hereby prohibited for any individual to utilize the services of any individual or corporation for purposes of residential solid waste collection other than the city's designated solid waste franchisee. Every residential occupant shall subscribe to the services of the franchisee having the exclusive franchise for collection and disposal service with the city. It is declared to be unlawful for the occupant of any of the premises described in this section to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of solid waste as required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-50. - Defined terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
100-year flood means a flood that has a 1.0 percent or greater chance of recurring in any given year or a flood of a magnitude equaled or exceeded once in 100 years on the average over a significantly long period. 
Bags means plastic sacks designed to store garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush, or other refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. The total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds. 
Brush means plants or grass clippings, leaves or tree trimmings, including bags and/or bundles of landscape waste. 
Bulky waste means stoves, refrigerators with a Freon evacuation certificate, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, carpet, fencing materials, more than ten bags of landscape waste or bundles of brush and other items of a similar nature that can be loaded by two employees in five minutes or less, except construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for trash collection containers. 
Bundle means tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. 
Commercial means any structure other than single-family and duplex residential development including hotels, motels, residential structures containing three or more dwellings, and residential care facilities. 
Commercial garbage means all normal establishment waste products of commercial buildings or establishments, including multifamily dwellings, other than single-family and duplex residential development, other than sewage and body waste, manure, dead animals over ten pounds in weight, special and hazardous waste, large tree trimmings, demolition or remodeling debris, or any other waste material that cannot be broken down to fit into commercial garbage containers herein specified. 
Commercial garbage compactor means all steel or metallic containers provided by the city or its contractor. Designed to hold compacted commercial garbage shall specifically include 20, 30 and 40 yard compactors. 
Commercial garbage container means all steel or metallic containers, provided by the city or its contractor, designed to hold commercial garbage, and shall specifically include all roll-off containers, roll-off compaction containers, and all such containers with a volume of between three cubic yards and ten cubic yards. 
Commercial recycling container means all steel or metallic containers, provided by the city or its contractor, designed to hold recyclable material, and shall specifically include such containers with a volume of between six cubic yards and eight cubic yards. 
Commercial recycle material compactors means a roll off with or without a compactor designed to hold loose or compacted recycle. Material constructed of steel or metallic material provided by the city or the contractor. 
Container lease charge means a monthly charge that shall be assessed for the use of trash collection containers that are provided by the sanitation contractor. Said charge shall apply to 20-cubic-yard, 30-cubic-yard, and 40-cubic-yard open-top containers. 
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
Designated contractor means such private firm designated by the City for the collection, transportation, and/or disposal of solid waste, and the collection, transportation and/or processing of recyclable materials. 
Extra accumulations means quantities of waste that are containerized or bundled that cannot be fitted into the 95-gallon residential garbage receptacle, not exceeding ten bundles of brush or normal bags of waste (for amounts in excess described herein refer to unusual accumulations). 
Garbage. See "commercial garbage" or "residential garbage." 
Generator means any person whose acts or processes produces or causes solid waste and/or recyclable materials. 
Hauler means a person, other than the designated contractor, who has obtained and maintains a valid permit to collect and divert recyclable materials. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., as amended. 
Landfill means facility operated by and approved by TCQ. 
Municipal solid waste or MSW means garbage, trash, refuse, brush, yard waste, and other waste generated in residences and commercial establishments as well as debris resulting from traffic accidents in the city (excluding wrecked or disabled vehicles which are removable by a wrecker service). 
Nonresident means persons residing other than within the corporate city limits. 
Nuisance means solid waste that is stored, processed or disposed of in an unsightly manner that causes the pollution of surrounding land, the contamination of groundwater or surface water, the breeding of insects or rodents, or the creation of odors adverse to human health, safety or welfare. 
Permitted recycle contractor means a company or corporation to transport loose or compacted recycle material for a manufacture or holding company for recyclable material and shall be in compliance with article III section 34-61 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, business trust, partnership, association, organization or municipal entity, incorporated or unincorporated, other than the city. 
Premises means all public and private establishments, including individual residences, all multifamily dwellings, residential care facilities, hospitals, schools, businesses, other buildings and all vacant lots. 
Provider means entity providing solid waste collection and disposal services. 
Recyclable material means any material, substance or byproduct that has been recovered or diverted from the non-hazardous waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling or reclamation, and is any material or product designated in writing by the city's director of public works or his or her designee as being suitable for reuse, recycling or reclamation. 
Recycle means to collect, buy, sell, and store and/or produce any material, substance or product from waste material or byproducts and to keep such from being included in the waste stream intended for disposal. 
Refuse means all solid waste except hazardous wastes. 
Residential garbage means all normal waste products of single-family and duplex residential development, other than sewage and body waste, manure, dead animals over ten pounds in weight, special and hazardous waste, large tree trimmings, demolition or remodeling debris, or any other waste material that cannot be broken down to fit into residential garbage receptacles herein specified. 
Residential garbage receptacle means a plastic or metal receptacle, designed for automated or semi-automated solid waste collection systems, and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing littering and the entrance into the container by small animals. The weight of the receptacle and its contents shall not exceed 75 pounds and shall be designed for ease of movement and use. One receptacle shall be provided in designated areas unless customer wants to pay for each additional container, with ownership of the receptacle retained by the contractor. 
Residential recycling receptacle means a plastic receptacle provided by the city or its contractor, designed for automated or semi-automated recyclable material collection systems, and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing littering and the entrance into the container by small animals. The weight of the receptacle and its contents shall not exceed 75 pounds and shall be designed for ease of movement and use. A receptacle shall be provided in designated areas, with ownership of the receptacle retained by the contractor. 
Residents means persons residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
Rubbish means any nonputrescible solid waste, including aluminum cans, paper, boxes, glass, yard trimmings, leaves, feathers and any other matter commonly understood to be rubbish. 
Solid waste means garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community and institutional activities. The term does not include: 
(1)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued under V.T.C.A. Water Code, Ch. 26, as amended; 
(2)  Soil, dirt, rock, sand or other natural or manmade inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or 
(3)  Waste materials that result from activities associated with the exploration, development or production of oil or gas or geothermal resources and other substance or material regulated by the Railroad Commission of Texas under V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code, § 91.101, as amended, unless the waste, substance or material results from activities associated with gasoline plants, natural gas liquids processing plants, pressure maintenance plants or re-pressurizing plants and is hazardous waste as defined by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.). 
(4)  Recyclable material; however, recyclable material may become solid waste at such time, if any, as it is abandoned or disposed of as other solid waste, rather than recycled, whereupon it will be solid waste with respect only to the party actually abandoning or disposing of the material. 
Special waste means solid waste or a combination of wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. If improperly handled, transported, stored, processed or disposed of or otherwise managed, it may pose a present or potential danger to human health or the environment. Special waste includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small-quantity generators that may be exempt from full controls under 30 V.T.C.A. Texas Administrative Code §§ 335.401—335.419, as amended, relating to household materials which could be classified as hazardous waste; 
(2)  Class I industrial nonhazardous waste not routinely collected with municipal solid waste; 
(3)  Special waste from health-care-related facilities (refers to certain items of medical waste); 
(4)  Municipal wastewater treatment plant sludge's, other types of domestic sewage treatment plant sludge's, and water-supply treatment plant sludge's; 
(5)  Septic tank pumpings; 
(6)  Grease and grit trap wastes; 
(7)  Wastes from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants, air pollution control facilities, and tanks, drums, or containers used for shipping or storing any material that has been listed as a hazardous constituent in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 261, Appendix VIII, as amended, but has not been listed as a commercial chemical product in 40 C.F.R. § 261.33(e) or (f), as amended; 
(8)  Slaughterhouse wastes; 
(9)  Dead animals; 
(10)  Drugs, contaminated foods, or contaminated beverages, other than those contained in normal household waste; 
(11)  Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, or rodenticide) containers; 
(12)  Discarded materials containing asbestos; 
(13)  Incinerator ash; 
(14)  Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils, or chemicals; 
(15)  Used oil; 
(16)  Light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) compounds; 
(17)  Waste from oil, gas, and geothermal activities subject to regulation by the state railroad commission when those wastes are to be processed, treated, or disposed of at a solid waste management facility permitted under this chapter; 
(18)  Waste generated outside the boundaries of the state that contains: 
a.  Any industrial waste; 
b.  Any waste associated with oil, gas and geothermal exploration, production or development activities; or 
c.  Any item listed as a special waste in this definition; 
(19)  Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage, refuse or rubbish; 
(20)  Lead acid storage batteries; and 
(21)  Used-oil filters from internal combustion engines. 
Unusual accumulations means: 
(1)  For residences, each regular collection that cannot fit into a residential garbage receptacle; 
(2)  For commercial establishments, accumulations that would not occur in the ordinary course of business; 
(3)  Bulky waste; 
(4)  Materials judged by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative to be hazardous, such as oil, acid or caustic materials; and 
(5)  Existing conditions favorable to the harboring and/or breeding of any agent, such as an insect, reptile, rodent or other agents capable of transferring a pathogen from one organism to another. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-51. - Sanitation service deposits and fees. 
Deposits and fees as specified in Appendix A [included as sections 34-70 and 34-71] of the Code of Ordinances which may be amended from time to time shall be required of all customers requesting the collection and disposal of refuse by the city's designated contractor as specified in section 34-58. All utility customers shall receive solid waste and recyclable material collection service. The charges for collection service shall be included on the monthly utility bill of the customer. For partial months, such charges shall be prorated for each and every day of the month during which such service is available and provided to the residential customers. An increase in monthly fees may be made upon approval of the city council. A penalty for overdue payment of the monthly utility bill may be charged. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-52. - Garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush and refuse nuisances. 
The storing or keeping of garbage, rubbish, brush, refuse and/or recyclable material that is unsightly or a health, fire or safety hazard or a harbor for reptiles, rodents, insects, or other animals is prohibited and shall constitute a public nuisance. Removal of all such materials is the owner's responsibility and shall be done at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-53. - Dumping. 
Dumping of any garbage, solid waste, recyclable material, rubbish, brush and/or other refuse in any place and in any manner other than that designated in this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-54. - Collection containers and receptacles for garbage, trash, brush and recyclable material. 
(a)  Every owner, tenant, occupant or lessee using or occupying any building, house, or structure within the corporate city limits of the City of Schertz for residential, church, school, commercial, business or other purpose shall use a collection container that is only in designated areas or receptacle authorized by this article provided by the city, its designated contractor as specified in section 34-60, or a hauler. All garbage and trash mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed in the collection container or receptacle. 
(b)  Every owner, tenant, occupant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate city limits of the City of Schertz for residential, church, school, commercial, business or other purpose shall notify the city of any loss, theft or damage to the collection container or receptacle and shall be responsible for replacement costs unless the damage is a result of collection by contractor. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every residential customer to keep the residential garbage and recycling receptacle in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(d)  Except when placed for collection, residential garbage and recycling receptacles shall be stored behind the front building line if collection occurs from a public street, or stored adjacent to the main structure if collection occurs from an alley. Commercial collection containers or receptacles shall be kept in a screened area, unless such requirement is waived by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative. 
(e)  Brush that cannot fit into the residential garbage receptacle shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in length with no limbs exceeding six inches in diameter. Bundles of brush shall be comparable in size and weight with bags of garbage, not to exceed 50 pounds each. 
(f)  The city manager or his designated representative shall cause regular inspections to be made to ensure compliance with the terms of this section, and if any unsanitary collection container or receptacle is found, a notice shall be placed upon such collection container or receptacle informing the owner to clean the same within five days. Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-55. - Residential collection regulations. 
(a)  There shall be collection twice weekly and once in designated areas for regular garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, and brush and landscape waste other than bulky waste. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residence, commercial establishment or other building to place the garbage or recyclable material in proper receptacles at the curb line or at the alley most accessible to the collection crew vehicle as determined by the contractor and the director of public works or his duly appointed representative. 
(c)  Garbage and recyclable material shall not be placed at the point of collection before 6:00 p.m. prior to the designated day of collection and any garbage receptacles or recycling receptacles shall be removed within 24 hours from the point of collection and stored in accordance with section 34-44(d). 
(d)  Unusual accumulations, brush or bulky wastes shall not be placed for regular garbage pickup. Removal of unusual accumulations, brush or bulky wastes may be requested for a special collection, and there shall be an additional fee for such service as determined from time to time by city council per pick-up truckload for more than 12 pick ups per calendar year. The city shall be the authority to determine what constitutes unusual accumulations if there is a difference of opinion between a customer and the contractor. 
(e)  Materials intended for recycling shall not be placed for collection with waste materials. Recycling collection activities are to be separate from garbage collection activities. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any premises to report the failure to collect properly prepared property garbage and recyclable material for a consecutive period of two weeks to the city where the holder of a franchise granted by the city is responsible for such collection; and if the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee elects to regularly remove garbage and recyclable material from his premises, it shall be unlawful for such owner, occupant, tenant or lessee to remove such accumulation less often than required under this section. 
(g)  All putrescible waste must be placed in the residential garbage receptacles. 
(h)  From the time of placement of solid waste and of recyclable material at the point of collection by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residence for collection in accordance herewith, such solid waste and recyclable material shall be delivered by the designated contractor, as specified in section 34-60, to the appropriate facility for disposition designated by the city pursuant to contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-56. - Residential collection fees. 
(a)  For the collection and removal of solid waste and brush in a residential garbage receptacle and collection of recyclables in a residential recycling receptacle once a week or twice in designated areas, a monthly charge shall be as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  For each additional residential garbage receptacle, or residential recycling receptacle, the monthly charge shall be as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  For the collection of unusual accumulations, there shall be a fee as determined from time to time by the city council. 
(d)  For other solid waste collection or disposal services not listed, the city and contractor shall work together to determine a reasonable fee, pending council approval of the fee within 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-57. - Commercial collection regulations. 
(a)  Collection containers commonly used by commercial garbage and recycling collectors, including residential garbage and recycling receptacles (for commercial use), shall be placed at a location on the premises mutually agreeable to the customer, the city, its designated contractor as specified in section 34-60, and hauler, as applicable. The director of public works or his duly appointed representative may authorize the use by a commercial customer of residential garbage or recycling receptacles on a case by case basis after the commercial customer makes request for use of such residential receptacles. The collection and removal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish and brush from buildings and premises used for commercial and institutional purposes shall not be made less than one time per week and as often as necessary in order to maintain such premises free of accumulations of garbage, trash and brush. Materials for recycling shall not be placed for collection with waste materials. Recycling collection activities shall be separate from garbage collection activities. A commercial business shall be responsible for the collection and lawful disposal of hazardous waste generated by that commercial business. 
(b)  From the time of placement of solid waste and of recyclable material at the point of collection by the commercial business for collection in accordance herewith, such solid waste and recyclable material shall be delivered by the designated contractor, as specified in section 34-60, to the appropriate facility for disposition designated by the city pursuant to contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-58. - Commercial collection fees. 
The service charge for commercial collections shall be based on the frequency of collection necessary and the amount regularly collected. 
(1)  Minimum service level. The minimum service level is one 96 Gallon garbage collection container and one recyclable material collection container picked up one time a week for a fee as determined from time to time by the city council unless area has been grandfathered for twice a week pickup. Additional collection containers can be requested for an additional fee as determined from time to time by the city council. The property owner is responsible for replacement of the collection containers in the case of theft, loss, or damage. There shall be a fee as determined from time to time by the city council charged for collections of unusual accumulations. 
(2)  Other solid waste collection and disposal services. For other solid waste collection or disposal services not listed, the city and contractor shall work together to determine a reasonable fee, pending city council approval of the fee within 60 days. 
(3)  Service charges for private haulers of recyclable materials shall be by customer agreement. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-59. - Collection and disposal of commercial garbage and recyclable material in central business district. 
(a)  The disposal of commercial garbage, recyclable material, rubbish and brush by placing the same in public trash receptacles located on public streets in the city is prohibited. The collection and removal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, and brush from buildings and premises used for commercial or institutional purposes shall be made not less than one times per week and as often as necessary in order to maintain such premises free of accumulations of garbage, trash and brush. 
(b)  Fee charges for private haulers of recyclable materials shall be by customer agreement. 
(c)  No annual private haul vehicle will apply using the authorized solid waste & recycle franchise hauler. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-60. - Collection contractor. 
(a)  The city shall designate a contractor to regularly collect and remove all garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush and solid waste, excluding hazardous waste, from all premises within the corporate city limits. This agent shall operate by contract with the city. The city manager shall take action to see that the terms of the contract are fulfilled. In the event of any conflict between the terms of the contract and the city's ordinances on the collection of solid waste, the ordinances shall control. The designated collection contractor shall not be responsible for the collection of hazardous waste except during special events. 
(b)  In the event that the designated collection contractor lacks adequate and/or appropriate resources to collect and remove solid waste from public improvement projects, the director of public works may authorize solid waste removal by another contractor. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-61. - Disposal of solid waste. 
(a)  Individual residents may remove garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush or unusual accumulations from their own residences, provided that the garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, brush or unusual accumulations are secured. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting solid waste within the city except as may be specifically authorized by contract with the city and the payment of a license fee to so operate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting solid waste within the city except as may be specifically authorized in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-62. - Permit for private haulers of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, company, or corporation to engage in the business of collection of commercial recyclable materials without obtaining a permit from the director of public works or his duly appointed representative. A separate permit shall be required for each generator from which the hauler intends to collect recyclable materials. 
(b)  Letter of certification. A hauler shall only receive a permit for recyclable material if the hauler includes a letter of certification with the permit application. The letter of certification shall be from the recyclable material generator and shall certify to the city the name and address of the generator, the name and address of the desired hauler, the constituents to be recycled, a brief contingency plan ensuring that waste materials will be separated from the recyclables prior to hauling, arrangements for solid waste management, and the final destination of the recyclable materials. This information shall be amended as necessary. 
(c)  Application for commercial recycle compactor hauler permit per haul vehicle. An applicant for a permit as a private hauler of recyclable materials must provide the following: 
(1)  The business name; 
(2)  The driver's name and driver's license numbers; 
(3)  Business address; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Business phone number; 
(6)  Home phone number; 
(7)  List of vehicles used for waste removal, including: 
a.  Make; 
b.  Model; and 
c.  License number; 
(8)  Proof of current bond of $10,000.00 on a form provided or approved by the city; 
(9)  The name of the final destination for recyclable materials and proof that such destination has demonstrated its ability to be an approved processor capable of diverting recyclable materials in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations; 
(10)  Proof of liability insurance; and 
(11)  A permit fee and a fee for each additional permit requested as specified in Appendix A [included as sections 34-70 and 34-71] of the Code of Ordinances, which may be amended from time to time. This fee shall not be prorated for a partial year. 
All information required in this subsection (c) shall be amended and updated, within 30 days of a change or when any of the current information in the possession of the city becomes outdated. 
(d)  Renewal of permit. ($2,500.00 Annually) Each permit shall be renewed annually and the information listed in subsection (c) of this section shall again be provided, along with a copy of the bond renewal, liability insurance, name of recyclable materials processor and a renewal fee as specified in Appendix A [included as sections 34-70 and 34-71] of the Code of Ordinances, which may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  Term of permit. The term of the permit shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. An expired permit is not valid for continued operation under this chapter. 
(f)  Vehicle permit required. Any vehicle used by a hauler for the purpose of removing and transporting recyclable materials must have, prominently displayed, a permit supplied by the city. 
(g)  Collection and diversion of recyclable materials. Haulers shall only divert recyclable materials in accordance with the requirements of this article and state law. Haulers shall submit evidence of such compliance with this article for each month demonstrating, at a minimum: (1) the amount of recyclable materials collected; (2) dates of collection; and (3) receipts for disposal. The city has the right to inspect and audit the records of any hauler in order to ensure compliance with this section. Diversion of construction and demolition debris as recyclable material shall only be accomplished after separation of recyclable material from solid waste at the construction or project site. Commingling construction and demolition solid waste with construction and demolition recyclable material is prohibited. The failure of a hauler to separate at the source any recyclable material from solid waste, which results in the hauler transporting solid waste as an unauthorized solid waste contractor, may result in the revocation of the hauler's permit. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. The permit of a hauler may be revoked by the director of public works for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failing to keep a current bond filed in the public works department; 
(2)  Being observed by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative placing recyclable materials or any other solid waste in any location other than as authorized by state law; 
(3)  Being observed by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative improperly securing a load while in transit to or from any location that requires transport on city streets; 
(4)  Failure to display a permit on any truck used for recyclable materials; 
(5)  Being observed by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative commingling solid waste with recyclable material and thereby transporting solid waste as an unauthorized solid waste contractor; or 
(6)  When a recyclable material generator terminates the letter of certification referenced in section 34-62(b). 
If the director of public works revokes the permit of a hauler, the hauler must surrender all permits that have been issued to him by the public works division. Operating under a revoked or expired permit is a violation of this section. 
(i)  Restoration of revoked permit. A hauler may appeal the revocation of his permit to the city manager or his duly appointed representative in writing within five days of the date of revocation; the city manager or his duly appointed representative shall have the authority to reverse or uphold the revocation or establish terms by which the permit may be restored. The decision of the city manager or his duly appointed representative shall be final. If a permit has been revoked due to illegal dumping by a hauler, the permit may only be restored with the payment of a restoration fee. If a permit revocation is upheld by the city manager or his duly appointed representative, the private hauler of recyclable materials may only obtain a new permit, as follows: 
(1)  After the first revocation: the applicant for a permit must make payment of a restoration fee as determined from time-to-time by the city council; and 
(2)  After the second or subsequent upheld revocation, a hauler may not obtain a new permit under this article for 12 calendar months from the date of revocation. 
(j)  Transferability. The permit is not transferable. A permit shall be required for each hauler desiring to provide service on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-63. - Transport of refuse. 
(a)  Refuse collected by persons other than the agent designated by the city shall be transported in vehicles which are covered by a metal top, screening or canvas or in such other manner so as to prevent the escape of any particle of refuse. Refuse escaping from such a truck shall be deemed as litter, and the driver shall be responsible for littering. 
(b)  Haulers from any locale other than the city using the streets of the city shall be required to use similarly suitable vehicles and to be responsible for the containment of the contents, as provided in subsection (a), above. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-64. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Pilfering, scattering contents or meddling with garbage, recyclables, rubbish, brush or collection containers or receptacles by any person other than the owner, occupant or authorized agent is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match, charcoal, ember or other burning material in any collection container or receptacle used for the disposal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish, or brush. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any materials not included in the definitions of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish and brush in any collection container or receptacle used for the disposal of garbage, recyclable material, rubbish or brush. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, other than the commercial customer or its employees or agents, to deposit any materials in a commercial collection container or receptacle. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to deposit solid waste generated from within the corporate city limits in any place other than a landfill designated in this chapter unless authorized by the executive director of public works or his duly appointed representative. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to store or place in a screening enclosure that is provided for garbage and/or recycling containers and/or receptacles any debris, solid waste or any other item for storage that is not a solid waste and/or a recycling container and/or receptacle. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to bring in waste for disposal from outside of City of Schertz City limits. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-65. - Diversion of recyclable materials. 
(a)  Individual residents may remove recyclable material from their own residences; provided that the recyclable materials are secured as provided in section 34-63(a). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including, without limitation, a resident or commercial business customer, to cause a diversion of recyclable materials at any location in violation of state law. 
(c)  No person, including, without limitation, a resident or commercial business customer, may contract for the diversion of recyclable materials with a person who is not a permitted hauler in compliance with section 34-60. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-66. - Wastes from tree-trimming operations. 
It shall be the duty of any person employing a contractor, tree-trimmer, or other person to trim or prune trees or shrubs to have said trimmings removed from the premises at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-67. - Applicability of state law. 
The provisions of this article are adopted under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361. 
(1)  The regulations promulgated in this article cover all aspects of municipal solid waste management under the authority of the state and are based primarily on the stated purpose of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code ch. 361, as amended, hereafter referred to as the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act. The owner or operator of a municipal solid waste landfill (MSWLF) facility shall comply with any other applicable federal rules, laws, regulations or other requirements. 
(2)  All permits, including any special provisions therein, issued by the applicable State Department shall remain in force after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. To the extent that a standard has been changed by this article, the permittee may continue to operate under standards contained in previously issued permits, except for those requirements mandated by EPA 40 C.F.R. §§ 257 and 258, as amended, which implement certain requirements of subtitle D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). For those Federally mandated requirements, the permittee is under an obligation to apply for a change to his permit in accordance with federal and state law, as applicable, to incorporate the required standard. Timely submission of a request for a permit change qualifies the owners or operators of existing MSWLF units for interim status. MSWLF facility owners or operators with interim status are treated as having been issued a permit modification or amendment until the executive director makes a final determination on the permit modification request or the commission makes a final determination on the permit amendment request. Facility owners or operators with interim status must comply with the requirements of this article upon the effective date of this article. 
(3)  A permit or license shall be required for each municipal solid waste (MSW) unit, as required by applicable law, and the city manager, at his discretion, may include one or more different types of units in a single permit if the units are located at the same facility. 
(4)  The following are some of the rules with which the city's public works director should have a working knowledge: 
a.  30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 281. This chapter describes how a permit application, amendment or modification is processed and approved; 
b.  30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 305. The chapter details the preparation and form of permits, applications, amendments and modifications; 
c.  30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 330. This chapter outlines municipal solid waste management rules. This is the principle rule municipal solid waste managers utilize; and 
d.  30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 335. This chapter outlines rules covering management of hazardous waste, both industrial and municipal. It also outlines how industrial solid waste is handled and when it can be deposited in municipal solid waste landfills. 
(5)  Regional and local plans. Every region in the state is completing a regional plan. The regions are defined by the existing regional councils of government established by the state legislature. These regional plans outline important data in analyzing the solid waste needs or to help with problem solving. The regional or local plan should be consulted for guidance or consistency in solving a problem or deciding on a course of action. In either case, the solid waste manager should be consistent with the plan, or seek amendment to the plan, before proceeding to implement a solution. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-68. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the director of public works or his duly appointed representative, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the director of public works or his duly appointed representative in the exercise of his duties under this article. Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, the director of public works or his duly appointed representative are hereby granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-69. - Offense. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article, who continues to violate or fails to comply with same, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, such offenses listed herein being violations of the health and safety ordinance of the city. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement by the city of any nuisance created by the violation of this article and the charging of the cost of abatement of said nuisance against the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purpose. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code ch.54, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances. 
(d)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 2, 7-28-2015)  
Sec. 34-70. - Sanitation service deposits and fees. 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 3, 7-28-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 3, adopted July 28, 2015 added § 34-70, as a heading only.  
Sec. 34-71. - Residential collection regulations. 
Garbage Collection Fees 	2014-15 
1. Residential: 	
Class I: Residential, Single Family, per month 	$ 11.70 
2 Cart pick up 	$ 17.53 
3 Cart Pick up 	$ 23.38 
4 Cart Pick up 	$ 29.22 
Recycling Fee, per month/container 	$ 1.93 
Special Pickup: 	
Move Ins, Special Tree Trimmings, oversize materials, & similar circumstances; minimum 	$16.30 
Class 1A: 	
Residential, Front Curb, per month 	$17.08 
Class 1B: 	$11.70 
Once a week residential pick-up in selected areas. (Contractor will provide a 96 gallon cart at no charge); per month 	
Class II: Mobile Home Parks 	$9.33 
Mobile Home Parks (2 or more mobile homes) (based on number in park on the 15th day of the month), per unit/monthly 	
Class III: Apartments 	$9.33 
per unit/monthly 	
Class IV: Motels 	$4.12 
per unit/monthly 	

2. Commercial 	
Class V: 	$14.81 
Offices, barber shops and Professional services, per month 	
Class VI: 	$25.54 
Light retail, wholesale, commercial or industrial, 2000 to 4000 square feet and excluding large grocery stores, etc., per month 	
Class VII: 	$37.09 
Medium retail, wholesale commercial or industrial (2000 to 4000 square feet and exclude large grocery store, etc.), per month 2 Cart, 1 pickup per week 	$38.29 
Class VIII: 	
Heavy Volume retail wholesale, commercial, or industrial (placement determined by a time and cost study of refuse generation and collection. The categories in this class usually require hand loading from rooms or pens and would not apply when commercial containers are used.) 	
A. Two weekly pickups of 1.5 cubic yard containers, excluding large grocery, furniture or department stores, per month 	$65.91 
B. Two weekly pickups of 3 cu. Yard containers, excluding large grocery, furniture or department stores, etc., per month 	$131.80 
C. Three weekly pickups of 3 cu. Yard containers, excluding large grocery, furniture or department stores, etc., per month 	$205.95 
D. Four weekly pickups of 4 cu. Yard containers, including large grocery, furniture or department stores, etc., per month 	$247.11 
E. Five weekly pickups of 4 cu. Yard containers, including large grocery, furniture or department stores, etc., per month 	$329.49 
F. Six weekly pickups of 4 cu. Yard containers, including large grocery, furniture or department stores, etc., per month 	$411.92 
G. Customer requiring more than four (4) cu. Yds each pickup would be charged per cu. Yds. Collected., per yard 	$4.56 

3. Commercial Containers. 	
CONTRACTOR will provide commercial containers to those customers who desire to use them in lieu of garbage cans. The use of such CONTRACTOR provided containers is required by this contract. Rates for containers and pickup will be based on the following table: 	
Container Size: 		Frequency of Pickup 
2013-14/2014-15 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
2 cu. Yard 	$56.06 	$95.46 	$115.30 	$131.81 	$148.29 	$164.75 
3 cu. Yard 	$67.57 	$121.89 	$168.06 	$192.73 	$217.48 	$242.17 
4 cu. Yard 	$83.98 	$145.02 	$197.69 	$238.87 	$280.09 	$321.28 
6 cu. Yard 	$118.66 	$197.69 	$271.86 	$346.02 	$420.08 	$494.24 
8 cu. Yard 	$140.06 	$255.36 	$354.18 	$453.06 	$552.61 	$650.78 
10 cu. Yard 	$161.43 	$296.51 	$420.08 	$527.23 	$634.28 	$741.35 

4. Roll-Off Rates Per Pull Open Top Containers - Dry Material 
20 cu. Yard 	$304.77 
30 cu. Yard 	$362.42 
40 cu. Yard 	$420.08 
Roll-off Rental (no pulls within billing cycle) 	$126.02 
per container per month 	

5. Collection and Disposal of Municipal Wastes 	
Wet Material Rates on Compactor containers or open top containers with wet material must be negotiated with customers at the time they are needed. This type of waste must be hauled to a Type I landfill which generally has a higher disposal rate attached to it. 	
Roll-off Container Delivery Charge per container 	$36.73 
Roll-off Relocation or Trip Charge per container 	$36.73 
2 cu. Yard compactor, per month (2 services per week) 	$217.14 
Extra pick ups (2 yard compactor), each 	$82.33 
4 cu. Yard compactor, per month (2 services per week) 	$447.33 
30 cu yard Compactor, per pull 	$551.91 
40 cu yard Compactor, per pull 	$655.71 
30 cu yard Open-top (Recycle), per pull 	$205.82 
Front-Load container extra pick-up charges 	
2 cu yard 	$28.01 
3 cu yard 	$35.01 
4 cu yard 	$42.02 
6 cu yard 	$49.02 
8 cu yard 	$56.02 
10 cu yard 	$63.01 
OVER WEIGHT CHARGE 	$28.09 
To address non standard requests, the solid waste contractor can negotiate a fee with the customer requesting the service. The City will collect 15% of the negotiated fee per the franchise agreement. 
Annual permit fee, per fiscal year 	$2,500.00 
 
(Ord. No. 15-F-17 , § 3, 7-28-2015)  
Secs. 34-72—34-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Public smoking restricted, Tex. Penal Code, § 48.01. 
 
Sec. 34-89. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
City facility means any building owned or operated by the City of Schertz. 
Dining area means any area in which meals or entrees are served but shall not include areas where the incidental service of hors d'oeuvres, snacks, pretzels, popcorn, or similar items are provided, or where food sales in the area are less than five percent of gross receipts. 
Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for monetary compensation or profit. 
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity that employs one or more persons. 
HVAC system means a single heating, ventilating, and air conditioning system. 
Place of employment means any enclosed indoor area under the control of an employer to which employees have access during the course of employment, and includes but is not limited to stores, offices, professional, financial, and other commercial establishments; restaurants; enclosed shopping malls; public and private institutions of higher education; the common areas of health care facilities, and nursing and convalescent home. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to banks, bars, bingo facilities, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, recreational facilities, city facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. The term "public place" also includes the area within 25 feet of the exterior of any public entrance or public exit from any city facility. If any "recreational facility" is fenced or otherwise enclosed, for purposes of the definition of "public place", such "recreational facility" shall include all areas within 25 feet outside of such fence or enclosure. If any "recreational facility" is not fenced or otherwise enclosed, for purposes of the definition of "public place", such "recreational facility" shall include all areas within 25 feet of each item of athletic, play, or recreational equipment. A private residence is a "public place" if it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Recreational facilities means any city owned or operated swimming pools, athletic facilities, athletic fields, playgrounds, or other city owned or operated areas with athletic, play, or recreational equipment. 
Smoke or smoking means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, or the lighting of, emitting, or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-80, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-90. - Article not to excuse noncompliance with other measures. 
Nothing in this article excuses noncompliance with any state or federal law, provisions of this Code, or any other applicable ordinance of the city, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which prohibits smoking. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-81, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-91. - Smoking in public places generally prohibited, and other offenses. 
A person commits an offense if he/she: 
(1)  Knowingly smokes in a public place and is not in an area designated as an employee smoking area or as a smoking area under this article; or 
(2)  Is the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of a public place or restaurant and knowingly or intentionally permits, or fails to make a reasonable effort to prevent commission, by another, of the offense described within subsection (1) of this section; or 
(3)  Fails to have prominently displayed a no-smoking sign, a designated smoking area sign as required by this article; or 
(4)  Is an employer who operates a place of employment in the city and fails to adopt and implement a smoking policy which is consistent with the requirements of this article within three months of adoption of this article or upon opening for business, or fails to maintain thereafter a written smoking policy which is consistent with the requirements of this article; or 
(5)  Is an employer who operates a place of employment in the city and fails to communicate a smoking policy which is consistent with the requirements of this article to all employees within three weeks of adoption of the policy or fails to post the smoking policy conspicuously in all workplaces under the employer's jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-82, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-92. - Signs required in public places. 
The owner, lessee, or other person in charge of a public place shall place a sign or signs, visible at each entrance to the premises, notifying persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited, or that smoking, other than within designated smoking areas, is prohibited. The owner, lessee, or other person in charge of a public place shall post a sign, or signs, in each area designated as smoking. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-83, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-93. - Certain places exempt. 
(a)  Smoking may be permitted in the following areas and if smoking is so permitted the provisions of section 34-91 shall not apply: 
(1)  Tobacco specialty retail shops; or 
(2)  Private residences (unless used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility); or 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests; or 
(4)  Enclosed meeting or assembly rooms in restaurants, hotels, motels, and other public places if the entire room is used for a private function; or 
(5)  Businesses licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on premises or nonprofit commercial facilities, provided in either case that food sales do not constitute more than 25 percent of such business's or organization's gross receipts; or 
(6)  Any facility other than a restaurant otherwise described as a public place which has installed a separate HVAC system and air filtering equipment for a designated smoking area encompassing not more than 25 percent of the total seating area; or 
(7)  A special separate dining area of any restaurant with an area serving as a dining area in compliance with this Article, if the separate dining area is enclosed on all sides and has a separate HVAC system or if it is enclosed on three sides, has a separate HVAC system, and is removed by 15 feet from any area in which smoking is not allowed and has air filtrating equipment installed by April 1, 2002; the smoking section shall be situated so the ventilation minimizes the effect of smoke in nonsmoking areas and so that air from the smoking area is not drawn across a nonsmoking area; or 
(8)  Outdoor seating areas of restaurants if an area encompassing at least 25 percent of the seating is reserved for nonsmoking. 
(b)  (1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any public place described in this section may declare that entire public place or any portion of the public place as a nonsmoking area. The owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls the public place shall place a sign or signs, visible at each entrance to the premises, notifying persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited, or that smoking, other than within designated smoking areas, is prohibited. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly smokes in any public place or portion thereof declared a nonsmoking area in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-84, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-94. - Places of employment. 
Each employer who operates a place of employment in the city shall, within three months of adoption of this article or upon opening for business, adopt, implement, and maintain a written smoking policy which is consistent with the requirements of this article. If smoking will be permitted, the policy shall contain, at a minimum, the following provisions and requirements: 
(1)  The owner, lessee, or other person in charge of a public place may, but is not required to, designate on or more areas as smoking areas for the use of the employees as part of the smoking policy provided for in this section. A designated employee smoking area may include private enclosed offices. Designated employee smoking areas may be located in areas to which employees, but not the general public, except by invitation only, have access during the course of employment. A common employee work area shall not be designated as an employee smoking area unless every person who works in that area agrees in writing to the designation. In no event shall an employee restroom or an area containing food or drink dispensing facilities be designated as an employee smoking area. 
(2)  If such employee smoking area is designated, each such smoking area shall: 
a.  Be in an area set aside for the use of employees, but not accessible to members of the general public except by specific invitation of the employer or employee; 
b.  Be ventilated to prevent the mixing of air from the designated employee smoking area to other areas or the public area; 
c.  Be a physically enclosed area separated from nonsmoking areas; 
d.  Be designated by appropriate signs which are clearly visible to employees and members of the public entering the area; and 
e.  Contain ashtrays, containers, or other facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials. 
(3)  The smoking policy shall be communicated within three weeks of adoption of all employees and shall be posted conspicuously in all workplaces under the employer's jurisdiction. 
(4)  The owner, lessee, or other person in charge of a public place that designates one or more areas as designated smoking areas for the public shall not require employees to work in a designated smoking area if the employee request to work in a nonsmoking area. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-85, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 07-H-32, I, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-95. - Disposition of filters. 
All filter used in HVAC systems and other air filtration devices under this article shall be disposed of in compliance with requirements established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-86, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-96. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 7½-87, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Sec. 34-97. - Inconsistent provisions. 
All ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, which are in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict, and the provisions of this article shall be and remain controlling as to the matters ordained herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-24, § 3, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 11-M-06, § 1, 4-19-2011 )  
Secs. 34-98, 34-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS 
 
Sec. 34-100. - In General. 
The City of Schertz hereby adopts the provisions of Title 25 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Sections 181 through 208, regarding the regulation of swimming pools and spas. This article shall not apply to swimming pools and spas that are located on a lot zoned single-family residential. All other swimming pools and spas in the City of Schertz shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O7-H-32, II, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-101. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a swimming pool or spa without a valid permit issued by the city. Permits are valid for one year. All permits expire on September 30 of each year and permit fees are due and payable on October 1 of each year. All permits must be renewed within 30 days after October 1 or they will be suspended. Permits are not transferable from one establishment to another or from one person to another. Permits must be posted in a conspicuous place at the location of the swimming pool or spa. 
(b)  All permits may be suspended or revoked by the health official upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article, following which, unless corrections are immediately made, action may be instituted in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a restraining order or permanent injunction preventing such person from operating the swimming pool or spa unless immediate compliance with the provisions of this article is obtained. Revocation of a permit for any cause whatsoever is still affected by the issuance of the statement that the permit may be made at any time and will be approved provided that full compliance of the provisions of this article is accomplished. 
(c)  Whenever a swimming pool or spa is constructed or extensively remodeled, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the city for review before work begins. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the swimming pool or spa is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work area, and the model of equipment and facilities to be used. The city will approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the rules contained in this article and other applicable ordinances of the city. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling, or conversion prior to opening for business; and each new establishment will be inspected by the health official to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O7-H-32, II, 7-3-2007)  
Sec. 34-102. - Inspections. 
As often as deemed necessary by the health official, the health official shall inspect every swimming pool or spa that is located within the city. The person operating the swimming pool or spa shall, upon request of the health official, permit access to and allow the inspection of the entire establishment relating to the swimming pool or spa. 
(Ord. No. O7-H-32, II, 7-3-2007)  
Secs. 34-103—34-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 34-110. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings. 
Person shall mean an individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, association, wholesaler, retailer, or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
Illegal smoking material shall mean any plant or other substance, natural or synthetic, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A—all parts of the plant currently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexy1]-5-(2-methyloctain-2-y1)phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethy1)-6, 6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctain-2-y1)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-penty1-3-(1-naphthoy1) indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-buty1-3(1-naphthoy1) indole (also known as JWH-073; or 
(6)  1-penty1-3-(4-methoxynaphthoy1) indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are potentially marketed under, but not limited to the following chemical names: 
"K-2," "K-2 Summit," "K-2 Sex," "Genie," "Dascents," "Zohai," "Sage," "Spice," "Sence," "Smoke," "Skunk," "KO nock-out 2," "Spice Gold," "Spice Diamond," "Yucatan Fire," "Solar Flare," "Pep Spice," "Fire N' Ice," "Blaze," "Red X Dawn," "Salvia Divinorum" and "Salvnoria A". 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
Illegal smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the manufacture, purchase, sale, offer for sale, delivery, or gift of illegal smoking materials as defined herein within the corporate limits of the City of Schertz, and to prohibit the possession or use of illegal smoking materials and illegal smoking material paraphernalia within the corporate limits of the City of Schertz. Any form of delivery, including without limitation a simple gift, constitutes a violation of this article by all parties involved. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-112. - Manufacture, display, purchase, sell, deliver, offer, barter, or give. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, purchase, sell, offer for sale, barter, publicly display, deliver, or to give any illegal smoking material to any person within the corporate limits of the City of Schertz. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-113. - Possession or use of illegal smoking materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, or to use, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body, illegal smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of Schertz. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-114. - Possession or use of illegal smoking material paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any illegal smoking material paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume or introduce into the human body illegal smoking material. It is a violation of this section if a person is found in possession of illegal smoking material paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done by the city or at its request on the paraphernalia showing traces of illegal smoking material present on the paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-115. - Affirmative defenses to prosecution. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of this article: 
(a)  If the use of the illegal smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  If an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(c)  If the sale or possession of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Sec. 34-116. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $2,000.00. 
(b)  In addition to the fine, the City of Schertz shall be entitled to restitution for expenses incurred by it in connection with the testing of substances related to the fine. The restitution under this subsection (b) and fine under (a) above together shall not exceed $2,000.00. 
(c)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each regulated item involved. 
(d)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each day a violation continues. 
(e)  The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the City of Schertz from filing a civil suit to enjoin the violation of this article. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
( Ord. No. 10-H-37, Art. I, 12-14-2010 )  
Secs. 34-117—34-120. - Reserved.  
Chapter 38 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal fair housing ordinances, Tex. Local Government Code, § 214.903. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 38-19. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, color, religion or national origin. It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each individual to provide for himself and his family a dwelling according to his own choosing and economic capability, and further, that the denial of such rights, through considerations based upon race, color, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1976, § 8-16; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 1, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-20. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Administrator means the individual designated as human relations administrator by the city manager. 
Committee means the citizens' advisory committee until such time as a committee on human relations is deemed necessary by the city. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 38-23, 38-24 and 38-25. 
Dwelling means any building or structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building or structure or portion thereof. 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever similar character. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise grant, for a consideration, the right to occupy premises not owned by occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 2, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-21. - Cooperation with secretary of housing and urban development. 
The committee and the administrator are authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of the Title VIII—Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article and may accept reimbursement from the secretary for services rendered to assist him in carrying out the provisions of the above-cited federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 8-18; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 12, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-22. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 38-23: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by a private, individual owner; provided that: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses, wherever located, at any one time; 
b.  In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
c.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
d.  The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of section 38-23 only if such house is sold or rented without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or person and without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 38-23(c); but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters independent of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates, for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members. 
(Code 1976, § 8-19; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 6, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-23. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 38-22, it shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(4)  To represent to any person, because of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling on representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 3, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-24. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise, whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1976, § 8-21; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 4, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-25. - Discrimination in provision of real estate brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing, service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1976, § 8-22; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 5, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-26. - Complaints for discriminatory practices generally. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The administrator shall prepare and adopt, from time to time, standard complaint forms and furnish them, without charge, to any person aggrieved. The administrator and employees of his office may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints. 
(b)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII—Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, in the course of any investigation as provided in section 38-27 on a complaint filed with or referred to the administrator, he shall receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the person named in such complaint has committed a discriminatory housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, the administrator may prepare and file a supplementary complaint, upon his own motion and in his own name, and such supplementary complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as an original complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(d)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint, upon his own motion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint under this section, the administrator shall furnish a copy of the same to the person named in the complaint. 
(f)  A complaint under subsections (a), (c), (d) and (e) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonable and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him, and with the leave of the administrator, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be signed. 
(Code 1976, § 8-23; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 7, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-27. - Investigation of complaints. 
Upon the filing of a complaint under section 38-26, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. In connection with such investigation, the administrator may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appear and may examine, record and copy documents which are produced. 
(Code 1976, § 8-24; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 8, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-28. - Conciliatory efforts of administrator in case of discriminatory practice. 
During or after the investigation provided for in section 38-27, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt, by informal endeavors, to effect conciliation, including voluntary compliance and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. In the event conciliation is effected, the administrator shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way as to make public identification of the persons named in the complaint, without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Code 1976, § 8-25; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 8, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-29. - Committee action on complaints for discriminatory practices. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, as provided for in this article, but, within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, and if conciliation has not been effected, the administrator shall refer the complaint to the committee, together with the answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his investigation and activities in the matter. 
(b)  The committee shall promptly set a date for a hearing on matters referred to it under this section. This date shall be within 30 days of the date on which the administrator referred the complaint. At least five days prior written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice. The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be public. Proof of the matters alleged within the complaint may be presented by the administrator. The complainant and the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice may appear personally or by representative and with or without legal counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross-examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent related matters. In the event that a person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the committee hearing, either personally or by representative, after notice as provided above, then such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person. 
(c)  If, after such hearing, a majority of the committee shall determine, on the basis of the evidence at the hearing, that the complaint is well founded, the committee shall forthwith, by persuasion, education and entreaty, diligently attempt to secure, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, voluntary discontinuance of any discriminatory housing practice. 
(Code 1976, § 8-26; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 9, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-30. - Prosecutions for discriminatory practices. 
(a)  If the committee shall determine that a discriminatory practice has occurred, and if a hearing before the committee on the complaint alleging such violation has been waived, or if the committee has held a hearing and the efforts of the committee to the city attorney, that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request the city attorney to forthwith prosecute such violation in the municipal court. 
(b)  Upon certification by the administrator pursuant to the direction of the committee, the city attorney shall institute a charge in the municipal court and prosecute the same to final conclusion. 
(c)  The certification of the administrator and the actions taken by the city attorney under this section shall be cumulative of all other remedies and procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-27; Ord. No. 78-M-8, §§ 10, 11, 4-18-1978)  
Sec. 38-31. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for any participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or class of persons from: 
a.  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) above; or 
b.  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any person because he is or has been or in order to discourage such person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceable assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity so as to participate. 
(Code 1976, § 8-28; Ord. No. 78-M-8, § 13, 4-18-1974)  
Chapter 42 - JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, Tex. Transportation Code, § 396.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means a person, firm or corporation who owns or operates a junk or salvage yard. 
Junk means any damaged, worn out or scrapped materials such as, but not limited to, automobiles, building materials, machinery, metals, parts, or appliances. 
Salvage yard or junkyard means a business establishment dealing in both new or used materials, buying and selling damaged, worn out or scrapped materials such as, but not limited to, automobiles, machinery, appliances, metals or papers. 
(Code 1976, § 9-16; Ord. No. 87-H-25, § 1, 10-20-1987)  
Sec. 42-20. - Fencing of junk or salvage yards. 
The following shall apply to all junk or salvage yards already in existence and any future yards that may exist within the city limits: 
(1)  Such junk or salvage yards may be operated within the city limits only if the premises fronting on roadways are entirely enclosed by a fence or wall, and where such premises are visible to the public from side approaches, they shall be further screened by a fence of at least 50 feet or more to effectively reduce such visibility as approved by the city manager or his designated representative. 
(2)  Fences or walls shall be no less than eight feet and not higher than ten feet in height from natural grade, constructed of masonry, metal or wood, or a combination of such materials. Chainlink fences of required height may be screened with venetian blind or other similar material. No barbed wire shall be used unless the barbed wire is eight feet or more above grade, and when so used, shall not project beyond the property line of the premises. 
(3)  Fences or walls shall be constructed of sturdy, substantial construction, of opaque material, to accomplish desired screening from public view. 
(4)  They shall be maintained in a neat, safe, structurally sound condition, in good repair and shall be kept painted. 
(5)  Entrance gates shall be constructed in harmony with the style of fence, and shall swing inward when open and kept closed when premises are not open for business. 
(Code 1976, § 9-17; Ord. No. 87-H-25, § 2, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 89-H-6, § 2, 2-21-1989)  
Sec. 42-21. - Scrap, junk or salvage hidden from view. 
No scrap, junk or salvage of any kind shall be allowed to remain outside or extend over, above, or through such fence. 
(Code 1976, § 9-18; Ord. No. 87-H-25, § 3, 10-20-1987)  
Sec. 42-22. - Compliance required except in hardship cases. 
(a)  Any owners or dealers of junk or salvage yards which are annexed into the city shall have 180 days from the effective date of such annexation to bring their yards into compliance with this article. 
(b)  When it has been determined by the planning and zoning commission that compliance with any section of this article would create an undue hardship, a time extension or a variance may be recommended to city council. 
(Code 1976, § 9-19; Ord. No. 87-H-25, § 4, 10-20-1987)  
Sec. 42-23. - Penalties. 
Any violation, by any person, dealer, firm, corporation, partnership or any agent of any part of this article is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor, and any violation thereof shall be punished by a fine as determined from time to time by ordinance, or otherwise in accordance with the general penalty. Any person in violation of this article, and having paid a fine assessed for such violation, shall not be relieved of compliance with this article. Each day a violation exists under this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 9-20; Ord. No. 87-H-25, § 4, 10-20-1987)  
Chapter 46 - MASSAGE BUSINESS, MASSEURS, AND HEALTH SPAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of massage therapists does not preempt local zoning and limited regulation of massage establishments, Tex. Occupations Code, § 455.005. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Activities prohibited between certain hours. 
No massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-1; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 20, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-2. - Supervision of premises. 
A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person who qualifies as a masseur on the premises at all times while the establishment is open. The permittee shall personally supervise the business. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-2; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 17, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-3. - Age restrictions. 
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee, or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-3; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 18, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-4. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-4; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 19, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-5. - Massaging person of opposite sex. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to massage any person of the opposite sex. It shall be a defense, however, to any person charged with violating this section that the person massaged was referred, in writing signed by a licensed physician, to that particular masseur, masseurs, or massage establishment for massage for medical purposes. This section does not apply to massage therapists holding valid licenses from the state department of state health services. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-5; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 12, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age, other than a masseur, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
Massage means any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise, or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands, feet or any instrument. 
Masseur means any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined. The use of the masculine gender in this section shall include in all cases the feminine gender as well. 
Patron means any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-6; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 1, 7-15-1980)  
Secs. 46-7—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION, PERMITS, SANITATION AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS, PENALTIES AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Permits required. 
(a)  A business permit is required. No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless he has a valid massage business permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person. This subsection does not apply to massage therapists holding valid licenses from the state department of state health services. 
(b)  A masseur's permit is required. No person shall practice massage as a masseur, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting masseur's permit issued to him by the city pursuant to provisions of this article. This subsection does not apply to massage therapists holding valid licenses from the state department of state health services. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-11; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 2, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-32. - Massage business permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a massage business permit, other than massage therapists currently licensed by the state department of state health services, shall file a written application with the police chief on a form to be furnished by the police chief. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise. 
(2)  The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted. 
(3)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be contacted. 
(4)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs and employees in the business and the name and residence addresses of the manager or other person principally in charge of operation of the business. 
(5)  The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers. 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age. 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex. 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two by two inches in size. 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
g.  All criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the offense for which arrested and the disposition thereof. 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives. 
(6)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the police chief to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application. 
(7)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(8)  The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will serve as character references. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. 
(9)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(b)  The police chief shall issue a massage business permit within 30 days of receipt of the application unless he finds that: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, zoning, and health regulations. 
(3)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any line, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction herewith. 
(5)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-12; Ord. No. 80-L-17, §§ 4, 6, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-33. - Masseur's permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a masseur's permit shall file a written application with the police chief on a form to be furnished by the police chief. The applicant shall tender with the application the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
(1)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be practiced. 
(2)  The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
a.  Name, complete residence address and residence telephone numbers. 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age. 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex. 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience ten years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation. 
g.  All criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violation, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested, and the offense for which arrested and the disposition thereof. 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives. 
i.  A current valid health card issued by the San Antonio Metropolitan Health District. 
(3)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the police chief in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the application. 
(4)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. 
(5)  A certified photocopy and applicant's grade record from an institution of higher learning accredited by the American Physical Therapy Association to offer degree programs in physical therapy or assistant physical therapy certifying the completion of a course of three semester hours of applied anatomy and physiology. 
(6)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(b)  The police chief shall issue a masseur's permit within 15 days of receipt of the application unless he finds that: 
(1)  The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and, in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(4)  The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar permit or license denied, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of application. 
(5)  The applicant is not over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-13; Ord. No. 80-L-17, §§ 4, 7, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-34. - Approval by police chief. 
(a)  Upon receiving the application for a massage business or masseur's permit, the police chief shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal and criminal history. The police chief may, at his discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant, and such further information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation. 
(b)  In the case of applications for massage business permits, the police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the massage business is to be carried on, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth in this article and with the regulations of public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Before any permit shall be issued under this article, the police chief shall first sign his approval of the application. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-14; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 5, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-35. - Recordkeeping. 
Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a massage shall at all times keep an accurate appointment book(s) in which the name, age and current address of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and place of service, and the service provided. Every patron shall furnish proof of identity by showing a valid driver's license, voter registration certificate or similar identification, upon the request of one who operates a massage business or practices or provides a massage when such request is for the purpose of maintaining the accuracy of that person's appointment book. Such appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection by the police chief or his authorized representatives. The appointment book shall be kept throughout the permit year and shall be turned in to the chief of police or his authorized representative upon application for renewal of a permit under the provisions of this article. Such appointment book shall be returned to the massage business operator upon the issuance or denial of a new permit. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-15; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 14, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-36. - Display of permits. 
The massage business permittee shall display his permit and that of each and every masseur employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-16; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 8, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-37. - Fees; massage business, masseurs, separate locations. 
(a)  The permit fee for a massage business shall be $100.00 per year. The permit fee for masseurs shall be $10.00 per year. Both such permits shall expire one year from the date of issue. 
(b)  Should any massage business have more than one location where the business of massage is pursued then a permit, stating both the address of the principal place of business and of the other location(s), shall be issued by the chief of police upon the tender of a permit fee of $75.00. Permits issued for other locations shall terminate on the same date as that of the principal place of business, regardless of the date of issuance. 
(c)  No portion of any fee collected under this article shall be returned after a permit has been issued. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-17; Ord. No. 80-L-17, §§ 9—11, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-38. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  Any massage business or masseur's permit issued under this article shall be subject to suspension for a period not to exceed 30 days for an initial violation of any of the following sections, namely: sections 46-1, 46-35, 46-40, 46-41. Upon a second conviction under the provisions of the above sections or for a violation of any other provision of this article, or upon any grounds that would warrant the denial of issuance of such permit in the first place, any massage business or masseur's permit shall be subject to suspension of not less than 30 days or revocation of the police chief. Notice of such suspension or revocation shall be given to the massage business or masseur's permit holder in writing, with the reason(s) for such suspension or revocation specified in such notice, served either by personal service of such notice upon the permit holder, or in the case of a massage business, by posting such notice upon the establishment. The suspension or revocation shall become effective the day following personal service or posting of the notice of suspension or revocation. 
(b)  The permittee shall have ten days from the date of such suspension in which to file notice with the city clerk of his appeal to the city council from the order of the police chief. The city clerk shall provide for a council hearing on such appeal at the earliest convenient regular council meeting and shall notify the appellant and the police chief of the date of such hearing. After holding hearing on such suspension or revocation, the council shall by majority vote either sustain the actions of the police chief or issue an order to the police chief to reinstate the permit. 
(c)  In the event of the filing of an appeal from a suspension or revocation issued under the provisions of this article, then, until such appeal has been determined by the city council, such suspension order shall be stayed. 
(d)  If the city council sustains a suspension, then the suspension shall be immediately reinstated and its term shall run from the date of such city council action. Appellant shall, however, be given credit for the number of days, if any, that the establishment was closed because of the suspension, but prior to appeal. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-18; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 13, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-39. - Transfer of permits prohibited. 
No massage business and masseur permits are transferable, separate or divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on the permittee named herein. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-19; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 15, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-40. - Sanitation and health requirements. 
(a)  All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically inspected by the police chief or his authorized representative for safety of structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt, or refuse. Well marked toilet and handwashing facilities for permittees, employees, and patrons shall be provided. All walls, ceilings, windows and doors shall be free of dust, dirt, refuse or mold. In high humidity areas, including toilet rooms, shower rooms, steam rooms, locker rooms and other such rooms, the walls, ceiling and floors shall be constructed or covered with a material that is smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily cleaned. 
(b)  Towels, cloths, and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron. Soiled linens and towels shall be stored in a clearly marked covered receptacle and shall not be reused prior to laundering. Any individual performing any duties at a massage business that may bring them into contact with patrons of the business or with the towels, cloths, sheets, or paper, if such is substituted for cloth, shall have a current valid health card issued by the San Antonio Metropolitan Health District on his person at all times during business hours. No animals shall be permitted within a massage business at anytime. 
(c)  All equipment used for the treatment of patrons shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and said equipment shall be kept in a good and safe state of repair at all times. 
(d)  Male masseurs shall wear all white slacks and shirts; and female masseurs shall wear an all white dress or all white slacks and blouse while engaged in the treatment of a patron. An all white surgical gown or smock may be substituted. Said clothing shall at least cover the masseur's pubic area, perineum, buttocks, natal cleft and entire chest to four inches below the collarbone. The masseur's clothing shall be kept clean at all times, and soiled clothing shall not be worn during the treatment of a patron. No masseur shall message a patron whose genitals are exposed during the treatment; and no patron of a massage business shall knowingly expose his genitals during a massage to a masseur. 
(e)  No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings within a massage establishment shall have an unobstructed opening six inches by six inches in size capable of clear two-way viewing into and out of all cubicles, rooms, or booths. Said opening shall be not less than 4½ feet from the floor of the establishment nor more than 5½ feet from the floor. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall have no such opening in the covering door or curtain, but shall be clearly marked as to purpose on the exterior door or curtain of said cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by the police or health department. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-20; Ord. No. 80-L-17, § 16, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-41. - Entrances, exits, access. 
(a)  No massage business shall have an entrance or exit way providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence, or living quarters. 
(b)  All massage establishments operating under the authority of this article are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the doors to the exits and entrances of such establishments locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided, however, such doors may be closed. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-21; Ord. No. 80-L-17, §§ 21, 22, 7-15-1980)  
Sec. 46-42. - Penalty and exceptions. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or persons holding unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishment, nor shall this article apply to barbers, cosmetologists, physical therapists, assistant physical therapists or athletic trainers, lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state. 
(Code 1976, § 9¼-22; Ord. No. 80-L-17, §§ 23, 24, 7-15-1980)  
Chapter 50 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Inspection and repair of utility fixtures in public places. 
The fire marshal, building inspector, electrical inspector, police officers and such other persons as may be designated by the city shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to examine and inspect, from time to time, all telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, gas pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures in the public places within the city, for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1)  
Sec. 50-2. - Posting bills on property of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or otherwise exhibit any advertisement, poster, bill or other notice or sign, on any building, fence, bulletin board or other property not belonging to or controlled by him, without the permission of the person owning or controlling the same. 
(Code 1976, § 10-3; Ord. No. 127, § 1, 8-5-1965)  
Sec. 50-3. - Placing advertising matter on utility poles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any sign, placard, notice, bulletin board or advertising device of any nature or kind whatsoever upon or against any pole erected, used or maintained in any street in the city for the support of any telegraph or telephone wire, or electric lamp, light or wire. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and any other police officer to remove any advertising matter attached to or against any pole in violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4; Ord. No. 127, § 2, 8-5-1965)  
Sec. 50-4. - Theaters required to display rating of films; penalty. 
(a)  All theaters within the city limits of the city, showing motion pictures shall be required to display on the marquee of such theaters (or to otherwise prominently display on the premises at a location that can be readily observed prior to entry) the rating of films being shown in such theaters as such ratings have been determined by the Motion Picture Association of America, which ratings come within the following categories: 
(1)  "G"-general audience; 
(2)  "PG"- parental guidance suggested; 
(3)  "R"- restricted (only those 17 or older unless accompanied by parent or guardian); 
(4)  "PG-13" — some material may be inappropriate for children under age 13; 
(5)  "NC-17" — no one under age 17 admitted. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5; Ord. No. 77-M-6, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-1977)  
Sec. 50-5. - Drive-in theaters exhibiting adult films required to provide wall or fence to prevent persons outside from viewing screen; penalty. 
(a)  All drive-in movie theaters within the corporate limits of the city, that exhibit movies that are rated NC-17 by the Motion Picture Association of America shall cause to be erected a wall or fence around said theater of sufficient height to prevent persons from outside the drive-in theater from viewing the screen. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. Each day that said "X"-rated movies are exhibited without a wall or fence as required in subsection (a) hereof shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6; Ord. No. 77-M-11, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-1977)  
Sec. 50-6. - Utility companies to furnish rate schedules. 
(a)  All water, telephone, telegraph, electric, and gas associations, organizations, companies and corporations using the streets, highways, boulevards, alleys, easements, parks and public grounds within the city shall at all times have on file with the city secretary of the city, a schedule of all rates in effect charged consumers of such water, gas, electricity, or users of telephone and telegraph service in the city. All such electric, water, gas, and telephone and telegraph associations, organizations, companies and corporations shall within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived deliver to the city secretary, a schedule of rates hereinabove specified. 
(b)  No change in any such rates shall ever be effective until approved by the city council of the city. 
(c)  This section does not, nor do any of the provisions hereof grant, and they shall not be construed to grant, any water, telephone or telegraph, electric, or gas association, organization, company or corporation a franchise to use the streets, boulevards, highways, easements, alleys or public ways of the city. 
(d)  This section does not nor shall it be construed to affect, alter, modify or revoke the right of the city council to fix rates for prescribed reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of water, electric, telephone or telegraph, and gas associations, organizations, companies, or corporations as same as may now or hereafter be provided by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10-7; Ord. No. 81-F-25, §§ 1—6, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 50-7. - Violations of the City Charter. 
(a)  The following acts are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Holding other office. No mayor or councilmember shall hold any compensated city office or employment until two years after the expiration of the term for which he or she was elected to the city council. 
(2)  Appointments and removals. Neither the city council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer or employee whom the city manager or any of his or her subordinates are empowered to appoint. 
Exception. The city council as a body at a properly called meeting, may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(3)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries or excepted under this section, the city council and its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(4)  Admission of liability. Neither the city council nor any of its members shall accept or admit liability or pay any claim for damages asserted against the city without first obtaining a written opinion from the city attorney regarding the city's liability therein. 
(5)  Conflicts of interest. It is prohibited for the mayor or council member or a city official to violate the rules and regulations regarding conflicts of interests as set out in the Texas Local Government Code, chapter 171 as amended or its successor. For purposes of this section term "city official" means any individual subject to the requirements of Texas Local Government Code, chapter 171 as amended or its successor. 
(6)  Attorney client privilege. It shall be unlawful for the mayor or a council member to release any attorney-client privileged communication. 
(b)  Any violation hereof shall be punishable in municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 17-M-19 , § 1, 6-27-2017)  
Secs. 50-8—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-M-52 , § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, repealed Art. II, §§ 50-31—50-38, which pertained to insanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions on private premises and derived from Code 1976, §§ 10-16—10-23; and Ord. No. 89-H-12, §§ 1—8, adopted April 4, 1989. 
 
Secs. 50-31—50-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, JUNKED PROPERTY AND PROPERTY FOUND IN VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Disposition of most unclaimed and abandoned personal property, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 18.17. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-65. - Declaration of nuisance; duty of police to impound. 
Subject to the provisions of division 2 of this article with respect to motor vehicles, any property or obstruction placed, left standing, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance of the city, or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place of the city is declared to be a nuisance; and any such property, when so found, shall be removed summarily by any police officer of the city and taken to the police pound and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as provided in sections 50-66—50-71. 
(Code 1976, § 10-34; Ord. No. 136, § 1, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 91-D-19, § 1, 12-3-1991)  
Sec. 50-66. - Lien on impounded property. 
The city shall have a lien on personal property impounded, under section 50-65 for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, and advertising such property, and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1976, § 10-35; Ord. No. 136, § 2, 10-14-1965)  
Sec. 50-67. - Sale generally. 
For property not meeting the above criteria and if the owner is unknown or cannot be located, the city manager or designated representative must, after a 30-day period, publish a one-time notice in a general-circulation newspaper giving a description of the property, name of owner, if known, and the name/address of the officer holding the property. A statement must also be made that if the owner does not claim the property within 90 days from the date of the notice the property will be sold and the proceeds, less storage/sale costs, will be placed in the city treasury. Two weeks prior to the sale, at least once a week for two consecutive weeks, a notice must be placed in a general circulation newspaper stating the location/date of sale, description of property to be sold, and the name of owner if known. On the day of the sale of the property, city manager or designated representative can accept a bid or, if bids are not sufficient, hold the property for sale at a later date. 
(Code 1976, § 10-37; Ord. No. 136, §§ 4, 7, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 89-H-11, § 1, 4-4-1989)  
Sec. 50-68. - Notice of sale. 
Before selling personal property with a fair market value of $500.00 or more, other than motor vehicles, impounded under this article, the city manager or designated representative shall post a notice thereof at the entrance of the city hall and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once at least 14 days prior to the day of the sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting such notices as herein required. 
(Code 1976, § 10-38; Ord. No. 136, § 5, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 89-H-11, § 2, 4-4-1989)  
Sec. 50-69. - Redemption after impoundment. 
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of personal property impounded under this article may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying to the city the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the city manager or designated representative. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; provided that, the property must be redeemed from the buyer within 30 days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to the property shall become absolute in the buyer. 
(Code 1976, § 10-40; Ord. No. 136, § 3, 10-14-1965)  
Sec. 50-70. - Impoundment and sale fees to be charged. 
The following fees shall be charged and shall be paid into the city treasury: 
(1)  For taking and impounding any personal property, $25.00. 
(2)  For preparing advertisements of sale for each article, $10.00. 
(3)  For selling each article, $5.00. 
(4)  For posting notices of sale relating to any one article, $2.50. 
(Code 1976, § 10-41; Ord. No. 136, § 10, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 89-H-11, § 4, 4-4-1989)  
Sec. 50-71. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
All proceeds from the sale of impounded property will be deposited within the City of Schertz General Fund. 
(Code 1976, § 10-42; Ord. No. 136, § 8, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 89-H-11, § 5, 4-4-1989)  
Sec. 50-72. - Disposal of property as junk. 
Impounded property which is offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the procedure prescribed in section 50-67, and upon which no person bids, shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk. Money received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under this division. 
(Code 1976, § 10-43; Ord. No. 136, § 9, 10-14-1965)  
Sec. 50-73. - Records to be kept. 
The city manager or designated representative shall keep a record book which shall contain: A description of all property impounded under this article; the date and time of such impounding; the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders; the return of receipts of sale at auction; the amount realized for each article at such sale; the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known; information as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 10-44; Ord. No. 136, § 10, 10-14-1965; Ord. No. 89-H-11, § 6, 4-4-1989)  
Secs. 50-74—50-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former § 50-105 has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superceded by Ord. No. 01-H-6, adopted Mar. 6, 2001, codified as §§ 50-105—50-112, of this division. Said former § 50-105 pertained to the provisions of the Tex. Transportation Code adopted by reference. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, Tex. Transportation Code, § 683.001 et seq.; abatement of nuisance of junked vehicles, Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 683.071—683.078. 
 
Sec. 50-105. - Definitions. 
Abandoned motor vehicle: A motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or the person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of any designated county, state or federal highway within the state for more than 48 hours or for more than 24 hours on any turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority. 
Motor vehicle: Any motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq.), including a motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, ch. 31. 
Police department: The police department of the City of Schertz, or chief of police or any police officer employed by the police department of the City of Schertz. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-6, § 1(10-51), 3-6-2001; Ord. No. 05-H-11, § I(10-51), 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 13-M-52 , § 3, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 50-106. - Authority to take possession of abandoned motor vehicles. 
Abandoned motor vehicles can be removed from private property, public premises, or public right-of-way with proper notification of owner and lienholder in compliance with procedures outlined in the V.T.C.A, Transportation Code § 683.012 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-6, § 1(10-52), 3-6-2001)  
Sec. 50-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-M-52 , § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, repealed §§ 50-107—50-110, which pertained to provisions regarding junk vehicles, and derived from Ord. No. 01-H-6, § 1(10-53—10-56), adopted March 6, 2001.  
Sec. 50-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note to section 50-107.  
Sec. 50-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note to section 50-107.  
Sec. 50-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note to section 50-107.  
Sec. 50-111. - Conflict of law. 
The authority to take possession of abandoned vehicles and procedures therefor, as adopted by the City of Schertz, are to be construed in a manner consistent with law of the State of Texas. If the provisions or procedures adopted by the city should conflict with the law of the state at any time, Texas state law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-6, § 1(10-57), 3-6-2001; Ord. No. 13-M-52 , § 4, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 50-112. - Penalties. 
Any violation by any person, firm or corporation of this division is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor and any violation thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $40.00 or more than $200.00. Any person in violation of this division and having paid a fine shall not be relieved of the abatement and removal of the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 01-H-6, § 1(10-58), 3-6-2001)  
Secs. 50-113—50-123. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GUNS, BB GUNS, PELLET GUNS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulatory authority concerning firearms and explosives, Tex. Local Government Code, § 229.001; right to keep and bear arms in lawful defense of self and state, Tex. Const. Art. 1, Sec. 23. 
 
Sec. 50-124. - Unlawful to fire. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to willfully or intentionally shoot a gun within the limits of the city, except as provided in section 50-125. A person asserting an exception to prosecution under this section shall be required to prove same as a defense under the provisions of the Texas Penal Code and a Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  A gun shall include specifically, but not exclusively, any shotgun, pistol, rifle, that discharges or ejects any bullet, buckshot, or any other metallic object of any size by force of combustion. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to willfully or intentionally discharge an airgun, BB gun, toy gun, slingshot, crossbow, bow and arrow, or cast a stone or rock by a citizen not on his or her own property or with the permission of the property owner, or if on his or her own property or with the permission of the property owner, in a manner in which the projectile enters into or onto another person's property. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to the general penalty set forth in this Code. In addition, the city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-70; Ord. No. 02-M-19, § 1, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 14-M-24 , § 1, 5-27-2014)  
Sec. 50-125. - Exception. 
Excepted from section 50-124 are: 
(1)  Shooting a shotgun upon a tract of ten acres or more under one ownership, with the written consent of the owner(s) and any tenant(s) residing thereon, provided that the shotgun is not discharged within 900 feet (150 feet, if the tract of land was annexed by the city on or after September 1, 1981) of a residence or other occupied structure other than the property owner's or tenant's, or in such a manner as would reasonably be expected to cause any projectile to cross the boundary of the tract onto other premises. 
(2)  Shooting a center fire or rim fire bullet or projectile from any rifle or pistol of any caliber upon a tract of 50 acres or more under one ownership, with the written consent of the owner(s) and any tenant(s) residing thereon, provided that the rifle is not discharged within one mile (300 feet, if the tract of land was annexed by the city on or after September 1, 1981) of a residence or occupied structure other than the property owner's or tenant's, or in such a manner as would reasonably be expected to cause any projectile to cross the boundary of the tract onto other premises. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the previous two subsections, no shooting of any kind shall be permitted in that portion of the City of Schertz, Texas, located between highways I-35 and FM-78 and a part of the city's corporate boundaries prior to September 1, 1981. 
(4)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
i.  "Adjacent" shall mean having a common border. 
ii.  "One ownership" shall mean an unsubdivided parcel, which may be owned by a person, corporation or other entity, or by a combination thereof or as tenants in common. 
iii.  "Shotgun" shall mean .410, 20, 16 or 12 gauge shotgun with shot no larger than size 6. 
iv.  "Written consent" shall mean the prior written consent of a person authorized to act, or whom the shooter reasonably believed was so authorized. 
(5)  By any Schertz Police Officer or by an individual under the supervision of a Schertz Police Officer on property owned, licensed or leased by the city for purposes of gun training. 
(Code 1976, § 10-71; Ord. No. 02-M-19, § 1, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 06-M-58, § I, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 14-M-24 , § 1, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 15-M-14 , § 1, 5-5-15)  
Sec. 50-126. - Unlawful to sell. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the city, to sell to any person under the age of 17 years any leaded cartridge or any explosive of any kind, or any gun capable of exploding or discharging a bullet, pellet, or BB. 
(Code 1976, § 10-72; Ord. No. 84-M-25, § 2, 12-18-1984)  
Sec. 50-127. - Unlawful to possess. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to have in their possession any gun, bow and arrow, or slingshot of any kind outside the confines of his immediate home unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult. 
(b)  Any such minor found in possession of above mentioned item will be picked up by the police; weapons confiscated and a summons will be issued to the parents, legal guardian, or responsible adult for appearance in municipal court. 
(c)  The parent, legal guardian, or responsible adult shall be held responsible for any damages caused by their children or wards as a result of the violation of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-73; Ord. No. 84-M-25, § 3, 12-18-1984)  
Sec. 50-128. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any portion of, or any provision of, this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day in which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1976, § 10-74; Ord. No. 84-M-25, § 4, 12-18-1984)  
Secs. 50-129—50-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ALARM SYSTEMS, FALSE ALARMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments cannot enact ordinances inconsistent with state law concerning fire alarm systems, Tex. Insurance Code, Art. 5.43-2, Sec. 3(a). 
 
Sec. 50-155. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm notification: Means a notification intended to summon police/fire services, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of fire or unauthorized intrusion. 
Alarm site: Means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
Alarm system: Means a device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal that is intended to notify police or the fire department of an unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to take a person hostage, or a fire alarm and, is intended to summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, public safety services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site. 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises having the alarm system and which does not have a broadcast system. 
Broadcast alarm: Means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure. 
Burglar alarm: Means an alarm system that transmits a signal intended to summon police in response to a burglary. The term includes an audible signal on the exterior of a structure and an alarm installed on a vehicle used for habitation at a permanent site. 
Chief: Means the chief of police of the city or his authorized representative. 
False alarm: As to a burglar alarm, means the city responds within 30 minutes of the burglar alarm notification and determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the burglar alarm was false. 
Fire alarm: Means any system or device that is permitted and installed to meet the minimum standards of the Schertz Fire Code and appropriate national and state requirements and designed as an automatic communication device giving early warning of smoke, heat, fire, suppression system activation, and trouble, including the notification of a U.L. listed approved central monitoring station. 
Fire marshal: means the Fire Marshal for the City of Schertz or his authorized representative. 
Permit holder or person in control: means the person designated as such in the application for an alarm permit or the person who is responsible for responding to alarms on behalf of the applicant and giving access to the site and who is responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees. Such person must be at least 18 years of age. 
Person: means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
(Code 1976, § 10-81; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-81), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-156. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that assures proper operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications; 
(3)  Respond to or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time, which period shall be designated by the city, when requested by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises; 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than the occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(5)  Notify the police department communications prior to activating a security or fire alarm for maintenance purposes; and 
(6)  Notify the fire department and U.L. listed central station prior to any fire drills or tests that may or may not cause the activation of a fire alarm system. 
(b)  A permit holder or person in control of a security or fire alarm system shall not utilize any alarm system which causes an audible signal to be emitted continuously or intermittently for more than 30 minutes after being activated or which emits a subsequent alarm without being reset which would constitute a nuisance and a violation of this article. 
(c)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any other chapter of this Code, any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief or fire marshal or, for a security fire alarm system that is not licensed by the Texas Board of Private Investigators or private security agencies. 
(d)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall maintain a complete set of written operation instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site. Special codes, combinations, or passwords must not be included in these instructions. 
(Code 1976, § 10-82; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-82), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-157. - Direct alarm reporting; automatic alarm notification prohibited. 
An alarm system which transmits automatic alarm notification directly to the communications center of the police department is prohibited, except for such systems currently in place on date of adoption hereof and to the original permit holder hereunder, or as authorized in section 50-158 hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 10-83; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I (10-83), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-158. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  A financial institution required to have a security/fire alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C., Section 1882) may install, with the permission of the chief, signal line directly to the police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such an arrangement is made, all other requirements of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the city permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel monitored in the communications division of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the financial institution's expense. 
(b)  The financial institution shall pay an annual fee to be determined by the city for each indicator. The chief shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and require necessary repairs or improvements. If the chief finds that the alarm system continually fails to operate properly, or to be operated improperly, he may terminate the privilege to have equipment and indicators in the communications center of the police department and require prompt removal of the equipment at the expense of the financial institution. 
(c)  The financial institution, at its own expense, shall make arrangements to provide service for the alarm system on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week. In no event shall the city become liable for charges for repair and maintenance. 
(d)  The financial institution may cancel its agreement with the city any time by giving the city written notice through the chief, and at its own expense, remove the equipment and indicators from the monitor panel in the communications center. 
(e)  The chief may require any change, modernization, or consolidation of alarm signaling equipment that he deems advisable. In no event shall the city become liable for changes for these requirements. 
(f)  Instead of direct lines, a financial institution may report burglaries and robberies by transmissions through an alarm reporting service using special equipment designated by the chief. 
(Code 1976, § 10-84; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-84), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-159. - Alarm system permits. 
(a)  Permit required. A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated, an alarm system without an alarm system permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each street address. The fee for each permit shall be according to the schedule of fees, section 50-165, and shall be renewed. 
(b)  Form of application. 
(1)  Application for permits required by the provisions of this article shall be filed with the chief on a form provided by the chief. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be subscribed and sworn to by such person. If the applicant is an individual who does not reside, operate any business, or is not employed within the state, or in the event the applicant is a firm or partnership and no owner or general partner resides, operates a business or is employed within the state, then the applicant must also be subscribed and sworn to by the individual having the authority and responsibility for the management and operation of the business within the state. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be subscribed and sworn to by at least one principal corporate officer. If the applicant is a corporation and none of its principal corporate officers are responsible for the management and operation of the business within the state, the application shall also be subscribed and sworn to by the individual having the authority and responsibility for the management and operation of the business within the state. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the date and place of its incorporation, the location of the applicant's principal place of business, a list of the principal corporate officers and the business address, residence address and the office or position held by each principal corporate officer. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall specify the location of the applicant's principal place of business and the names, business addresses and residence addresses of each partner. 
(4)  The application shall include the following information for each individual required to subscribe and swear to it: 
a.  The individual's full name, business address, and residence address. 
b.  The individual's residence and business telephone number. 
(5)  Each permit application must contain the following information: 
a.  The address of the location of the alarm site; 
b.  A description by brand and general type of the alarm system stating the manner in which the alarm will be given, and if the alarm is to be transmitted to as central office, the name, address and telephone number of the operator of the central office; 
c.  Classification of the alarm system site as single-family, multifamily or commercial; 
d.  Any other information required by the chief, which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(6)  Owners/operators of fire alarm systems, in a commercial business, medical, institutional and multifamily occupancy, the alarm not being part of a security system, are required to hold a valid fire marshal's annual permit instead of a permit issued by the police department. 
(c)  Permit issuance or denial. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief shall issue an alarm system permit to an applicant unless the applicant: 
(1)  Has had an alarm system permit for the alarm site revoked and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
(2)  Has made false statement on the application of a material matter; 
(3)  Committed any act, which if committed by a permitee, would be grounds for the revocation of a permit under this article. 
(4)  While not permitted, knowingly and willfully committed, or aided and abetted in commission, of any act for which this article requires a permit. 
(d)  Transfer and amendments. An alarm system permit cannot be transferred to another person. A permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within two business days. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(e)  Fees paid. All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(f)  Permit renewal. A permit for an alarm system is valid for one year. A permit will be revoked for nonrenewal upon 30 days written notice from the chief to the permit holder. 
(Code 1976, § 10-85; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-85), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-160. - Revocation of alarm system permits. 
(a)  The chief shall revoke an alarm system permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated any provisions of this article; or 
(3)  Eight or more false burglar alarms occurred in a twelve-month period. 
(b)  A person having an alarm permit revoked pursuant to subsection (a)(3), above, may reapply for an alarm system permit 60 days after such revocation occurs. 
(c)  A person commits a Class C misdemeanor if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Code 1976, § 10-86; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-86), 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 06-M-56, § I, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 50-161. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the chief refuses to issue a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten days after the receipt of the notice from the chief. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the chief in revoking a permit until the city manager, or his designated representative, makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief is final. 
(b)  The city manager, or his representative, shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing and the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-87; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-87), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-162. - False alarm notification. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, each false alarm notification omitted from any alarm system, after the third false alarm response within any 12-month period, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  If a person notifies the chief and applies for an alarm system permit before a new alarm system is put into service, any false alarm notification during the first 30 days after the system is put into service will not be counted in determining when a violation exists. 
(c)  If the responding officer determines that an alarm notification was caused by smoke or fire, unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery or an attempt to take a person hostage, that notification will not be counted as a false alarm. 
(d)  A false alarm system notification will not be counted in determining when a violation exists if the permit holder can prove to the satisfaction of the city that the alarm notification was the result of a severe weather condition that caused physical damage to the alarm site, or the result of the malfunction of the telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals, proof of the latter being documented upon the telephone company work orders or time-stamped records from the alarm company showing the period of interrupted service. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (a)—(d) above, the holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service fee according to the schedule of fees, section 50-165, for each false alarm notification emitted from each alarm system that is in excess of three false alarms within any 12-month period. 
(f)  Failure to pay the service fee described in subsection (e) above shall result in the revocation of the alarm permit. 
(Code 1976, § 10-88; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-88), 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 09-M-32, § I, 8-4-2009)  
Sec. 50-163. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  A person commits a offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility. 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted, and such violation is punishable by a fine of not more than the maximum allowed by state law. 
(c)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting on behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, and within the scope of his employment. 
(Code 1976, § 10-89; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-89), 2-4-2003)  
Sec. 50-164. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to alarm systems operated by local, state or federal government entities. 
(b)  A fire alarm notification will not be counted in determining a violation when the event occurred due to an honest mistake of a reasonable person thinking that there is a fire. 
(c)  The criminal act of malicious false alarms as defined in the fire code and Texas Penal Code will not be applied in determining a violation of this article and shall be prosecuted as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1976, § 10-90; Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(10-90), 2-4-2003) 
_____ 
Sec. 50-165. - Fees. 
Alarm permit and service fees shall be as listed below: 
Alarm permit fee: 
Residential .....$10.00 
Tier 1 commercia .....l25.00 
Tier 2 commercial site alarm system required under local, state or national code .....50.00 
Alarm service fee (other than burglar alarms): 
Fourth false alarm within any 12-month period .....$100.00 
Fifth false alarm within any 12-month period .....150.00 
Sixth false alarm within any 12-month period .....200.00 
Seventh false alarm within any 12-month period .....250.00 
Eighth (and thereafter) false alarm within any 12-month period .....500.00 
Burglar alarm service fee: 
Fourth false burglar alarm within any 12-month period .....$50.00 
Fifth false burglar alarm within any 12-month period .....50.00 
Sixth false burglar alarm within any 12-month period .....75.00 
Seventh false burglar alarm within any 12-month period .....75.00 
Eighth (and thereafter) false burglar alarm within any 12-month period .....100.00 
(Ord. No. 03-M-06, § I(Exhibit A), 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 06-M-56, § II, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Secs. 50-166—50-183. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - AT-RISK BUSINESSES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-M-23, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2012 , repealed Art. VI, §§ 50-184—50-192, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment Art. VI pertained to "Convenience Store Security." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Sec. 50-184. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
At-risk business means any place of business that is in the retail sale of groceries, foods, gasoline, alcoholic beverages, or services that is open for business during any hours between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The term "at-risk business" does not include a business which is solely or primarily a restaurant. 
Security camera system means a video camera system capable of retrieving an identifiable image to assist with the identification and apprehension of persons engaged in criminal activity. 
Unobstructed view means windows need to be clear of store merchandise and excessive advertisements to allow responding emergency personnel to see inside the business. 
( Ord. No. 12-M-23, § 1, 11-27-2012 )  
Sec. 50-185. - At-risk businesses security. 
(a)  Each at-risk business located within the City of Schertz shall be equipped with an operating security camera system. 
(b)  Each at-risk business located within the City of Schertz shall maintain windows with an unobstructed view. 
( Ord. No. 12-M-23, § 1, 11-27-2012 )  
Sec. 50-186. - Implementation. 
All at-risk businesses within the City of Schertz shall comply with the terms of this article. Further, compliance with this article shall be a requirement for a new at-risk business to obtain a certificate of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 12-M-23, § 1, 11-27-2012 )  
Sec. 50-187. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
Any violation of this article by any person, firm, or entity is declared to be unlawful and shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day in which a violation occurs or continues. 
( Ord. No. 12-M-23, § 1, 11-27-2012 )  
Secs. 50-188—50-222. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 50-223. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable. Includes church groups, school groups and any organization that has applied for and received IRS nonprofit designation. Each subsidiary organization or subgroup of any charitable organization, including for example each auxiliary, club, special committee or any other group designated by a charitable organization as a subsidiary organization or subgroup, shall be treated as a separate charitable organization for purposes of this article. 
Garage sale. Includes but not be limited to garage sales, neighborhood garage sales, homeowner's association garage sales, charitable organization garage sales, or any designated individual or organizational yard sales, auctions, bazaars, estate sale or rummage sales which are conducted for the sale of new or used merchandise at a location which is not currently zoned for such sales. 
Homeowner's association garage sale. A homeowner's association garage sale is one in which there is an active homeowner's association within a subdivision with more than five homes are which requests a single permit for a garage sale held on their individual properties at the same time and on the same date. 
Neighborhood garage sale. A neighborhood garage sale is one in which there are more than five homes participating, no active homeowner's association within the particular subdivision exists, and the homeowners request a single permit for a garage sale held on their individual properties at the same time and on the same date. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-100), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 50-224. - Inspection of garage sales. 
The building official, inspector, code enforcement officer, health official or any police officer may be designated by the city manager and shall have the power to examine and inspect, from time to time, all garage sales within the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-101), 11-2-2004)  
Sec. 50-225. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-225, which pertained to permit required and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-102), adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 50-226. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-226, which pertained to application for a permit and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-103), adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 50-227. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-227, which pertained to permit cost and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-104), adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 50-228. - Placement and size of garage sale signs. 
(a)  Garage sale signs shall not exceed three square feet. 
(b)  Two garage sale signs may be placed on any private property with permission of the property owner. 
(c)  It is expressly prohibited for any person, group, or organization to post a garage sale sign on any public property including but not limited to traffic control devices, utility poles, and any public right-of-way or easement. 
(d)  It is prohibited to place garage sale signs on Schertz Parkway, FM 3009, FM 1103, FM 78 and FM 1518. 
(e)  Garage sale signs may be posted up to 24 hours before the sale is scheduled to be conducted and shall be removed 24 hours after the sale is complete. 
(f)  Any garage sale sign violating this article will be removed and destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-105), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 50-229. - Number of garage sales limited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to hold more than four garage sales per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-106), 11-2-2004)  
Sec. 50-230. - Time limit for each garage sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to hold a garage sale for a period of time longer than two days, operating between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., without a written waiver by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-107), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 50-231. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-231, which pertained to permit nontransferable and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-108), adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 50-232. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-232, which pertained to rain days and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-109), adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Sec. 50-233. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed more than $200.00. Each and every day that such violation shall exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-L-35, § II(10-110), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-19-2017)  
Sec. 50-234. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-L-51 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 19, 2017, repealed § 50-234, which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. 04-L-35, § Exh. 2, adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
Secs. 50-235—50-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CURFEW FOR MINORS UNDER 17 YEARS OF AGE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Children taken into custody for violation of juvenile curfew, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.059; renewal of curfew every three years by home-rule city, Tex. Local Government Code, § 370.002. 
 
Sec. 50-256. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them below: 
Bona fide emergency shall include, but not be limited to, fire, explosion, natural disaster, manifest illness or injury, an automobile accident, or obtaining reasonably necessary medical care for another person. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian shall mean any person to whom custody of a subject juvenile has been given by a court order. 
Knowingly means actual awareness of the subject juvenile's act or actions and his or her intent to violate this article. 
Lawful employment activity means a duty, function, or activity willingly engaged in by a subject juvenile within the course and scope of his or her lawful employment and for which the subject juvenile has a reasonable expectation of remuneration or other lawful and acceptable compensation. 
Juvenile shall mean any unemancipated person under 17 years of age. 
Lingering means fail[ure] to leave the premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
Parent shall mean: 
(1)  A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of the subject juvenile; 
(2)  A court-appointed guardian; or 
(3)  Any other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by court order or the subject juvenile's natural or adoptive parent or court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the subject juvenile. 
Police officer means an individual employed by the city to keep the peace and enforce the city's and other relevant laws who is duly sworn and authorized to do so and to serve as a peace officer under the laws of the State of Texas. 
Public place as defined by Texas Penal Code. 
Subject juvenile shall mean any juvenile charged with violating this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-121; Ord. No. 06-M-10, § 1, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-M-21, § 1, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 50-257. - Curfew and offenses. 
A municipal juvenile curfew is hereby imposed within the incorporated limits of the city as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile not in the company of his or her parent to purposely remain, walk, run, stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place within the incorporated boundaries of the city between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. Sunday evening through Friday morning or the hours between 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday mornings unless: 
a.  The subject juvenile is accompanied by one or more of his or her parents; 
b.  The subject juvenile is accompanied by another person 18 years of age or older with the approval of a parent of the subject juvenile; 
c.  The subject juvenile is engaged in a reasonably necessary response to a bona fide emergency; 
d.  The subject juvenile is traveling to or returning home, by the most direct route from a school, government sponsored, or religious activity; 
e.  The subject juvenile is engaged in a lawful employment activity or is going directly to or coming directly from lawful employment activity; 
f.  The subject juvenile is upon an errand directed or approved by his or her parent and traveling by the most direct route; 
g.  The subject juvenile is in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the city's incorporated limits was the most direct route; 
h.  The subject juvenile is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any parent having legal custody of a juvenile to knowingly encourage or consent to any act by the juvenile which would be in violation of the curfew imposed in this subsection (1), above. 
(Code 1976, § 10-122; Ord. No. 06-M-10, § 2, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-M-21, § 2, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 50-258. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Upon finding a juvenile who is, for the first time, in violation of section 50-257 of this article, any police officer shall determine the name and address of the subject juvenile and the name and address of his or her parent(s) or guardian(s). A warning notice ("Notice") shall be issued to the subject juvenile, and the officer will attempt to contact parent(s) or guardian(s) and advise of the violation. A copy of the notice and a letter shall be forwarded to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the subject juvenile advising them of the fact that the subject juvenile was found in violation of this article and soliciting their cooperation in preventing further violations of this article by the subject juvenile. 
(b)  Upon finding a juvenile in violation of section 50-257, who has previously been found in violation of section 50-257, any police officer shall issue the subject juvenile an appropriate citation and transfer the case to proper authorities (including the municipal court of the city, if applicable). In addition, a formal complaint, if indicated under the evidence, may be filed against the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the subject juvenile in municipal court for violation of section 50-257(b) hereof. The police department shall file all necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this article by either the subject juvenile or by any parent or guardian thereof. 
(c)  A Class C citation will be issued to an owner/operator of an establishment that knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1976, § 10-123; Ord. No. 06-M-10, § 3, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-M-21, § 3, 6-3-2008)  
Sec. 50-259. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any juvenile violating the provisions of this article for the third or greater time shall be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal Code and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of applicable state law, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Each parent or guardian violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less that $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)  In assessing punishment for either a parent or a juvenile, the municipal court judges may consider utilizing the community service program of the city. 
(d)  A Class "C" citation will be issued to an owner/operator of an establishment that knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1976, § 10-124; Ord. No. 06-M-10, § 4, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-M-21, § 4, 6-3-2008) 
Note— Ord. No. 92-M-25, §§ 1—4, adopted 12-15-1992 although not specifically amending this Code is included at the editor's discretion as article VIII, sections 50-256—50-259. Effective date for Ordinance No. 92-M-25 is on or after January 7, 1993.  
Secs. 50-260—50-304. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - GRAFFITI[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-M-35, adopted Sept. 1, 2009, repealed Art. IX, §§ 50-305—50-312, in its entirety. Section I of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Sec. 50-305. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
Authorization means with the specific consent, written or oral, of the property owner or with other authority of law, regulation, or ordinance. 
Felt tip marker means an indelible marker or similar implement with any size tip. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, letter, figure, symbol, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any exterior structure surface visible from a public place, public right-of-way, or private buildings, structures, or other facilities or upon any other property, regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component or property. 
Graffiti implement means any aerosol paint container, paint ball gun, felt tip marker, or paint stick or engraving or etching tool capable of scarring or otherwise defacing glass, metal, concrete, stucco, vinyl, wood or any other surface attached to or covering a structure or building. 
Guardian means any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax epoxy, or other similar substances capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a visible mark. 
Parent means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, "parent" shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person. 
Property owner includes, but is not limited to, any legal or equitable owner, and any person having a possessor's right to land or a building or the person lawfully occupying it, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or any person, individual, corporation, association, or partnership in apparent or actual control of such property or any agent or employee of any of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-306. - Graffiti and graffiti implements—Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, write or mark, cut, print, stamp, indent or display any word, sentence, symbol or figure on public or privately owned buildings, permanent structures, or places located within the city, without authorization of the property owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement in any public park, public school ground, public playground, public swimming pool, public recreational facility, any public right-of-way, or other public grounds in the city. The graffiti implement shall be presumed to be for the purpose of defacing such buildings, structures, or places if the person in possession of any such implements is observed by an officer or employee of the city engaging in such defacing of property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement. The graffiti implement shall be presumed to be for the purpose of defacing property if it is in the holder's possession while the holder is on private property closed to the public, without permission from the property owner or a legal agent of the property owner. 
(d)  It shall be an offense for the parent or legal guardian of a minor under 17 years of age to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence allow such child to violate the provisions in subsection (a), (b) or (c), above. 
(e)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution if the person uses any graffiti implement in his or her employment or in connection with a school, civic or religious activity or has written permission from the property owner or legal agent of the property owner of the premises to engage in an authorized activity utilizing the implements. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-307. - Notices and city offer to remove graffiti. 
(a)  Whenever the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager has probable cause to believe graffiti has been placed upon any property subject to this article, the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager shall notify the property owner in writing of (i) the presence of the nuisance and (ii) the city's offer to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge. The property owner shall have ten calendar days from the date of receipt of the city's notice under this subsection to either accept or refuse the city's offer to remove the graffiti. If the property owner does not send a written response to the city within that ten calendar days, the city's offer shall be deemed refused. The city may use its sole discretion regarding the manner by which it removes graffiti pursuant to this subsection. 
(b)  If the property owner either (i) refuses the city's offer to remove the graffiti as provided under section 50-307(a) or (ii) fails to respond to the city's offer to remove the graffiti as provided under section 50-307(a) within ten calendar days, the city shall send the property owner a notice that the property owner is required to remove the graffiti from the owner's property on or before the 15th day after the date the property owner receives notice under this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to a property owner if the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure and the removal of graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(c)  The notice provided under section 50-307(b) must be given in accordance with of the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 250.006(d), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-308. - Failure to remove graffiti—offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to abate or cause the abatement of graffiti from his or her property after receiving written notice, as provided in section 50-307(b) of this article, of such nuisance and being given 15 calendar days to effect the abatement. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to property or structures owned by federal, state, or local governments or railroads if they have in effect a city-approved graffiti abatement plan. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a property owner if the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure and the removal of graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to property that is residential owner-occupied. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-309. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of section 50-306(a)—(d), of this article shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense and a fine of not less than $400.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second and each subsequent offense. 
(b)  Violation of any other provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine or any other such punishment as may be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  The court shall have the discretion to provide other means of punishment for violation of any provision of this article, which may include community service. In setting penalties due hereunder, consideration will be given to the costs incurred by the property owner to remove the graffiti, the amount and visual prominence of the graffiti, and past history of the offender. In all cases, requiring removal of graffiti at the offender's expense shall be considered by the court. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-310. - Abatement by city; payment of costs by owner; imposition of lien. 
(a)  If a property owner fails to abate or cause the abatement of graffiti from his or her property after receiving written notice, as provided in section 50-307(b) of this article, of such nuisance and being given 15 calendar days to effect the abatement, the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager may order abatement of the graffiti and charge the expenses of removal to the property owner in accordance with a fee schedule adopted from time to time by the city. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available. The city may use its sole discretion regarding the manner by which it removes graffiti pursuant to this subsection. 
(b)  Persons authorized by the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager to abate the graffiti nuisance may enter onto private property to examine such nuisance, to obtain information to identify such nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of such nuisance. 
(c)  Whenever the city shall abate a graffiti nuisance as provided by this section, the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the option of using city employees and materials or selecting a private contractor to abate the nuisance. 
(d)  The city shall assess to the property owner a charge for the actual cost, including labor and materials, for all work done to abate the graffiti nuisance pursuant to this section 50-310, plus an administrative expense of $150.00, and shall cause the expense thereof to be assessed on the property upon which such expense is incurred. Until this section may be modified in the future, the foregoing shall be the "fee schedule" required by section 50-310(a). All revenue collected shall be deposited in a separate account in the city dedicated to graffiti abatement. 
(e)  A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate the graffiti nuisance pursuant to this section shall be mailed to the property owner, if the property owner and mailing address are known, and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The statement shall demand payment within 30 days after the date of receipt or publication of such notice. 
(f)  If such statement has not been paid within such period, the city manager or other city employee designated by the city manager may file a statement of expenses incurred with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located stating (i) the property owner's name, if known, (ii) the legal description of the lot or parcel, and (iii) the amount of expenses incurred. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement shall be prima facie proof of the expenses incurred. Such statement shall be, and the city shall have, a lien for expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent per annum on the amount due from the date incurred by the city. To the extent permitted by law, such liens shall be inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. To the extent permitted by law, the city may foreclose such liens in a proceeding brought in accordance with applicable law. The remedy allowed in this subsection shall not be the city's sole remedy. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Sec. 50-311. - Future actions. 
(a)  The city agrees that it may consider future measures aimed at remedying the graffiti problem, including the following: 
(1)  Coordination of volunteer organizations which assist in graffiti removal; 
(2)  Preparation of a directory of contractors who remove graffiti for a fee; 
(3)  Publication of information on where and how to obtain free paint, tools, and materials for graffiti removal; 
(4)  Provision of information on probationer restitution services available to community-based organizations for graffiti removal; 
(5)  Provision of information about graffiti abatement programs; 
(6)  Establishment of a paint bank within the city's department of public works from which community-based groups or individuals may obtain paint and materials for the purpose of removing graffiti; 
(7)  Encouragement of local businesses and other potential donors to contribute resources to the paint bank; and 
(8)  Establishment of a reward program for information concerning graffiti vandals. 
These programs will be considered in the future as budgetary decisions are made, but the final decision shall be made after weighing the various competing needs for public funding. 
(b)  The city shall make reasonable efforts and use reasonable available resources to promptly remove graffiti from city-owned property. The city will also consider use of lighting and shrubbery to discourage placement of graffiti on its buildings and structures. Similarly, business owners and homeowners exempted from the provisions of this article will be encouraged to use reasonable measures to prevent graffiti on their properties and to remove graffiti from their properties as soon as possible. 
(c)  A property owner who demonstrates to the city marshal or other city employee designated by the city manager that his or her structure has been subjected to graffiti may be provided sufficient paint material, if available, to cover the graffiti on the property. The materials will typically be from donated sources or bulk purchases, and the paint may not match the existing background surface color. The property owner shall have 15 calendar days following receipt of the materials to abate the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 09-M-35, § I, 9-1-2009)  
Chapter 54 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 2014 amended Chapter 54, §§ 54-1—54-40, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former Chapter 54 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-H-03, §§ I—V, adopted January 2009. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Regulation of nuisances by home-rule municipality, Tex. Local Government Code, § 217.042. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential and nonresidential structures and all premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance, whether now existing or existing in the future; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties within the jurisdiction of the city and property within 5,000 feet outside the limits of the city, whether or not within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference— LGC 217.042.  
Sec. 54-2. - Duties and powers of the code official. 
(a)  Generally. The city health official, hereinafter referred to in this chapter as the code official, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and other related ordinances and regulations of the city. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. The code official is a member of the city marshal's department, which shall have overall enforcement authority as to this chapter. The foregoing is not intended, and shall not be interpreted, to limit the authority of the city's police department or of any other applicable law enforcement department or agency with applicable jurisdiction from enforcing the provisions of this chapter, which police department and any other applicable law enforcement department(s) or agency(ies) with applicable jurisdiction shall also have enforcement authority. 
(b)  Reports. The code official shall give attention to the health and sanitary conditions of the city and report to the city council periodically, making recommendations as necessary conducive to the cleanliness of the city and the general health of the citizens. 
(c)  Right of entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, or delay the code official or other city deputies, inspectors, or officers in the discharge of any duties under this chapter or to refuse to comply with the orders of the code official. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Inspections. The code official shall respond to complaints related to violations of this chapter and shall conduct inspections related to ensuring compliance with all state and local requirements governing general property maintenance. 
(e)  Department records. Official records shall be kept of all complaints, reports, citations, notices, and orders issued for violations of this chapter. Such records shall be retained in the official records of the city pursuant to the city's document retention policy. 
(f)  No liability. The code official and any other employees, personnel, or officers charged with the enforcement of this chapter while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent laws or ordinances, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and are hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against the code official or any other employee, personnel, or officer charged with enforcement of this chapter because of an act performed by such individual in the lawful discharge of duties under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by legal representation provided by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any other employee, personnel, or officer charged with enforcement of this chapter shall not be liable for cost in any such action, suit, or proceeding unless it is determined by a court in a final non-appealable judgment that the individual did not act in good faith without malice or that the individual acted outside the scope of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-3. - Severability. 
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-4. - Requirements not covered by this chapter. 
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure, or equipment, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare and not specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the code official or by other applicable departments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-5. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the code official from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to stop an illegal act, business, or utilization of a building, structure, or premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-6. - General notices and orders. 
(a)  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, mortgagee, agent, or lien holder, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Form. Any notice given under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the applicable real estate to which the violation relates sufficient for identification; 
(3)  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued; 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing seven calendar days after the date on the notice to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the property or structure into compliance; 
(5)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and 
(6)  Include a statement regarding the city's right to file a lien. 
(c)  Method of service. Any notice given under this chapter shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address of the property owner as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; 
(3)  Posted on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates; 
(4)  Posted on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
(5)  If personal service cannot be obtained, given by publication at least once. 
(d)  Final notice. In the notice, the city may inform the owner (either by regular mail and a posting on the property or by personally delivering the notice), that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may issue a citation, correct the violation at the owner's expense, and assess the expense against the property. If the violation covered by a notice under this chapter occurs within the one-year period following issuance of the notice, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by section 54-8 and assess its expenses as provided in sections 54-9, 54-10, and 54-12. 
(e)  Refused or unclaimed. If the code official mails a notice to a person responsible for a violation and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered to have been delivered. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference— LGC 342.006.  
Sec. 54-7. - Reserved.  
Sec. 54-8. - Removal or correction by the city; interest on expenses. 
In the event the owner, tenant, lessee, agent, or occupant of any lot, parcel, or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this chapter within seven calendar days after notice has been given, the city may do whatever is deemed necessary to remove or remedy the condition, or cause the same to be done, and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner, tenant, agent, lessee, or occupant of the lot, parcel, or premises, and such expenses shall be assessed as a lien against the real estate upon which the work is done. A statement of expenses incurred will be certified by the city secretary and sent to the violator of this chapter. That person will be given a period of 15 calendar days for total reimbursement to the city. Upon the expiration of 15 calendar days, the amount of such unpaid expenses shall bear ten percent per annum interest from the date certified by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-9. - Restrictions imposed on property until lien is cleared. 
In the event no collection can be made by the city of expenses incurred in removing or remedying any of the conditions and before and after a lien is filed against such property, the city shall have the right to impose the following restrictions on such property until such lien is cleared: 
(1)  No building permit of any type will be issued by the city with respect to the property involved, including building improvement, remodeling or modification permits; and 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 will be levied against the violator as an administrative fee to cover the costs of filing a lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-10. - Statement of expenses; lien for expenses and for interest on expenses; suit to collect expenses and interest; foreclosure of lien; proof of expenses. 
(a)  Statement of expenses. The city manager or his/her designated representative may file, with the county clerk of the county or counties in which the property is located, a statement of expenses incurred under section 54-8 stating the following: 
(1)  The amount of such expenses; 
(2)  The date on which such expenses were certified by the city secretary; 
(3)  The name of the property owner, if known; and 
(4)  The legal description of the property. 
(b)  Lien for expenses and for interest on expenses. Upon filing a statement of expenses described in section 54-10(a), the city shall have a lien against the property to secure the expenses and interest, which lien is superior to all other liens except for tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(c)  Suit to collect expenses and interest; foreclosure of lien: 
(1)  The city may bring suit for foreclosure of the lien to recover the expenses and interest; and 
(2)  The city may foreclose a lien under this chapter as provided by Section 33.91 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(d)  Proof of expenses. A statement of expenses described in section 54-10(a) or a certified copy of a statement of expenses shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference— LGC 342.007.  
Sec. 54-11. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation used by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-12. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties. Any violation by any person of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor and any violation thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $40.00 or more than $2,000.00. Any person in violation of this chapter and having paid a fine assessed for such violation shall not be relieved of the expense incurred by the city in removing or remedying the condition prescribed in this chapter. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Paying the fine for the violation does not relieve the person from remedying the violation. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 54-13. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Code official means the city health official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative of such person. 
Composting means a controlled biological reduction of organic waste to humus. 
Easement means a strip of land extending along a property line or across a lot, for which a limited right of use has been or is to be granted for a public or quasi-public purpose. No property owner shall place any obstructions or structures in or along an easement. 
Garbage means any rejected or waste household food composed of vegetable and animal substances; or other waste. It shall be taken to mean and include all table and kitchen refuse of every kind and description; also decaying vegetables and meats, or anything that will, or may, decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health. 
General nuisance means any condition or use of a building, structure, lot, parcel, or premises which is in an unsanitary, objectionable, or unsightly condition or injurious to public health, which is detrimental to the property of others, or which causes, or tends to cause diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises is located. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means (i) any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven and not properly licensed or inspected for safety in accordance with state law; (ii) a car, truck, bus, or van that cannot be started and moved under its own power; (iii) a vehicle that is not currently licensed, including a recreational vehicle or trailer, which is designed for travel on the public roads; or (iv) an inoperable tractor or inoperable farm equipment. 
Junk means all worn out, worthless or discarded material, including, but not limited to, any of the following materials, or parts of said materials or any combination thereof; new or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials; used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or window coverings not currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, drums, barrels, and/or roofing material not currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components and parts not currently in use; used furniture other than that designated for outdoor use; used and/or inoperative lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use; pallets, windows or doors not currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use; used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions not currently in use; and any other type of used and/or inoperable machinery not currently in use. Discarded bottles or cans. Any other building materials or debris. 
Junk vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and does not have lawfully affixed to it both an unexpired license plate and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate (both a current registration and inspection sticker shall be affixed to the windshield, if one of those is expired, the vehicle is in violation); and is: 
(1)  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(2)  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property or 30 consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property. 
State Law reference— Transportation Code 683.071. 
Lot or parcel is defined and considered as having ordinary meaning but shall include, in addition to the land within a lot or parcel boundary, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curb line of adjacent streets and, where no curb exists, to the existing street surface. The word "lot" or "parcel" shall also include all land lying between the property line of any lot or parcel and the center of adjacent easements. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle that is subject to registration under Chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended from time to time. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique vehicle or special interest vehicle; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique vehicle or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique vehicle or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Nuisance means any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; or that is offensive to the senses; or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include, but is not limited to: any abandoned wells, abandoned household appliances, stagnant or unwholesome water, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, any objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature. 
Noise nuisance means any unreasonably loud, disturbing noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
Owner means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property in question; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to such property; or otherwise having control of such property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person as used in this chapter shall be construed to impart the singular and plural as the case demands, and shall include corporations, companies, societies, associations, firms, partnerships, all other entities, and individuals. 
Right-of-way means a public or private area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, streets, bike paths, alleys, and walkways. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features such as landscaped areas. 
Rubbish means miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping, mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing, and offices, including other waste matter, such as slag, stone, broken concrete, fly ashes, ashes, tin cans, glass, scrap metal, rubber, paper, rags, chemicals, or similar or related combinations thereof. 
Special interest vehicle is a motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed on any property within the city. 
Tenant means a person, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 54-14. - Certain acts declared to be noise nuisances. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but said enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The playing of any radio, tape recorder, cassette player, compact disk player, DVD player, MP3 player, any digital device or any similar device or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(2)  The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier to such intensity that disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof; the use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any day between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; the creation by means of any such said device of any unreasonable loud or harsh noise for any unreasonable period of time. 
(5)  The running of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loud or in such manner as to create loud or grating, grinding, jarring, or rattling noise or vibration. 
(6)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(8)  Commercial contractors are prohibited from the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair work on any building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Commercial contractors are prohibited from outdoor work involving erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair work on unoccupied structures on Sundays. An exception can be made in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only by written permit from the city manager or his/her designee, which permit may be renewed by the city manager or his/her designee, during the time the emergency exists. All special requests must be submitted in writing. 
(9)  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning while in session or adjacent to any hospital which interferes with the working of such institutions, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that the same is a school or hospital street. 
(10)  The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors, which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 
 
Sec. 54-15. - Abandoned large household appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be or remain upon any premises under his control in a public or semi-public area that might be accessible to children, any large appliance (including any freezer, refrigerator, stove, dishwasher, clothes washer, clothes dryer and other similar appliances). 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-16. - Responsibility of owner or person in control. 
The owner or person in control of any large home appliance on any such property as described in section 54-15 shall not permit same to be discarded, abandoned, or stored as to create a public nuisance of safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 54-17. - Building standards. 
The city has adopted certain building regulations and codes governing the minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction, including, without limitation, those set forth in section 54-18 below, in chapter 18 of the city's Code of Ordinances, and elsewhere in the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-18. - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(a)  Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(b)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
(c)  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth or other contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities, or lacks current water or electric utilities, or other essential equipment required by this article, or because the location of this structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(d)  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this article, or which was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(e)  Closing of vacant structure. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any legal resources. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-19. - Emergency measures. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This structure is unsafe, and its occupancy has been prohibited by the City of Schertz Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-20. - Demolition. 
(a)  General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment is so old, dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, and to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure. 
(b)  Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(c)  Salvage material. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the city or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price reasonably obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, to the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
(d)  Procedure. 
State Law reference— LGC 214.001. 
(1)  A public hearing shall be held before the city's building and standards commission to determine whether the building complies with the city's minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction (see section 54-17 above) in connection with any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under section 54-20. 
(2)  The parties to any proceeding under this section 54-20 before the city's building and standards commission shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city's building and standards commission to the state district court within 30 days of such decision, or to the extent that Texas Local Government Code § 214.0012 applies. 
(3)  The city manager or his/her designee shall present all cases related to this section 54-20 on behalf of the city before the building and standards commission. 
(4)  Whenever it is determined that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this section 54-20 or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice of such alleged violation shall be given to the owner, and as applicable and as more fully described below, to each lienholder and mortgagee. Such alleged violations shall constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  A notice of a hearing sent to an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee under this section 54-20 must include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(6)  After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of standards, the city's building and standards commission may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided below. The city's building and standards commission also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time. If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the city shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on which the building is located. The city shall personally deliver, send by certified mail with return receipt requested, or deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing: 
a.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
b.  A description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; and 
c.  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time. 
(7)  As an alternative to the mortgagee and lienholder notice procedure prescribed by section 54-20(d)(6), the city may make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give them a notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. In addition, the city may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined, a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. If the city operates under this section, the order issued by the city may specify a reasonable time in accordance with the provisions set forth below for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an additional reasonable time in accordance with the provisions set forth below for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. Under this section 54-20(d)(7), the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(8)  Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
a.  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
b.  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing: 
1.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
2.  The date of the hearing; 
3.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
4.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(9)  After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building. 
(10)  In conducting a hearing under this section 54-20, the city's building and standards commission (if it finds that the building fails to comply with the city's minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction) shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days: 
a.  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or 
b.  Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
(11)  If the city's building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city's building and standards commission, in consultation with the city manager or his/her designee, shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by city's building and standards commission, in consultation with the city manager or his/her designee. 
(12)  The city's building and standards commission may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
a.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
b.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(13)  If the city's building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the city manager or his/her designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the city manager or his/her designee to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the city boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the city's building and standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under this subsection. In lieu of a bond, the city's building and standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the city. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30 th day after the date the city's building and standards commission issues the order. 
(14)  In a public hearing before the city's building and standards commission to determine whether a building complies with the minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the minimum standards and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(15)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. This subsection does not limit the ability of a city to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required by section 54-20(d)(13). 
(16)  If the city incurs expenses under section 54-20(d)(15), the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is expressly prohibited under applicable state law, the property on which the building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. 
(17)  If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the tenants of the building or to repair, remove, or demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as set forth in this section 54-20, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens. 
(18)  The city satisfies the requirements of this section 54-20 to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to make a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the city searches the following records: 
a.  County real property records of the county in which the building is located; 
b.  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
c.  Records of the secretary of state; 
d.  Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
e.  Tax records of the city; and 
f.  Utility records of the city. 
(19)  When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section 54-20 to a property owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or registered agent and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(20)  In addition to the procedures set forth above, the city may secure, in accordance with the procedures set forth below, a building that the city's code official determines (1) violates the minimum standards; and (2) is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building: 
State Law reference— LGC 214.0011. 
a.  Before the 11 th day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the owner by: 
1.  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
2.  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
3.  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
4.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown. 
b.  The notice must contain: 
1.  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
2.  A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building; 
3.  A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and 
4.  An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing before the city's building and standards commission about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building. 
c.  The city's building and standards commission shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing before the city's building and standards commission. The city's building and standards commission shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed. 
d.  The city has the same authority to assess expenses under this section as it has to assess expenses under section 54-20(d)(16). A lien is created under this section in the same manner that a lien is created under section 54-20(d)(16) and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under that section. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014; Ord. No. 17-S-50 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-13-2018)  
Sec. 54-21. - General responsibilities. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this article V shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment, and exterior property. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this article V. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this article V. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control. 
(c)  Maintenance. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-22. - Exterior property areas; nuisance upon premises. 
(a)  No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash, debris, brush, garbage or animal, vegetable or mineral matter and/or any composition of residue thereof with the exception of composting done in accordance with this chapter; 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers or other appliances and including empty and discarded cans or containers, inoperable motor vehicles, car parts, tires and structurally unsound fences. 
(3)  Any sign, notice, pole, post, and any other obstruction placed or painted upon any sidewalk, street or in any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)  Excessive growth of weeds or other vegetation that exceeds eight inches in height or is allowed to remain upon premises so as to become a breeding place for flies, or insects or become offensive so as to emit foul or noxious odors; excluding trees, fruits, vegetables, farm crops, bushes, garden beds, flowers or other ornamental plants and composting done in accordance with this chapter. 
(5)  The accumulation of stagnant water permitted to remain thereon. Watering beyond an individual's property, or in a manner or amount which encroaches on a neighbor's property resulting in standing or stagnant water is prohibited. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, contrary to public health, safety or welfare. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, easement, sidewalk, street, right-of-way or vacant lot into or adjacent to water or any other public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, weeds, brush, tree cuttings, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind. 
(c)  In other areas of the city, that portion of any lot or parcel of land within 50 feet of any open street or road or which is within 75 feet of any building shall be kept completely free and clear of excessive growth of weeds and vegetation that exceed eight inches in height. Abandoned and discarded equipment and rubbish and stagnant water are also prohibited. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises to permit the overhanging or protrusions of trees, brush and shrubs over streets, sidewalk, alleys and easements. 
(1)  Minimum clearance from street surface shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Minimum clearance in easements and alleys shall be 15 feet in height from entire width of easement. 
(3)  Minimum clearance over sidewalks shall be eight feet. 
(e)  All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(f)  All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes, which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(g)  All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(h)  No person shall willingly or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(i)  Composting. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the composting of organic waste or land application of composted organic waste. All compost piles shall be maintained using the following approved composting standards: 
(1)  All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the harborage of rodents and pests. The presence of rodents in or near a compost pile shall cause the city to issue a complaint. 
(2)  All compost piles shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant, rotten egg-like, putrefactive, sweet, sour or pungent odors. 
(3)  No compost pile shall be located less than three feet from the rear or side property line or within 20 feet of any home, patio, pool or similar structure on the adjacent property. 
(4)  Compost piles shall not be located in the front or side yard; alleyways or easements. 
(5)  Compost piles shall contain no more than a total of five cubic yards of end product on-site at any one time. Anyone requesting an increase in size limitations must submit a request (in writing) to the code official and demonstrate that the acreage is sufficiently sized and properly situated to handle the increase. 
(6)  No compost pile shall be located where it will impede the natural free flow of storm water drainage. 
(7)  Any vegetables, fruits, egg shells, fruit peels, rinds and hair must be composted in such a way that these materials are buried in the center of the pile at all times and so that none of these materials are exposed or visible. 
(8)  Compost piles established in accordance with this chapter shall be for private use only. There shall not be commercial provision of material to be composted or commercial use of the product of such composting. 
(9)  Every owner or operator shall be responsible for maintaining all property under his/her control in accordance with these requirements. 
(10)  a.  Compost piles may contain the following permitted ingredients: 
1.  Yard waste, including leaves, sod and grass clippings; 
2.  Untreated wood, wood chips and sawdust; 
3.  Paper and straw; 
4.  Empty egg shells; 
5.  Coffee grounds and tea leaves; 
6.  Vegetables, fruits and their remains (peels and rinds); 
7.  Dryer lint and hair; 
8.  Aquatic weeds; 
9.  Evergreen needles; 
10.  Organic garden waste; and 
11.  Commercial compost additives. 
b.  No compost pile shall contain any of the following: 
1.  Animal carcasses, fish, fowl, meat or other animal products; 
2.  Manure or animal feces of any kind; 
3.  Used litter box remains; 
4.  Milk, cheese, sour cream or other dairy products; 
5.  Lard, oils, or oil-based foods; 
6.  Mayonnaise or salad dressing; 
7.  Peanut butter; 
8.  Whole grains (rice, wheat, barley, etc.); 
9.  Items not normally composted; 
10.  Plants that are diseased; and 
11.  Items not biodegradable. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 54-24. - Parking prohibited on front and side yards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park or allow to remain parked a motor vehicle, construction vehicle, boat, personal water craft or trailer of any kind (except those defined in subparagraph (b)) at any time in the side or front yard in any single-family residential zoned district, unless parked on a well maintained parking area extending from the curb, street or alley and constructed of concrete or asphalt; and 
(b)  When recreational vehicles allowed, it shall be unlawful to place, park, or maintain any recreation vehicle, as defined herein, on any public street in the city for a period in excess of 72 hours. Recreational vehicles shall be allowed on a lot, tract or parcel of land in the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  Front and side yards. A recreational vehicle may be parked in the driveway in front or side yard building line provided that the vehicle must be parked on the property; i.e., it may not overhang the property line or sidewalk. 
(2)  Behind the front or exterior side yard building line. A recreational vehicle may be parked behind the front exterior side yard building line provided, however, that it may not be parked in an interior side yard within five feet of any main building. 
(c)  Occupancy prohibited. Recreational vehicles shall not be temporarily or permanently occupied as a habitation while in the city and shall not be connected to public or private utilities except when located in an approved recreational or mobile home park. 
(d)  For purposes of section 54-24, "recreational vehicle" means a bus conversion, class "A" camper, class "C" camper, travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or pop-up camper. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Secs. 54-25—54-27. - Reserved.  
Sec. 54-28. - Rubbish and garbage. 
(a)  Large appliances. Storing large appliances (including freezers, refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, and other similar appliances) and similar equipment not in operation on the exterior areas of the property is prohibited. The only exceptions shall be if the doors or any self-latching devices are removed and the equipment is going to be discarded during the city fall and spring cleanup or immediately taken to an approved dumpsite. 
(b)  Time of disposal. No trash or garbage containers will be placed on the curb line earlier than 24 hours prior to the time of the collection or left no later than 24 hours after the time of collection. 
(c)  Dumpsters. It shall be unlawful to dispose of garbage, junk, rubbish, or other trash in any dumpster for which the person disposing of such items does not have the lawful right or permission to use. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-29. - Texas Litter Abatement Act adopted. 
To prevent illegal dumping within the city, and to eliminate and abate the health and safety hazards associated with and attributable to such illegal dumping, the City of Schertz hereby adopts Chapter 365, the Texas Litter Abatement Act, of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time, in its entirety herein, and it shall serve as the city's ordinance for illegal dumping. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-30. - Extermination. 
(a)  Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(b)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(c)  Single occupancy structures. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy structures. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(e)  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Secs. 54-31—54-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - JUNK VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 54-34. - Enforcement. 
Person authorized under this chapter to administer the procedures set forth in this chapter may enter public or private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and remove or cause the removal of a nuisance vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-35. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, who maintains, allows, causes or permits a nuisance vehicle on public or private property commits a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon conviction, the court may order the removal and abatement of the nuisance vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-36. - Junk vehicles declared public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards and constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-37. - Junk vehicles prohibited on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to cause or permit a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle to be placed or to remain on any public property or public right-of-way. 
(b)  A vehicle that remains in violation of this section for a period of more than 48 hours constitutes an abandoned motor vehicle and may be dealt with under processes defined by state law for removal of abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-38. - Junk vehicles prohibited on private property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person that owns or controls any real property to maintain, allow, cause or permit a junk vehicle to be placed or to remain on the property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to maintain, allow, cause or permit a junk vehicle to be placed or to remain on real property without the permission of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-39. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  The following are defenses to prosecution under section 54-38. 
(1)  The vehicle or vehicle part is completely enclosed within a building and is not visible from the street or other private or public property; 
(2)  The vehicle or vehicle part is stored or parked on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; 
(3)  The vehicle is an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means; or 
(4)  The vehicle is in an appropriate storage facility maintained by the city or approved by the city. 
(b)  This section does not allow a person to leave a junk vehicle on private property without the permission of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-40. - Conflicts of law. 
The authority to take possession of junk vehicles and the procedures relating thereto as adopted under this chapter are to be construed in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Texas. If the provisions or procedures adopted by the city should conflict with the laws of the State of Texas, the laws of the State of Texas shall control. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-41. - Notice to abate junk vehicle. 
(a)  For junk vehicles on private property as described in section 54-38, the city marshal, or his or her designee, will give written notice by (i) personal delivery; (ii) certified mail, five-day return requested; or (iii) United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service, to the last known registered owner of the vehicle, any lienholder of record and the owner or occupant of the property on which the vehicle is located. If the post office address of the owner is unknown, the notice may be placed on the vehicle or hand delivered to the owner. 
(b)  The notice must state: 
(1)  The existence and nature of the nuisance; 
(2)  That the nuisance must be abated within ten days after the notice was personally delivered or mailed; 
(3)  That a request for a public hearing must be made within the ten-day period or it will be automatically waived; and 
(4)  That if the nuisance is not removed and a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period, the city will remove or cause the removal of the junk vehicle. 
(c)  If any notice is returned undelivered, official action to abate the junk vehicle shall be continued to a date not less than the 11 th day after the date of return. 
(d)  For junk vehicles on public property as described in section 54-37 which are not dealt with as abandoned motor vehicles, written notice shall be given as described in subsection (a) of this section, except that notice must be mailed to the occupant of the public premises and to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-42. - Public hearing in municipal court. 
(a)  Upon the timely request for a hearing of any person to whom a notice was given regarding a junk vehicle, a public hearing will be held before a municipal court judge. Notice of the time, date and location of the hearing will be provided to each person who submitted a timely request for a hearing. 
(b)  The issue at the hearing is whether the vehicle is a junk vehicle. 
(c)  At the hearing, unless proved otherwise by the owner, the vehicle is presumed to be inoperable. 
(d)  If the judge finds the vehicle to be a junk vehicle, the judge will order the vehicle to be removed. 
(e)  Any order requiring the removal of a junk vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the vehicle identification number and license number, if the information is available at the site. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference— Transportation Code 683.076.  
Sec. 54-43. - Removal of junk vehicle. 
The city may remove a junk vehicle at any time following a public hearing and order of the judge or following the waiver of a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-44. - Disposal of junk vehicle. 
A junk vehicle or vehicle part will be disposed of by the city by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or any suitable site for processing as scrap or salvage, and any reconstruction or work to make the vehicle operable after being removed is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Sec. 54-45. - Notice to state. 
The city marshal will give notice to the Texas Department of Transportation of the removal of a nuisance vehicle not later than five days after its removal. The notice will identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Ord. No. 13-H-51 , § 1, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference— Transportation Code 683.074.  
Chapter 58 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, Tex. Local Government Code, § 331.001. 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Tracts of land. 
The following tracts of land will be named as follows: 
(1)  The 16.825 acre tract bounded by Oak Street, Farm Market Road 1518 and Aero Avenue to be named G. W. Pickrell Park; and 
(2)  The 10.023 and .559 acre tracts along Cibolo Creek to be named Cut-Off Park; and 
(3)  The neighborhood park in Lone Oak Subdivision to be named Lone Oak Park; and 
(4)  The 12-acre tract bounded by the La Vaca Gathering Company right-of-way, Oak Street and Aero Avenue, to be named H.P. Thulemeyer Park; and 
(5)  The neighborhood park in Oak Forest Subdivision on the corner of Crest Oak and Crown Oak to be named Coy J. Simmons Park. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-1)  
Sec. 58-2. - Curfew time for park usage established; exceptions. 
All city parks shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily. Exception to this policy would be special reservations IAW section 58-4. It shall be considered a violation of this chapter for any person or persons to use any part of the parks or park facilities during the above-stated closed hours without prior written permission as approved by the city council or city manager as described in section 58-4 of this chapter; said permission to be considered only for the following conditions: 
(1)  Large group special use activities, such as fairs, carnivals, city sponsored functions, and/or other activities where fees are charged for entrance or participation in any activities; or when charges are made for consumable or nonconsumable items, when approved by the city manager in accordance with section 58-4(2)b. of this chapter. 
(2)  Special activities such as scouting or organized youth group activities or jamborees, family reunions, company picnics, etc., when approved in writing by the city manager. 
(3)  Other presently unforeseen special events, when approved by the city manager; and only when such permission will not constitute a nuisance to residents adjacent to any park area. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-2; Ord. No. 09-M-12, § I, 5-28-2009)  
Sec. 58-3. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks and recreational areas. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be possessed and/or consumed in all parks and recreation areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. in authorized areas provided reservations have been made for the use of a specified area and authorization has been granted. 
Exception: the possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is not authorized at any time in the ballfield areas, including the picnic area next to and including the area of the Scout Hut, that area being in H.P. Thulemeyer Park; Lone Oak Park in the Lone Oak Subdivision; Coy J. Simmons Park in Oak Forest Subdivision and the swimming pool facility in G.W. Pickrell Park. 
(b)  In addition to all other City of Schertz Code restrictions concerning alcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages may not be brought into or removed from a city park or recreation area during particular events designated from time to time by the city council. During these particular events, alcoholic beverages may be purchased in the designated park or recreation area only from those vendors given permission by the city council to: 
(1)  Bring alcoholic beverages into the designated city park or recreation area; and 
(2)  Sell alcoholic beverages in the designated park or recreation area. 
(c)  Such vendors shall provide the city manager with such proof of their authority from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (or necessary agency) to sell alcoholic beverages as the city manager may demand. The city council shall by resolution (which may be amended or modified from time to time) designate particular parks and recreation areas and designate particular dates to which the provisions of this paragraph shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-3; Ord. No. 88-M-13, § 1, 5-17-1988; Ord. No. 93-M-21, § 2, 12-7-1993)  
Sec. 58-4. - Reservation policies; fees; permission required for musical groups to perform. 
The following regulations will apply in the utilization of city parks and recreational areas: 
(1)  Areas available for reservation. Reservations will only be accepted for the following locations within the park system. Playground equipment is not included in any area. 
a.  Picnic area next to and including the area of the Scout Hut, H.P. Thulemeyer Park. 
b.  Picnic area of six table group near south restroom facilities, G.W. Pickrell Park. 
c.  Picnic area of three table sets near drainage culvert westward of south restroom facilities (three groups of table sets - reservation of any one, three table set) G.W. Pickrell Park. 
d.  Small Pavilion and picnic table area, G.W. Pickrell Park. 
e.  Large Pavilion, either with or without kitchen facilities. A minimum of 100 persons shall be required. Large restroom facilities will be available only when kitchen is reserved. G.W. Pickrell Park. 
f.  Any ballfield facility, either single field, multiple fields or combination of fields, H.P. Thulemeyer Park. 
g.  Swimming pool facilities, on Wednesday evening only. G.W. Pickrell Park. 
(2)  Reservation policies: 
a.  Reservation requirements, where made: 
1.  No reservation will be required for small group (25 or less) usage of picnic areas, unless alcoholic beverages will be possessed and/or consumed after 8:00 p.m. by those persons using an area. 
2.  Reservations are required for large group activities (26 or more) usage. 
3.  Reservations are made in person, by a city resident, at the municipal complex administration offices during normal working hours. 
b.  Reservations and setting of fees for park areas, or either of the pavilions for special use activities, such as fairs, carnivals, city sponsored functions, etc., will be determined by the city council for each separate occasion. 
c.  The individual or group making reservations will be responsible for posting "Reserved" signs at designated area by 8:00 a.m. the day of reservation. These "Reserved" signs must include the name of party and time and date of reservation. 
d.  The parks and recreation department will be notified of time, date and type of group making reservations. Security personnel will be scheduled by the parks and recreation department using a formula approved by the city manager. 
e.  No musical groups except city sponsored functions will be allowed to perform in the city parks without prior written permission of the city manager. 
f.  No glass containers: All glass containers are prohibited within the city park areas. 
g.  Use of ballfield complex lighting systems, will be limited to reservation only. Lighting fees listed in Attachment "C". 
(Code 1976, § 12½-4; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 58-5. - Use, regulation, and fees of ballfield areas and swimming pool and other public recreational facilities. 
Use, regulations of, and fees to be charged for ballfields, swimming pool facilities, parks, pavilions and other public recreational properties shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-5; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 58-6. - Motorized vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
No motorized vehicles, except maintenance or emergency vehicles, will be allowed in any part of any park, except designated parking areas, without special permission. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-6)  
Sec. 58-7. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association or persons, or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the rules, regulations or provisions of this chapter, or any part of it or any portion thereof, by any act either of commission or omission, or cause the same to be done, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed $200.00 for each and every violation. Each violation of each part or any part of this chapter shall be and constitute a separate offense; and where such violation is a continued act, each day such violation is continued, or permitted to be continued shall be a separate offense, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Code 1976, § 12½-7)  
Chapter 62 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser means any person compiling information and/or conducting a poll from house-to-house, business-to-business, or in a public place. 
Interstate commerce means soliciting, selling or taking orders for, or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, or other things of value, which at the time the order is taken are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped into the city in fulfillment of such order. 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation as well as agents, or employees thereof, who or which engage in the temporary or transient business of selling, exhibiting, or offering for sale in the city any goods, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, or other things of value, or exhibits same for the purpose of taking orders thereof, and who or which, for the purpose of carrying on such temporary or transient business, either rents, leases, or occupies without renting or leasing, any room or space in any building or structure or in any space, enclosed or unenclosed, upon any private premises within the city. 
Peddler means any person who engages in a temporary business within the city limits by carrying goods or merchandise and who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house-to-house, business-to-business or upon public property; a merchant shall be considered temporarily in business and a peddler unless it is the intention of such merchant to remain continuously in business at each location where the merchant is engaged in business in the city as a merchant for a period of 60 days or more. 
Solicitor means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit, from house-to-house, business-to-business or upon public property, orders for services, commercial goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions, or publications to be delivered at a future date or time. A "canvasser" is a solicitor. 
Temporary business means any business transacted or conducted in the city, in, upon, or through or from any private premises for which no definite arrangement for legal right of occupancy therefor has been made in advance of such use and occupancy. 
Transient business means any business described above under "itinerant merchant" conducted or operated by any person, or his agent or employees, who resides away from the city or who has a fixed place of business headquarters outside the city, or who moves stocks of goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value into the city, or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-1, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, welfare, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of the city, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-2, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-3. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or soliciting within the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to solicit, take orders for, or offer to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, magazines or other things of value without first making application for and obtaining a peddlers' and solicitors' permit from the city manager. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant, to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of selling or the taking of orders for the sale thereof, any goods, wares, merchandise, service, photographs, magazines or any other thing of value without first making application for and obtaining a peddlers' and solicitors' permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-3, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-4. - Exclusions from applicability of this chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of their business; 
(2)  Insurance salesman, real estate agents, and others licensed by the state; 
(3)  Vendors of farm produce or agricultural products when the vendor himself produces such produce or products; 
(4)  Persons engaged in religious or political speech, which does not include the sale of any item or the solicitation of contributions; 
(5)  Persons engaged in the distribution of handbills or flyers for services, commercial goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions, or publications to be delivered at some future date, who do not engage in face-to-face contact with prospective customers or clients. 
(6)  City employees authorized to solicit pursuant to Ordinance No. 11-M-24 . 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-4, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 11-M-24, § 2, 8-16-2011 )  
Secs. 62-5—62-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 62-27. - Application for permit. 
Each person applying for a peddler's and solicitor's permit under this chapter shall make application on a form to be supplied by the city, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant with a permanent address and local address, if any; 
(2)  The age and sex of the applicant; 
(3)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation the applicant represents; 
(4)  The nature of the goods, merchandise, or other things of value which are to be offered for sale, or for which orders are to be solicited; 
(5)  The names of all cities in the State of Texas where the applicant has worked in the previous 90 days; 
(6)  The license number of the vehicle, if any, which the applicant intends to use in the course of work while in the city; 
(7)  Whether the applicant, upon sale or order, shall demand, receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and 
(9)  The period of time during which the applicant wishes to solicit or sell in the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-5, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-28. - Investigation. 
(a)  Each applicant shall submit the information required, together with an investigation fee as determined from time to time by ordinance, which will be used to help defray the expense of investigating the applicant to verify the statements on the application and shall not be refundable. 
Exception: Charitable organizations and their representatives shall be required to go through an investigation, but shall not be required to pay fees provided in this section. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to investigate each applicant and to make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of a peddler's and solicitor's permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-6, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-29. - Performance bond. 
If the application shows that the applicant intends to demand, receive, or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, the applicant shall deliver, with the application described in section 62-27, a bond in the sum of $1,000.00 executed by such applicant as principal and by a surety company licensed to do business in the state, or a cash bond in the same amount. Where two or more applicants represent the same person, firm or corporation, only one bond shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-7, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-30. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue a peddler's and solicitor's permit applied for under this chapter no later than two weeks from the time a complete application is filed (including the bond, if required). A peddler's and solicitor's permit shall be in the form as established by the city. 
(b)  A peddler's and solicitor's permit issued hereunder shall be valid for 90 days, after which the holder thereof must reapply pursuant to section 62-27 if the holder desires to continue to solicit in the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-8, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-31. - Fees. 
(a)  If the city manager approves an application, the applicant shall pay a fee as determined from time to time by ordinance upon issuance of the peddler's and solicitor's permit. No permit shall be issued for more than 90 days or before all fees as required by this chapter have been paid. 
(b)  Charitable organizations and their representatives shall obtain permits as provided in this chapter but shall not be required to pay the permit fee provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-9, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 62-32. - Appeal of denial. 
If the city manager denies a peddler's and solicitor's permit to any applicant, the applicant may appeal such denial by written request or reconsider filing with the city manager within seven days of such denial, providing such additional information as the applicant believes is pertinent to the city manager's reconsideration of such denial. The city manager shall deny the appeal or issue the permit within seven days of receiving a request to reconsider. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-10, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-33. - Underage solicitors. 
No person under the age of 16 may solicit in the city unless accompanied by a person who is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-11, 6-3-2003)  
Sec. 62-34. - No solicitation notices. 
Any person may request a "No Solicitation Notice" in the form established and issued by the city. When such a "No Solicitation Notice" has been affixed in a conspicuous place within five feet of the front door of any residence or business, it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit at such residence or business, notwithstanding that such person may have a peddler's and solicitor's permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-12, 6-3-2003)  
Secs. 62-35—62-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-57. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed more than $200.00. Each day any violation of the chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-L-16, § 13-13, 6-3-2003)  
Chapter 66 - POLICE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Arrest without warrant. 
(a)  A police officer of the city may arrest an offender, without a warrant, for any offense committed in his presence or within his view. 
(b)  A police officer of the city may arrest, without warrant, when a felony or breach of the peace has been committed in the presence or within the view of a magistrate, and such magistrate verbally orders the arrest of the offender. 
(c)  A police officer of the city may arrest, without warrant, persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten to or are about to commit some offense against the laws of the city or state. 
(d)  Where it is shown by satisfactory proof to a police officer of the city, upon the representation of a creditable person that a felony has been committed, and that the offender is about to escape, so that there is no time to procure a warrant, such police officer may, without warrant, pursue and arrest the accused. 
(Code 1976, § 14-1; Ord. No. 34, 7-11-1960) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., arts. 14.01—14.04.  
Secs. 66-2—66-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICEMEN 
 
Sec. 66-21. - Authority to establish force; maximum number. 
(a)  In order to better preserve the general safety of the citizens of the city and to provide for trained police assistance in times of emergency, there is created a police reserve force for the city police department. 
(b)  The police reserve force shall be a volunteer organization with a membership restricted to not more than 25 in number. The police reserve force shall be under the control and direction of the city manager acting through the chief of police. 
(Code 1976, § 14-13; Ord. No. 79-G-13, §§ I, II, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish police reserve force, Tex. Local Government Code, § 341.012(a).  
Sec. 66-22. - Training. 
The police reserve force shall be operated under basic policies and rules as established by the city council. The city manager, acting through the chief of police, shall be responsible for ensuring that the policies and rules of the force are adhered to, and for the development of training programs and operating procedures. 
(Code 1976, § 14-14; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § IV, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Governing authority shall establish training standards, Tex. Local Government Code, § 341.012(b).  
Sec. 66-23. - Compensation. 
Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation, unless specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 14-15; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § II, 7-17-1979)  
Sec. 66-24. - Approval of appointments by council; carrying of weapons. 
No person appointed as part of the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a police officer until he has been approved by the city council. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police, and only when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. 
(Code 1976, § 14-16; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § III, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Tex. Local Government Code, § 341.012(g).  
Sec. 66-25. - To serve at discretion of chief of police. 
Members of the police reserve force shall act in the capacity of police officers only upon the direction and under the supervision of the chief of police. A member of the police reserve force shall have no police authority or power except when specifically assigned to duty by the chief of police. 
(Code 1976, § 14-17; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § V, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tex. Local Government Code, § 341.012(e), (f).  
Sec. 66-26. - To act in supplementary capacity. 
Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall, in no case, assume the full time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements for such regular police officers and only then upon the express approval of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 14-18; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § VI, 7-17-1979) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Tex. Local Government Code, § 341.012(h).  
Sec. 66-27. - Changing policies regarding the police reserve force. 
The city council may at any time change the policies under which the police reserve force is organized and administered, and may expand or disband the unit as it may deem in the best interests of the safety and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 14-19; Ord. No. 79-G-13, § VII, 7-17-1979)  
Chapter 70 - RAILROADS 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Unlawful riding or walking on right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, except in a railroad train, or walk along, over or upon the right-of-way along and over which railroad trains move within the city limits, except at designated walkways and street crossings. 
(Code 1976, § 15-1; Ord. No. 97, § 1, 4-2-1964)  
Sec. 70-2. - Trains obstructing street crossings. 
If a railroad conductor or other person in charge of a railroad engine or train of railroad cars shall stop or cause the same to be stopped across any street, alley, road, highway or other public way in this city, so as to interfere with or obstruct free passage thereon, for a longer time than five consecutive minutes, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 15-2; Ord. No. 37, 11-7-1960)  
Chapter 74 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, Tex. Local Government Code, § 243.001 et seq.; sexually oriented businesses prohibited from registering as massage therapists and establishments licensed under state law, Tex. Occupations Code, § 455.155(d). 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the patrons and employees of such businesses and the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 8 of the Texas Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimate the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community presented by the committee, public comment at two public hearings regarding the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Houston, Texas; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Cleburne, Texas; El Paso, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; New Hanover, North Carolina; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and New York, New York; the council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are currently uncontrolled or insufficiently controlled by the operators of the establishments. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter as adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  According to the Centers for Disease Control, National Center for HIV, STD, and TB Prevention, as of January 1999, there have been 8,874 reported cases of people living with HIV infection (243 of whom are children under the age of 13) in the State of Texas and 24,253 reported cases of people living with AIDS (124 of whom are children under the age of 13) in the State of Texas. This report is attached as Exhibit B of Ordinance No. 02-L-16. 
(8)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with close to 400,000 cases being reported in 1999. 
(9)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(10)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(11)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(12)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(13)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (12) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(14)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to address those substantial governmental concerns. 
(15)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Furthermore, such a licensing procedure will create an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(16)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theatres. 
(17)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to retain information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(18)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(19)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable disease to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct that this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(20)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
(21)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  The general welfare, health, and safety of the patrons and employees of sexually oriented businesses and the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-1; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-1, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 243, as amended. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment the primary business of which is the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs, for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others, or for use in connection with specified sexual activities. This term does not include items used for birth control or for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear semi-nude; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; and/or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, closed-circuit television transmissions, cable television transmissions, subscriber programming, any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be displayed on a computer or other video screen, or any image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable, satellite transmission or other method, which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; 
(2)  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; and 
(3)  Either: 
a.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours, or 
b.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions, images displayed on a computer or other video screen, or any images transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable, satellite transmission, or other method, characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, are regularly shown. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Schertz or his designee or the acting city manager. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or primary theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or primary character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Employee, employ, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person receives compensation (e.g. wages, tips, or favors) or whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, volunteer or other status. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Enforcement officer shall mean the chief of police or his designee or such person as may be so designated by the city council. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
Nude model studio. 
(1)  The term "nude model studio" means any place where a person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
(2)  The term "nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
a.  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Operate or cause to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a single family, two family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, garden home, or manufactured home park district as defined in the Unified Development Code, as amended. 
Residential use means a single family, two family, duplex, multiple family, garden home, or manufactured home park use as defined in the Unified Development Code, as amended. 
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment the primary business of which offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter establishment or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, massage therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved physical therapy and/or medically recognized sexual therapy. 
Sexually oriented business. 
(1)  The term "sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
(2)  The definition "sexually oriented business" shall not include the following: 
a.  A bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is defined as an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, or adult video store under this chapter; 
b.  A business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held; 
c.  A business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
d.  Massage therapists and massage establishments registered under the Massage Therapy Registration Act. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Any of the following offenses as described in Tex. Penal Code, ch. 43 (or any successor provision): 
a.  Prostitution; 
b.  Promotion of prostitution; 
c.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
d.  Compelling prostitution; 
e.  Obscenity; 
f.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
g.  Sexual performance by a child; or 
h.  Possession of child pornography. 
(2)  Any of the following offenses as described in Tex. Penal Code, ch. 21 (or any successor provision): 
a.  Public lewdness; 
b.  Indecent exposure; or 
c.  Indecency with a child. 
(3)  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Tex. Penal Code, ch. 22 (or any successor provision); 
(4)  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Tex. Penal Code, ch. 25 (or any successor provision); 
(5)  Distribution of a controlled substance as described in Tex. Health and Safety Code, ch. 481 (or any successor provision); 
(6)  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or 
(7)  Any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of another state or country; and 
(8)  For which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or the date of termination of parole, probation, or supervision for the offense, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the date of termination of parole, probation, or supervision for the offense, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction, the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, or the date of termination of parole, probation, or supervision for the offense, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction under subsections (1)—(7) is being appealed shall have no effect on the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance from which this chapter is derived takes effect. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities or other ownership interests or form of control which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-2; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-2, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-3. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses include but are not limited to the following business: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-3; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-3, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-4. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter; or 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with applicable law by the enforcement officer or his designee. 
(c)  An applicant for a: (i) sexually oriented business license and/or; (ii) sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license shall file with the enforcement officer a completed application on a form prescribed and provided by the city. An application shall be considered complete if it includes all of the information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be notarized. The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1) through (8) as follows: 
(1)  The full true name of the applicant and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years; 
(2)  Current business and/or mailing address of the applicant; 
(3)  A criminal history background check certified (within 14 days of submission of an application to the city) by the department of public safety; 
(4)  The name, business location, legal description, business mailing address and phone number of the existing or proposed sexually oriented business; 
(5)  Written proof of age, in the form of either: (a) a copy of a birth certificate and current photo, (b) current driver's license with picture, or (c) other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency; 
(6)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held or previously held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason or reasons therefor; 
(7)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; and 
(8)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license, the applicant shall submit three current passport photographs. 
The information provided pursuant to subsections (1) through (8) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the enforcement officer within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, such as a corporation, each officer, director, general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each such person must be qualified under section 74-5 and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(f)  A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter, where applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-4; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-4, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-5. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  Within 20 business days after the receipt of a completed application, the enforcement officer shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of subsections (1)—(8) below is found to be true. 
(1)  An applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 74-4 for issuance of the license. 
(3)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on this provision. 
(4)  The license application fee required by section 74-6 has not been paid. 
(5)  An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(6)  The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to operate under the zoning provisions in the Unified Development Code or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in section 74-13. 
(7)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the enforcement officer or his designee as being in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances. 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed sexually oriented business is in violation of or is not in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant ineligible for a license due to subsection (a)(3) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period described in subsection (8) of the definition of specified criminal activity has elapsed. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. 
(1)  The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time by a patron or the enforcement officer. 
(2)  A sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license shall contain a current photograph of the licensee. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the sexually oriented employee license on file with the city and the on-site employee license near or on his person at all times when on the premises of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business employee shall produce such license for inspection upon request by the enforcement officer as specified in section 74-7(a). 
(d)  An applicant can appeal the denial of a license pursuant to section 74-11. 
(e)  If the city denies a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date the denial is final pursuant to section 74-11. If the licensee appeals under section 74-11, the one-year denial period being the date after all appeals are final. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-5; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-5, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-6. - Fees. 
The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license and on-site employee license shall be established by city council. The fees for a sexually oriented business license, sexually oriented employee license, and an on-site employee license are set forth on Exhibit C of Ordinance No. 02-L-16. City council shall revise such fees every three years by resolution, if necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-6; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-6, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 74-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  A licensee, operator or employee of a sexually oriented business shall permit the enforcement officer or his designee to inspect the premises and the records required to be maintained under this chapter by a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person operates the establishment without maintaining a current list of all employees of the business, along with a complete updated employment application for each employee. A legible copy of a valid driver's license, state identification card, or passport, with a photograph, together with an original photograph accurately depicting the employee as the person appears at the time the person is hired, shall be required and maintained on the premises with the employee's application. 
(c)  A licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the records and premises by the enforcement officer or his designee at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business. 
(d)  The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain all records required to be maintained under the provisions of this section on the licensed premises. 
(e)  The licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the person does not maintain the required records on the premises of the licensed establishment. 
(f)  A licensee, operator, or employee of a sexually oriented business shall permit the enforcement officer or his designee to take photographs of the licensee, operator, or employees of the sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(g)  A licensee, operator, or employee of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if that person does not permit the enforcement officer or his designee to take photographs of the licensee, operator, or employee of the sexually oriented business at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(h)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-7; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-7, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-8. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed only by making application as provided in section 74-4. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. 
(c)  A fee will be assessed for renewal of a license as described in section 74-6. 
(d)  If a sexually oriented business license expires, the sexually oriented business shall not be open for business until a sexually oriented business license is received pursuant to section 77-4. If a sexually oriented business employee license and on-site employee license are expired, the applicant shall not be employed by a sexually oriented business in the city until the applicant receives a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license pursuant to section 74-4. 
(e)  If the enforcement officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date the denial is final pursuant to section 74-11. If the licensee appeals under section 74-11, the one year denial period begins the day after all appeals are final. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(f)  If the enforcement officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant can appeal the denial pursuant to section 74-11. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-8; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-8, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-9. - Suspension. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license, as applicable, for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of suspension. 
(c)  A licensee may appeal the suspension under the provisions in section 74-11. 
(d)  A period of suspension will begin the first day after the decision of suspension becomes final as provided in section 74-11. If the licensee appeals under section 74-11, the period of suspension begins the day after all appeals are final. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, if a license of a sexually oriented business is suspended, the sexually oriented business shall not be open for business for the period of time described by subsections (a) and (d) of this section. If a sexually oriented business employee license or an on-site employee license of an employee is suspended, the employee shall not be employed by a sexually oriented business in the city for the period of time described in subsections (a) and (d) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-9; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-9, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-10. - Revocation. 
(a)  The enforcement officer or his designee shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license if a cause of suspension in section 74-9 occurs and such license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The enforcement officer or his designee shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license and an on-site employee license if he determines that one of the following has occurred: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended or the licensee continued his employment with a sexually oriented business in the city during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal activity for which the time period under subsection (8) of the definition of specified criminal activity has not elapsed; or 
(6)  A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: (a) in exchange for money; or (b) in a public place or within public view. 
(c)  For purposes of section (b)(5), the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 74-11, the enforcement officer or his designee revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one year from the date revocation becomes final. If the licensee appeals under section 74-11, the period of revocation begins the day after all appeals are final. If, subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(4) of this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, if a license of a sexually oriented business is revoked, the sexually oriented business shall not be open for business for the period of time described in subsection (d) of this section. If a sexually oriented business employee license or an on-site employee license of an employee is revoked, the employee shall not be employed by a sexually oriented business in the city for the period of time described in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-10; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-10, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-11. - Notice of license denial, suspension or revocation; hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  A denial, suspension, or revocation of a license is an administrative procedure. The burden of proof shall be on the city and shall be by a preponderance of evidence. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(b)  If the enforcement officer or his designee determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the enforcement officer or his designee shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall include the grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation and shall be delivered by hand or by certified mail to a licensee (for either a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license and on-site employee license, as applicable) or owner of the sexually oriented business. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer. 
(c)  Within ten working days after such notice has been sent, the respondent may provide to the city manager in writing a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. 
(d)  Within three working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the city manager shall notify the respondent in writing of the hearing date on the respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding, which must be within 20 working days of the receipt of the respondent's written response. 
(e)  The city council shall conduct such hearing at which the respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his behalf: 
(1)  If a response is not received by the city manager in the time stated or, if after the hearing the city council finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five days after the city council or its designee sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the city council or its designee shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license. 
(f)  When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue (but not begin) operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue (but not begin) employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-11; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-11, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-12. - No transfer of license. 
A licensee commits an offense if he commits the following: 
(1)  Transfers or attempts to transfer his sexually oriented business license; 
(2)  Operates a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application; or 
(3)  Counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a license. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-12; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-12, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-13. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than as defined and described in the Unified Development Code, as amended. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any of the following: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use; or 
(6)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b). Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(g)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that is in violation of the location restrictions of subsections (a) through (f) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three-years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been revoked. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-13; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-13, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-14. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the enforcement officer denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business is in violation of section 74-13(g) of this chapter, then the applicant may, not later than ten working days after receiving the notice of the denial, file with the city manager a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 74-13(g). 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city manager within such period, the city council shall consider the request. The city council shall set a date for a hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  A hearing may proceed if a quorum of the city councilmembers are present. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 74-13(g) if it makes all of the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter; 
(3)  That the location of the sexually oriented business will not decrease the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of the sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program or neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed. 
(e)  If an applicant demonstrates that he cannot recoup his investment within the three year period provided in section 74-13(g), city council may grant the exemption from the locational restrictions imposed by section 74-13(g) without making the findings required under subsection (d)(1)—(5). 
(f)  The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of the preponderance of evidence. The decision of the city council is final. 
(g)  If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the city council's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 74-13(g) until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(h)  If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the city council's action. 
(i)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions of section 74-13(g). 
(Code 1976, § 15½-14; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-14, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-15. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-15; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-15, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-16. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear semi-nude or in state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-16; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-16, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-17. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears as semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-17; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-17, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-18. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-18; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-18, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-19. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction or surveillance equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1) through (14) above commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-19; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-19, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-20. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 18 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, file, or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-20; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-20, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-21. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-21, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-22. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, shall remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-22, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-23. - Lighting; fencing; security cameras. 
(a)  The owners or operators of a sexually oriented business shall maintain lighting outside the premises of the sexually oriented business on all property adjacent to or under the control of the sexually oriented business at an intensity of four footcandles per square foot with a uniformity ratio of no more than four to one at 18 inches above the surface. Such lighting devices shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business shall be surrounded by an eight-foot chain link fence or similar fencing materials on not more or not less than three sides of the premises of the sexually oriented business. The front of the building (facing the public right-of-way) shall not contain any fencing materials. Such fencing shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
(c)  The owners or operators of a sexually oriented business shall maintain a security camera system outside of the sexually oriented business that can retrieve identifiable images for the entire perimeter of such property in order to assist in the identification and apprehension of persons engaged in criminal activity. A sign shall be posted at the entrance of the sexually oriented business and in the parking lot stating that the entire outside perimeter of the sexually oriented business is monitored by a security camera system. The security camera system and posted signs shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-23, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-24. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code, § 243.010, any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $4,000.00; 
(2)  Confinement in jail for a term not to exceed one year; or 
(3)  Both such fine or confinement. 
(b)  Pursuant to Tex. Local Government Code, § 243.010, a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Code 1976, § 15½-21; Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-24, 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 74-25. - Compliance with Unified Development Code. 
An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business must comply with all relevant provisions of the Unified Development Code, including, but not limited to, zoning ordinances, building code ordinances, fire code ordinances, and health and safety ordinances. A violation of the Unified Development Code may be enforced under either the Unified Development Code or under this chapter as it relates to sexually oriented businesses. 
(Ord. No. 02-L-16, § 15½-25, 8-6-2002)  
Chapter 75 - SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY AND CHILD SAFETY ZONE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 75-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following terms, words, and the derivation thereof shall have the meaning given herein. 
Child means any person under the age of 17. 
Child safety zone means any premises that is used as a school, licensed day-care facility, private or public playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, video arcade facility, public or private park, or public library. 
In this section, "playground," "premises," "school," "video arcade facility," and "youth center" have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134, as amended. 
Database means the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database. 
Day-care facility means a facility licensed by the State of Texas, which provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Public or private park means (i) any land designated for public recreation or any athletic field that is owned, leased, or maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, conservation areas, recreational centers, skate parks, water parks, or public swimming pools or (ii) any private land that is used by the general public as a recreational or park area, including, but not limited to, a park or playground maintained by a community home owners' association. 
Residence, permanent means the place within the city that a person registers or verifies under Article 62.152, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as the person's residence. 
Residence, temporary means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person under 17 years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under Chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 14-M-23 , § 1, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 75-2. - Sexual offenders residence prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any child safety zone. 
(b)  A sex offender shall not on each October 30 th and 31 st (or any date set by the City for trick-or-treaters) between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the child safety zone. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person who has a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of a child safety zone: 
(1)  Is under 18 years of age and: 
a.  Resides with the person's parent or legal guardian; or 
b.  Has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives that: 
1.  Requires the person to register under Article 62.001(5), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and 
2.  Involves a victim or intended victim under 17 years of age; 
(2)  Established the permanent residence or temporary residence and complied with all the sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, and has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives that: 
a.  Requires the person to register under Article 62.001(5), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and 
b.  Involves a victim or intended victim under 17 years of age; or 
(3)  Established the permanent residence or temporary residence and complied with all sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the date a new child safety zone is established, and has not been convicted of an offense after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, or the date the new child safety zone is established, that: 
a.  Requires the person to register under Article 62.001(5), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; and 
b.  Involves a victim or intended victim under 17 years of age. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (d), a person is considered to have established a residence at a correctional facility, as that term is defined under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.07(14), in which the person is confined for more than seven consecutive days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives for a conviction of any sexual offense involving a person under 17 years of age. 
(f)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person required to register on the database has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under Chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(g)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person required to register on the database has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required reversed on appeal or pardoned. 
(h)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person's duty to register on the database has expired. 
(i)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the information on the database is incorrect, and the person listed on the database can provide evidence to show such error. 
(j)  It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that a person, who is required to register as a sex offender under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, was allowed by mistake or error of the city to reside in a permanent residence or temporary residence that is within 1,000 feet of any child safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 14-M-23 , § 1, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 75-3. - Sexual offenders prohibited from going in, on, or within child safety zones. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a sex offender to knowingly or intentionally go in, on, or within 1,000 feet of a child safety zone. 
(b)  Upon discharge from community supervision or parole, it is a defense to prosecution under this section that, at the time a person prohibited from going in, on, or within a child safety zone pursuant to subsection (a) went in, on, or within the child safety zone, 
(1)  Such person was the parent or legal guardian of a child 18 years of age or younger who resides with the person; and 
(2)  The child was on the premises of the child safety zone. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person required to register on the database has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under Chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person required to register on the database has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required reversed on appeal or pardoned. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person's duty to register on the database has expired. 
(f)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the information on the database is incorrect, and the person listed on the database can provide evidence to show such error. 
(Ord. No. 14-M-23 , § 1, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 75-4. - Child safety zone map. 
The Schertz Police Department will maintain a map illustrating the child safety zones in the city. The city shall review the map annually for changes. This map will be available to the public at the Schertz Police Department or available on both the city website and the Schertz Police Department website. 
(Ord. No. 14-M-23 , § 1, 7-22-2014)  
Sec. 75-5. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14-M-23 , § 1, 7-22-2014)  
Chapter 78 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of home-rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.001 et seq.; general authority regarding sidewalks, Tex. Transportation Code, § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, Tex. Transportation Code, § 316.001 et seq.; consent of governing body required for utility use of streets and ways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting the validity of any ordinance: 
(1)  Dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or other public way in the city; 
(2)  Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; or 
(3)  Establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city. 
And all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1976, § 16-1)  
Sec. 78-2. - City's extraterritorial jurisdiction to include roads and highways. 
The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, for all purposes as specified by statute, shall include all roads and highways traversing lands over which the city has extraterritorial jurisdiction and shall extend to the center of all roads and highways abutting any such land. 
(Code 1976, § 16-2; Ord. No. 120, 5-6-1965)  
Sec. 78-3. - Utilities to maintain plans of service systems installed, in, under, etc., streets. 
Persons, firms or corporations that maintain utilities distribution systems or other permanently installed service systems, in, under, over or along any street or other public property within the city shall maintain current "as built" plans on file with the city secretary at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 16-3; Ord. No. 256, § 6, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-4. - Trimming of trees and shrubs by utilities with service systems in, under, etc., streets. 
An inspector furnished by the city shall supervise any and all trimming of trees, shrubs or other foliage performed by any person maintaining any utility distribution system or other service system in, under, over or along any street or other public place in the city. All such trimming shall be done in accordance with the requirements prescribed by such inspector. Such inspector may, at any time, require the trimming of trees, shrubs, or other foliage by any such person whose lines, poles or fixtures are so placed as to require trimming to keep the same free of fire and other hazards created by the proximity of such trees, shrubs or other foliage. 
(Code 1976, § 16-4; Ord. No. 256, § 7, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-5. - Painting or placing signs, poles, posts, etc., on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed or paint or cause to be painted upon any sidewalk, street, or in any public right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city any sign, notice, pole, post, or any other structure. 
(b)  The painting of reflective address numbers on the curb in front of residents' homes will be allowed (i) to assist emergency services (EMS, fire, and police departments) in quickly and safely locating callers with emergencies both day and night and (ii) to assist delivery persons and visitors to easily find residents in the city. 
(c)  Persons soliciting to paint address numbers on the curbs in front of residences must complete an application and obtain a permit from the City. 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of each individual who will do such work must be listed on the application. A fee of $50.00 is required for such a permit. The fee may be waived by the city manager or his/her designee for non-profit, tax-exempt groups including, but not limited to, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, sports leagues, civic groups, or church groups. A copy of any document soliciting curb painting must be approved by the city manager or his/her designee. Such solicitation document shall include the following statement (printed in boldface type, 12 point font or greater) "Painting address numbers on the curb is optional and not required by the City of Schertz". A copy of the solicitor's form and permit must be on file with the city. 
(2)  The person performing the work must have the permit in his/her possession. Only those persons listed on the permit may perform the work. No permit may be transferred or assigned to another person or company without the prior written consent of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(3)  A permit is valid for 90 days. Persons can re-apply in accordance with City of Schertz Code of Ordinances, Chapter 62—Peddlers and Solicitors. 
(4)  No permit is required for a resident to paint the address of his/her residence on the curb in front of his/her residence. 
(d)  All solicitors and residents must adhere to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Homeowners should consult their homeowner's association rules (if applicable) before painting or authorizing any curb painting. 
(2)  The address numbers must be painted white, three inches high, centered within a five-inch high, dark colored background. The numbers must be painted with reflective paint. The background must be rectangular in shape and not longer than 20 inches. The address block must be placed within six inches of the driveway apron on the curb or centered on the curb if there is no driveway. 
(3)  Unacceptable work must be removed or corrected within ten working days after receiving a citation from the city. 
(e)  Any painting of signs, symbols, or numerals properly performed under the provisions of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of other ordinances of the City of Schertz regulating signs. 
(f)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of subsections (b)—(e) hereof shall be subject to the issuance of a citation and the payment of a fine. Each day that such markings, paintings, or signs remain in place shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to and cumulative thereof the City of Schertz, Texas shall also have the right to seek an injunction to enjoin any violation of this section. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his/her designee to remove any sign, pole, post, or other structure found in violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 16-5; Ord. No. 44, §§ 15, 16, 2-6-1961; Ord. No. 02-M-7, § 1, 5-7-2002; Ord. No. 10-M-15, § 1, 6-8-2010 )  
Sec. 78-6. - Loitering on streets or public places—Forbidden. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loaf, loiter, or idle on and along any street or public place within the City of Schertz, Texas, when not engaged in a legitimate business or purpose or when engaged in an immoral enterprise. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be fined not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 130, 9-2-1965) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 130, adopted Sept. 2, 1965, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion as section 78-6 was at the discreation of the editor.  
Sec. 78-7. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article by any person, firm or corporation is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor, and any violation thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $40.00 or not more than $200.00. Any person in violation of this article and having paid a fine assessed for such violation, shall not be relieved of the expense incurred by the city in removing or remedying the condition prescribed in section 78-5. 
(Code 1976, § 16-6; Ord. No. 02-M-7, § 1, 5-7-2002) 
Editor's note— In keeping with the numbering style of the Code section 78-6 was renumbered as 78-7.  
Secs. 78-7—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall in any way disturb, dig into or cut the surface of any street or alley in the city, for the location of driveways, electric lines, gas lines, any manner of utilities or any other purpose, without first securing a permit from the city manager. 
(b)  Each applicant for a permit required by this section shall file with the city manager complete plans for excavations or other work that is intended to be accomplished and plans for restoring the surface of the street or alley after such excavation or other work is completed. 
(c)  If the plans filed under subsection (b) are satisfactory and include proper provisions for restoration of the surface of the street or alley to the same condition it was in prior to commencement of the work, the manager, upon payment of a fee of $25.00, shall issue a permit to the applicant for the work in question to be done. Such permit will contain the cost of construction. 
(Code 1976, § 16-17; Ord. No. 256, §§ 1, 2, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-32. - Time limit for completion of work. 
All work authorized under a permit issued pursuant to this article must be completed within 90 days after the receipt of such permit or the same shall be void. 
(Code 1976, § 16-18; Ord. No. 256, § 2, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-33. - Street to be kept open; exception. 
All streets on which work is being performed by any person pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be left in such condition as to allow such streets to remain open for traffic at night and at all other times, unless 24 hours notification is given the police department and the fire department of the city. No public street in the city shall be barricaded or closed by any person without written consent of the police department and fire department of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-19; Ord. No. 256, § 5, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-34. - Restoration of surface. 
Any person who has received a permit for excavation or other work in the streets or alleys of the city shall be required to restore the subsurface and finished surface of such street or alley in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the city engineer. In the event that the city is required to perform any work in connection with the restoration of the surface of such street or alley, the cost of such work shall be paid by the person securing such permit. 
(Code 1976, § 16-20; Ord. No. 256, §§ 3, 8, 4-20-1972)  
Sec. 78-35. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  The city will provide an inspector to inspect the progress of all work being done under a permit issued pursuant to this article, while the same is in progress. Such inspector shall assure himself that all requirements established by the city engineer are complied with by the person performing such work. 
(b)  The city inspector shall file, for record in the city secretary's office, a copy of his final inspection report covering work inspected under this section. The city shall be reimbursed, at the rate of $25.00 per day for each day or part thereof of such work, as inspection fees. Payment of such fee shall commence on the date physical construction starts and shall terminate on the date of final inspection by the city inspector. It shall be the responsibility of the person to whom the permit is issued under this article to pay such inspection fees. 
(Code 1976, § 16-21; Ord. No. 256, § 4, 4-20-1972)  
Secs. 78-36—78-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, ETC., OF SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 78-59. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any sidewalk, curb, driveway or any other work on any public property within the city, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager. 
(b)  Each applicant for a permit under this section shall pay a fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by ordinance for inspec-tions for other engineering services performed by the city engineer or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Every permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be deemed canceled if active work is not commenced within 60 days from the date of issuance of such permit. If the permit shall be canceled, all fees paid for such permit shall be retained by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-33; Ord. No. 255, §§ 1, 3, 4, 4-13-1972)  
Sec. 78-60. - Specifications. 
All sidewalks, curbs and driveways built within the city shall be built in conformity with the standard specifications for such work, as prescribed by the city engineer and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 16-34; Ord. No. 255, § 2, 4-13-1972)  
Sec. 78-61. - Curb cuts for driveways—Residential property. 
Curb cuts for residential driveway aprons shall be not less than ten feet in width, and not more than 12 feet in width for a single driveway apron nor more than 24 feet in width for a double driveway apron. Curb cuts will be permitted only for driveway aprons providing access to a garage, carport or hardstand. Not more than one curb cut will be permitted for each residential parcel of land. 
(Code 1976, § 16-35; Ord. No. 255, § 5, 4-13-1972)  
Sec. 78-62. - Same—Commercial property. 
(a)  Curb cuts for commercial driveway aprons shall not exceed 30 feet in width and the aggregate width of all curb cuts shall not exceed 50 percent of the parcel frontage. 
(b)  Where multiple driveway aprons are used for commercial property, the curb cuts shall be at least 20 feet apart. 
(c)  For parcels of commercial property with less than 100 feet of the frontage, a maximum of two curb cuts will be permitted. 
(d)  For parcels of commercial property, no curb cut will be permitted for any parking facility which requires vehicles to enter a street in reverse. 
(Code 1976, § 16-36; Ord. No. 255, §§ 6—9, 4-13-1972)  
Sec. 78-63. - Curb cuts in curb returns. 
No curb cut in curb returns will be permitted in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-37; Ord. No. 255, § 10, 4-13-1972)  
Sec. 78-64. - Variances from article. 
Where the city manager finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the regulations prescribed in this article, the city manager may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this article. In granting variances and modifications, the city manager may require such conditions as will, in his judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. In the event the city manager should disapprove a request for variance, the applicant for the variance may request that the city council make a final determination on the request for variance. 
(Code 1976, § 16-38; Ord. No. 81-L-36, § 1, 11-3-1981)  
Secs. 78-65—78-86. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET RENTAL CHARGE FOR GAS MAINS, PIPES, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Compensation to the city for the use of streets and other public property by other utilities is provided for by individual franchise ordinances, which are not included in this Code, but are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
State Law reference— Public way occupancy charge payable by utilities, Tex. Tax Code, § 182.025. 
 
Sec. 78-87. - Imposed; amount; when payable. 
Upon February 1 of each and every year, every person, association, organization, company or corporation occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, boulevards, alleys, parks or other public places in the city, with poles, pipes, wires, cables, other fixtures, or any other means of conveyance of services, shall as a condition to such further occupancy pay to the city annually for such privileges a rental fee equal to two percent of the gross receipts received by such person, association, organization, company or corporation from its business conducted in the corporate limits of the city, for the preceding year, which sums shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-50; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 3, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-88. - Report of gross receipts of payor. 
All persons, associations, organizations, companies, and corporations using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, sewer, water or gas pipe lines, pipes and fixtures or any other means of conveyance of services in any of the public streets, avenues, alleys, highways and boulevards, parks and other public grounds of the corporate limits of the city, and wherever the city has or ever shall have jurisdiction, shall on February 1 of each and every year file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the business conducted by such persons, associations, organizations, companies and corporations within the corporate limits of the city, for the preceding year ending December 31st. 
(Code 1976, § 16-51; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 1, 9-3-1981)  
Sec. 78-89. - Examination of books and records of payor. 
The city council may when it deems necessary have the books and records of the person, association, organization, company or corporation rendering the statement required in section 78-88 of this article examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. 
(Code 1976, § 16-52; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 2, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-90. - Receipt for payment. 
Upon receipt of the above rental fee by the city, the city secretary shall deliver to the person, association, organization, company or corporation paying the same a receipt for such rental, which said receipt shall authorize such person, association, organization, company or corporation to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, boulevards, parks and other public ways, of the city in carrying on its business for 12 months from February 1st of such year. 
(Code 1976, § 16-53; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 4, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-91. - Nature of charge. 
The rental fee for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements, boulevards, and all other public places of the city provided for in this article is not charged as a tax but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by such persons, associations, organizations, companies and corporations of using the streets, easements, alleys, boulevards, highways and other public ways of the city in the conduct of their respective businesses; and such charges are additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against the person, associations, organizations, companies, or corporations mentioned herein. 
(Code 1976, § 16-54; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 5, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-92. - Article grants no relief from other laws and ordinances. 
Nothing herein is intended to relieve any person, association, organization, company or corporation of any condition, restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance now in existence or ever shall be in existence of the said city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-55; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 6, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-93. - Article does not grant franchise; cancellation of privileges and refund of rental. 
This article does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 16-56; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 7, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-94. - Right of city to adopt restrictions, regulations, etc. 
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the erection, specifications and maintenance of poles, wires, cables, pipes, and other appurtenances in the streets, highways, boulevards, easements, alleys and other public ways of the said city and from time to time to require such poles, pipes, cables, wires and other property equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city may deem proper. 
(Code 1976, § 16-57; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 8, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-95. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every person, association, organization, company and corporation who shall operate any business without the payment of the rentals provided for herein shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $200.00 for each and every day that such person, association, organization, company or corporation shall conduct such business using and occupying the streets, highways, boulevards, easements, alleys, or other public ways of the city, without the payment of the said rentals which said sum may be recovered by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction by a suit filed therein. 
(b)  Every person, association, organization, company or corporation and the local manager or agent of every such person, association, organization, company or corporation failing or refusing to make the report required by section 78-88, or failing or refusing to allow the examination provided for in section 78-89 may, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be fined in any sum not to exceed $200.00 and every day failure or refusal, as mentioned in this section, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 16-58; Ord. No. 81-F-24, §§ 9, 10, 9-1-1981)  
Sec. 78-96. - Inspections required. 
The city fire marshal, building inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, city's police officers, and such other persons designated by the city, shall have the power and authority, and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time to time all telephone, telegraph, electric light or other poles, sewer, water and pipe lines, gas pipe lines, pipes and other fixtures and appurtenances in the public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of the same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Code 1976, § 16-59; Ord. No. 81-F-24, § 11, 9-1-1981)  
Secs. 78-97—78-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 78-121. - Right-of-way construction. 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, or operation of facilities within any public right-of-way in the city except as provided in accordance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances of the city and the directives of the public works department. 
(Code 1976, § 16-70; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-70, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-122. - Registration and construction permits. 
(a)  Registration. In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, all users of city right-of-way will register with the city. Registration and permits shall be issued in the name of the person who will use the facilities. Such registration must be renewed every five years. For utilities subject to a current franchise or license, the continuation of the franchise or license shall be deemed to be evidence of such renewal. If a registration is not renewed, subject to 60 days written notification to the user by the director of public works, the facilities of the user in the right-of-way shall be deemed to have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the user shall inform the city of the change no more than 30 days after the date the change occurs. Registration shall include the following: 
(1)  The names of the user and the owner of the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of people who will be contact person(s) for the user and the owner; 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the user; 
(4)  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact for the user who shall be available 24 hours a day; and 
(5)  Proof of the following required insurance and bonds: 
a.  An applicant shall provide liability insurance in the total amount of $6,000,000.00; $1,000,000.00 primary plus $5,000,000.00 umbrella, or other provisions approved in writing by the city manager. 
b.  The coverage shall be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury or death, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, and explosion and collapse hazards. 
c.  Each policy shall include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not less than 30 days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
d.  The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address, and telephone number of the insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
e.  The applicant shall file with the city manager an annual surety bond which will be valid for each year construction will occur and for one full year after the completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the state in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost (as approved by the city manager) to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, or unsafe or other provisions acceptable to the city manager. 
f.  The above requirements shall be deemed to be met by the holder of a current franchise or license if its franchise or license adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
(b)  Construction permits. 
(1)  No person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in city right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit shall be in the name of the person who will use the facilities to be constructed. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the user of the facilities to be constructed. 
a.  Emergency repairs related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the public works department shall be notified in writing within two business days of any construction related to an emergency repair, including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable. 
b.  The phrase "construction or installation of facilities" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property (unless a street or sidewalk cut was required), or repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires a street or sidewalk cut, the closure of a nonresidential traffic lane, excavation, or boring. 
(2)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, the location of the work, the location of the facilities, the dates and times the work is to take place, and any other conditions established by the director of public works. 
(3)  The person requesting a permit shall provide the director of public works with documentation in the format specified by the director describing the following: 
a.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; 
b.  Engineering plans which shall be on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet unless otherwise approved in writing by the director of public works; 
c.  Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which the applicant plans to use; 
d.  Detail of all existing city utilities in relationship to the applicant's proposed route; 
e.  Detail of what the applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc.; 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets (include city standard construction details); 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, hand holes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth located in the city's right-of-way; 
h.  Hand hole and/or manhole typical of the type of hand holes and/or manholes the applicant plans to use or access; 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by the applicant; 
j.  The name, address, and telephone number of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name, address, and telephone number of an individual representative of the contractor who will be available at all times during construction; 
k.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) shall be subject to written approval by the director of public works; 
l.  A statement that the requirements of subsection (a)(5) have been met; and 
m.  Five sets of engineering plans. 
(4)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The director of public works shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he may reasonable require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(5)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and shall be made available for inspection by the director of public works at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(6)  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time period, the permit holder may request an extension in writing from the director of public works. 
(7)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city shall be submitted to the director of public works, if requested. 
(8)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least 15 working days before the proposed commencement of work described in the request, unless waived in writing by the director of public works. 
(9)  Requests for permits and extensions of permits will be approved or disapproved by the director of public works within a reasonable time or receiving all the required information. The director of public works will use his best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for a permit as soon as possible. 
(10)  The public works department or the applicant can require a pre-construction meeting, and the director of public works can require on-going construction meetings and a post-construction meeting. 
(11)  Permit applications are required for construction on new, replacement, or upgrading of the user's aerial or underground facilities in the right-of-way. 
(Code 1976, § 16-71; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-71, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-123. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The public works department must be notified in writing at least 48 hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, or its contractor or representative. At the time of notification, the right-of-way user shall inform the public works department in writing of the number (or other information) assigned from the one-call system. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable city, state, and federal laws. 
(c)  Three by three feet information signs stating the identity and telephone number of the person doing the work and the permit holder's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur at least 48 hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An informational sign shall be posted on the right-of-way 100 feet before the construction location commences and each 100 feet thereafter in the construction location, unless other posting arrangements are approved in writing or required by the director of public works. 
(d)  Erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. 
(e)  Lane closures on major thoroughfares shall be limited after 8:30 a.m. and before 4:00 p.m. unless the director of public works grants prior written approval. Arrow boards shall be required on lane closures, with all barricades, advanced warning signs, and 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the public works department. 
(f)  Permit holders shall be responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. A responsible representative of the permit holder shall be available to the public works department at all times during construction. 
(g)  The permit holder shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with city, state, and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, and barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas shall require wire-backed silt fencing. Upon request by the director of public works, the permit holder may be required to furnish applicable documentation submitted to or received from the federal or state government. 
(h)  The permit holder or its contractor or subcontractor shall notify the public works department immediately of any damage to other utilities, whether city-owned or privately owned. 
(i)  It is the city's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior written approval must be obtained from the director of public works, and all requirements of the public works department shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk cuts or removals shall be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicles and pedestrians. 
(j)  Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, including in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(k)  New facilities must be installed to a depth approved in writing by the public works department. 
(l)  All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while boring is in progress. The locator shall place a mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(m)  The working hours in the right-of-ways are 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Work that needs to be performed after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday must be approved in writing in advance by the director of public works. Any work performed on Saturday must be approved in writing at least 24 hours in advance by the director of public works. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday from 7:00 am. to 6:00 p.m., unless approved in writing in advance by the director of public works. Except for emergency repairs, no work shall be done on city holidays. 
(n)  People working in the right-of-way shall be responsible for obtaining line locations (certified in a form acceptable to the director of public works) for all affected utilities or other facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the geographic information system or relying upon plans of records shall not satisfy this requirement. 
(o)  The permit holder shall be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities in the right-of-way. When required by the director of public works, the permit holder shall verify locations by potholing, hand digging, or other methods approved in writing by the director of public works prior to any excavation or boring, with the exception of work involving lane closures, as described above. 
(p)  Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance in writing by the director of public works. Hand holes or manholes shall not be located in sidewalks, unless approved in writing by the director of public works. 
(q)  Location flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(r)  Construction which requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with city ordinances and applicable federal and state law and the directives of the public works department. 
(Code 1976, § 16-72; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-72, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-124. - Plans of record. 
Right-of-way users shall provide the director of public works with "plans of record" within 90 days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. Users which have facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the date of this chapter who have not provided "plans of record" shall provide one quarter of the information concerning facilities in city right-of-way within one year after the adoption of this chapter and one quarter each six months thereafter. The plans shall be provided to the city with as much detail and accuracy as is required by the director of public works. All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit shall be submitted and updated in the plans of record. The detail shall include location, size of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. The detail is not required to include capacity of lines, customers, or competitively sensitive details. "Plans of record" shall be submitted in digital format. The requirements of this section may be waived in writing by the director of public works for good cause. 
(Code 1976, § 16-73; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-73, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-125. - Conformance with public improvements. 
Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public works projects (e.g. installation or improvement of storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, etc.), it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user to another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the user of the facilities at such user's expense (unless provided otherwise by state law or a franchise in effect on the effective date of this provision until that franchise expires or is otherwise terminated) within the time limits set by the director of public works working in conjunction with the user of the facilities, or if no time frame can be agreed upon, within 90 days from the date the notice was sent to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved in writing by the director of public works. Facilities not moved after 90 days or within the approved schedule, as same may be extended from time to time, shall be deemed abandoned after 30 days written notice from the director of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 16-74; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-74, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-126. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade, and maintain facilities. 
(b)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded, or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people; or 
(2)  The facilities do not meet all applicable city codes and all applicable federal and state laws; or 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; or 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the directions provided by the public works department; or 
(5)  The facilities create or expose an environmental hazard. 
(Code 1976, § 16-75; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-75, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-127. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Restoration must be approved in writing by the director of public works. 
(b)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works and the property owner. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work or better either by sodding or seeding, as directed by director of public works; 
(2)  Installation of all manholes and hand holes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in daily, unless other safety requirements are approved in writing by the director of public works; 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation site to city specifications; and 
(6)  Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler systems. 
(c)  All location flags shall be removed during the clean-up progress by the permit holder or its contractor at the completion of the work. 
(d)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved public works department schedules and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. If restoration is not satisfactory or is not performed in a timely manner, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not complete may be halted by the director of public works, and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete and satisfactory. 
(Code 1976, § 16-76; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-76, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-128. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
If any of the provisions of this chapter are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the director of public works. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions of this chapter in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional requirements may be imposed. 
(Code 1976, § 16-77; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-77, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-129. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. 
Appeal from denial or revocation of a permit or from the decision of the director of public works shall be to the city council. Appeal shall be filed in writing with the city manager within 15 days from the date of the decision being appealed. 
(Code 1976, § 16-78; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-78, 9-18-2001)  
Sec. 78-130. - Designee of city official. 
Any action required or permitted to be taken under this chapter by the city manager or the director of public works may be taken by such official's designee. 
(Code 1976, § 16-79; Ord. No. 01-S-18, § 16-79, 9-18-2001)  
Secs. 78-131—78-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 78-151. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers; 
(2)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
(3)  Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-152. - Governing law. 
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code ("the Code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-153. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions found in the city Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes, Node Support Poles, and Transport Facilities ("the Design Manual") are hereby incorporated into this chapter and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the design manual are specifically applicable to this chapter: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The city uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with Texas Local Government Code chapter 284. 
City means the City of Schertz, Texas. 
City council means the municipal governing body of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
City manager means the manager or his/her designee for the City of Schertz, Texas. 
Chapter 284 means Texas Local Government Code, chapter 284. 
Code means the Texas Local Government Code. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of Network Nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances. 
Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
Location means the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Schertz, Texas, or designee. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower 
Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node; or 
c.  Transport facilities. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "Street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "Street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Chapter 284, Section 51.002, Utilities Code. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes", "network nodes", "node support poles", and "transport facilities" as defined in Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-154. - Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
Pursuant to this chapter and subject to the design manual and the [Texas Local Government] Code, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. 
The terms of this chapter shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-155. - Compliance with design manual and applicable codes. 
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this right-of-way management ordinance, city applicable codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-156. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes, network support poles and transport facilities described in the [Texas Local Government] Code in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-157. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 284 of the [Texas Local Government] Code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-of-way. 
(b)  As required by Chapter 284 of the [Texas Local Government] Code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought. 
(c)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(d)  The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this chapter; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60 th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least $1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage. 
(e)  Exception. As provided in Section 284.157 of the [Texas Local Government] Code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks, recreational trails or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks, recreational trails or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; 
(4)  Notwithstanding subdivision (E) above, the network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of work described in this subdivision (E). 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-158. - Installation in historic districts or design districts. 
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district; or an area that has been designated as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements described in the city's design manual. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts at a future date. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-159. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node, node support pole or transport facilities in a public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-160. - Municipal review process by the city. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. The City shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
(1)  For network nodes and note support poles. No later than 30 days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility. No later than ten days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
(1)  For network nodes. No later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles. No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities. No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, the city shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denied application. 
(1)  The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90 th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(e)  Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-161. - Time of installation. 
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-162. - Applicable fees and rental rates to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth in the city's fee schedule, which shall not be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(b)  The city fee schedule shall list rates for the following: 
(1)  Network nodes. 
a.  Application fee. The application fee shall be for each network node for up to but not more than 30 network nodes. The fee shall encompass up to five nodes with an additional fee for each node after that on the same application. 
b.  Annual public right-of-way rate fee. The annual public right-of-way shall be per network node installed in the city public rights-of-way. 
c.  Public right-of-way rate adjustment. As provided in Section 284.054 of the [Texas Local Government] Code, the city may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers for Texas. The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60 th day following the written notice. 
(c)  Node support poles. The application fee for a network support pole shall be a separate fee per pole. 
(d)  Transport facilities. 
(1)  An application fee shall be paid for each transport facility. 
(2)  The may be assessed a monthly transport facility rental rate for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under Chapter 283 of the [Texas Local Government] Code or cable franchise fees under Chapter 66 of the Texas Utility Code. 
(e)  Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(f)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's pole service agreement, there shall be a fee assessed per year per pole for collocation of network nodes on city service poles. 
(g)  City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with Section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(h)  The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-163. - Indemnity. 
As provided in Section 284.302 of the [Texas Local Government] Code, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Sec. 78-164. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
Nothing in this article shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 17-D-32 , § II(Exh. A), 8-29-2017)  
Secs. 78-165—78-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ROADWAY CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES 
 
Sec. 78-170. - Short title. 
This article be known and cited as the Schertz Roadway Capital Recovery Fees Article. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-171. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to ensure the provision of adequate roadway facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-172. - Authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395 and the City Charter. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize all powers and procedures authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, or other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this article. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-173. - Definitions. 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum capital recovery fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article. The amount of the capital recovery fee per service unit is a measure of the traffic impact on system facilities created by the new development. 
Capital improvement means a roadway facility with a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city (including the city's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system). "Capital improvement" applies to a newly constructed roadway facility or to the expansion of an existing roadway facility necessary to serve new development. 
Capital improvements plan for roadway capital recovery fees identifies the capital improvements or facility expansions and associated costs for each roadway service area that are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development within the service area, for a period not to exceed ten years, which capital improvements are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of roadway capital recovery fees pursuant to this article. The capital improvements plan for roadway capital recovery fees is set out in the adopted "Schertz Roadway Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan Final Report" adopted by resolution of the city council, and attached to Ord. No. 18-M-13 as exhibit B. 
Capital recovery fee or roadway capital recovery fee (also referred to as roadway impact fee) means a charge or assessment imposed by the city, pursuant to this article, against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to the new development. "Capital recovery fees" or "roadway capital recovery fees" do not include road escrow payments for site-related facilities imposed under facility agreements in existence on the effective date of this article. The term also does not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of drainage facilities, streets, sidewalks, or curbs if the dedication or construction is required by the subdivision ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to the new development. 
Capital recovery plan or Impact fee plan means the plan that identifies the calculation of the maximum assessable capital recovery fee for each service area based on the adopted capital improvements plan and land use assumptions. The capital recovery plan is set out in the "2017 Schertz Roadway Impact Fee Final Report" and attached to Ord. No. 18-M-13 as exhibit C. 
City means the City of Schertz, Texas. 
Credit means: 
(1)  When used in the context of determining the maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit, an amount equal to: 
a.  That portion of ad valorem tax and utility service revenues generated by new service units during the program period that is used for the payment of improvements, including the payment of debt, that are included in the capital improvements plan; or 
b.  In the alternative, a credit equal to 50 percent of the total projected cost of implementing the capital improvements plan; or 
(2)  When used in the context of determining the offset for system facilities, the amount of the reduction of an capital recovery fee designed to fairly reflect the value of any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of a system facility agreed to or required by the city as a condition of development approval, pursuant to rules herein established or pursuant to city council-approved administrative guidelines which value shall be credited on a vehicle mile basis against roadway facilities capital recovery fees otherwise due from the development and which credits are hereinafter referred to as an "offset" or "offsets" to avoid confusion. 
Development unit or development units is the expression of the magnitude of the transportation demand created by each land use planned within a particular development and is used to compute the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application. 
Final plat recordation or recordation of a final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions precedent to recording an approved final plat (minor plat or record plat) in the county, including the final completion of and acceptance by the city of any infrastructure or other improvements required by the subdivision ordinance or any other ordinance and the plat is filed for record with the county clerk's office. 
Land use assumptions means and includes a description of the service areas and the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, in each service area over a ten-year period upon which the roadway improvements plan is based. The land use assumptions are set out in the adopted document "Schertz Roadway Impact Fee Land Use Assumptions Final Report" adopted by resolution of the city council, and attached to Ord. No. 18-M-13 as exhibit D. 
Land use vehicle-mile equivalency table or LUVMET is a table that provides the standardized measure of consumption or use of roadway facilities attributable to a new development based on the land use category of the development and historical data and trends applicable to the city during the previous ten years. The LUVMET recognizes and expresses the magnitude of the transportation demand created by different land use categories within a particular development and allow different uses of land to more accurately bear the cost and expense of the impacts generated by such uses. The LUVMET expresses the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application as "vehicle miles (per development unit)." The applicable LUVMET is included by reference as Table 7 of the capital recovery plan. For land use categories with no applicability to those on Table 7, the applicant may petition for the use of an appropriate vehicle-mile equivalent by submitting a trip generation study including trip rates and lengths reflecting specific conditions of the proposed land use and local trip lengths. The study must include enough data to be statistically valid and approval will be at the discretion of the city manager or designee. 
New development means a project involving the subdivision of land and/or the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements, measured by an increase in the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with the county of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision ordinance or the issuance of a building permit. 
Offset or offsets means the amount of the reduction of an capital recovery fee designed to fairly reflect the value of any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of a system facility agreed to or required by the city as a condition of development approval, pursuant to rules herein established, using the values established in the capital recovery plan, or pursuant to city council-approved administrative guidelines which value shall be credited on a vehicle mile basis against roadway facilities capital recovery fees otherwise due from the development. 
Preliminary plat approval means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and the plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
Recoup means to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously installed or caused to be installed. 
Roadway means any freeway, expressway or arterial or collector streets or roads designated in the city's adopted master thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. The term includes the city's share of costs for roadways designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system. 
Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting or curbs. "Roadway facility" also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway officially enumerated in the federal or state highway system. "Roadway facility" includes the city's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or state highway system, including local matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the establishment of curbs, gutters, drainage appurtenances, and rights-of-way. "Roadway facility" excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
Roadway service area or roadway benefits area means the geographic area(s) within the city's corporate limits, which do not exceed six miles and within which geographic area(s) roadway capital recovery fees for capital improvements will be collected for new development occurring within such area, and within which fees so collected will be expended for those capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan to be located within the roadway service area. "Roadway service area" does not include any land outside the city limits. Roadway service areas are shown on Figure 1 of the capital recovery plan. 
Service unit means one vehicle mile of travel in the afternoon peak hour of traffic and is also referred to as a "vehicle mile." 
Service unit equivalent means the amount of capacity created by contribution of a capital improvement on behalf of a new development, expressed in vehicle miles. 
Single family residential lot means a lot platted to accommodate a single family or a duplex dwelling unit, as authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is constructed for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway facilities to serve the new development and which is not included in the roadway improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under the subdivision, and/or other applicable, regulations. 
System facility means a capital improvement which is designated in the capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. A system facility may include a capital improvement which is located off-site, within, or on and along the perimeter of the new development site. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-174. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to all new developments within the corporate boundaries of the city. The provisions of this article apply uniformly within each roadway benefit area. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-175. - Roadway capital recovery fees per service unit. 
(a)  The maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit (post-credit) for any use in each service area shall be as calculated and documented in the capital recovery plan as follows: 
(1)  The capital recovery fee per service unit in Service Area 1 is $1,647.53. 
(2)  The capital recovery fee per service unit in Service Area 2 is $1,327.89. 
(3)  The capital recovery fee per service unit in Service Area 3 is $1,044.48. 
(4)  The capital recovery fee per service unit in Service Area 4 is $2,392.72. 
(b)  The assessable capital recovery fee per service unit set forth herein that is assessed to new development, as may be amended from time to time, is declared to be the roughly proportionate measure of the impact(s) generated by a new unit of development on the city's transportation system. To the extent that the capital recovery fee per service unit collected is less than the maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit (post credit), as calculated and documented in the capital recovery plan, such difference is hereby declared to be founded on policies unrelated to the measurement of the actual impacts of the development on the city's transportation system. The maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit may be used in evaluating any claim by an applicant, developer, or property owner that the dedication, construction, or contribution of a capital improvement imposed as a condition of development approval pursuant to the city's regulations is not roughly proportionate to the impact(s) of the new development on the city's transportation system. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-176. - Assessment of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  Assessment of the capital recovery fee per service unit for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Assessment of capital recovery fee shall be made at the time of recordation of a final plat and shall be the amount of the maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit. 
(2)  Development on a lot for which a final plat has been recorded prior to the effective date of this article (March 27, 2018) shall not be charged a capital recovery fee for any complete building permit application submitted within 18 months from the effective date of this article (September 27, 2019). 
(3)  Development on a lot for which a preliminary plat was approved prior to the effective date of this article (March 27, 2018) shall not be charged a capital recovery fee for any complete building permit application submitted within one year from the effective date of this article (March 27, 2019). 
(4)  Any other development will be charged a capital recovery fee for a complete building permit application submitted after the date of adoption of the ordinance (March 27, 2018). 
(b)  Following assessment of the capital recovery fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the capital recovery fee assessed per service unit for that new development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or replat approval, in which case new assessment shall occur at the maximum assessable, applicable rate then in effect. 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with section 78-175. 
(d)  Approval of an amending plat pursuant to Texas Local Government Code § 212.016 and the UDC is not subject to reassessment of a capital recovery fee hereunder provided that the use of the property remains the same. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-177. - Payment and collection of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  For all new developments, capital recovery fees shall be collected at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. The capital recovery fees to be paid and collected are as follows: 
(1)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for residential use shall be $600.00 beginning the effective date of this article (March 27, 2018) until the last day of the second year from the effective date of this article (March 26, 2020). 
(2)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for residential use shall be $800.00 beginning on the first day of the third year from the effective date of this article (March 27, 2020) and continuing until the last day of the third year from the effective date of this article (March 26, 2021). 
(3)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for residential use shall be $900.00 beginning on the first day of the fourth year from the effective date of this article (March 27, 2021) and continuing until the last day of the fourth year from the effective date of this article (March 26, 2022). 
(4)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for residential use shall be $1,000.00 beginning on the first day of the fifth year from the effective date of this article (March 27, 2022) and continuing until a new rate is adopted. 
(b)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for nonresidential use for all roadway service areas shall be as follows: 
(1)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for nonresidential use shall be $100.00 beginning the effective date of this article (March 27, 2018) until the last day of the third year from the effective date of this article (March 26, 2021). 
(2)  The capital recovery fee per service unit for nonresidential use shall be $175.00 beginning on the first day of the fourth year from the effective date of this article (March 27, 2021) and continuing until a new rate is adopted. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of payment of capital recovery fees in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. 
(d)  The city shall compute the capital recovery fees to be paid and collected for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine the number of development units for each land use category in the new development using Table 7 of the capital recovery plan. 
(2)  Multiply the number of development units for each land use category in the new development by the vehicle miles (per development unit) for each such land use category also found in Table 7 of the capital recovery plan to determine the number of service units attributable to the new development. 
(3)  If an offset agreement providing for offsets and credits against capital recovery fees exists, the number of service units attributable to the new development shall be reduced by subtracting available service unit equivalents as provided in section 78-178. If adequate service unit equivalents for offsets and credits are available in an amount equal to or greater than the number of service units generated (required) by this new development, no fee is paid, but the pool of available service unit equivalents shall be reduced accordingly. 
(4)  The amount of capital recovery fees to be collected shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units for the new development by the applicable capital recovery fee per service unit identified herein and shall be calculated at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. 
(e)  If the building permit for which a capital recovery fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the capital recovery fees shall be computed using the LUVMET and the applicable capital recovery fee per service unit identified herein with credits for previous payment of fees being applied against any new fees due. 
(f)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional capital recovery fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the LUVMET and applicable fee per service unit identified herein, and such additional fees shall be collected at the times prescribed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-178. - Offsets and credits against capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The city shall offset the reasonable value of any system facility which has been dedicated to and has been accepted by the city no more than 18 months prior to the effective date of this article (September 27, 2016), or offset the amount of any contributions to such facility, against the amount of the roadway capital recovery fees due, in accordance with the rules set forth in this section. The value of an offset must be stated in service units. 
(b)  This subsection applies only to an offset associated with a capital improvement on the capital improvement plan contributed to the city no more than 18 months prior to the effective date of this article (September 27, 2016). 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection (b), an offset associated with a capital improvement on the roadway improvement plan contributed to the city no more than 18 months prior to the effective date of this article (September 27, 2016) is created at the time that the city accepts the system facility for dedication or as may be otherwise stipulated in a binding agreement for the facility pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations. 
(2)  At the time the offset is created, if no offset agreement exists, the developer shall apply for an offset agreement, and the agreement thereafter shall be enforced in accordance with the following terms, providing: 
a.  Identification of the plat with which the offset is to be associated; 
b.  The amount of the capacity created by the system facility, expressed in service unit equivalents; 
c.  A provision stating that the offset may be used to reduce capital recovery fees imposed on new developments contained within the land subject to the associated plat after the effective date of the agreement; and 
d.  A provision that the amount of the offset shall be determined by estimating the number of service unit equivalents of capacity supplied by the system facility (as set forth in the capital recovery plan), reduced by: 
1.  The number of service units developed within the plat since the contribution of the system facility, using the LUVMET; 
2.  The amount of the city's participation in the excess costs of the system facility (expressed in service unit equivalents); and 
3.  The amount of any payments received from other new developments utilizing the system facility (expressed in service unit equivalents); and 
e.  A provision for reimbursement of any unused offsets consistent with subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
f.  A provision stating that in those instances where the city determines the unique characteristics of a roadway segment (such as drainage, topography, easements required, absence of roadway segments remaining in service area) and the projected cost to construct a section of roadway is not roughly proportionate to the dollar value of the vehicle mile credits which may be awarded for that roadway section, the city may consider, upon request of the developer, awarding capital recovery fee offsets based upon the developer's verified, actual costs of said roadway section. 
The developer may assign the offset agreement with the city's consent, but in no event shall the offsets provided for in the agreement be transferred to any development not subject to the plat associated with such offsets. 
(3)  The developer may petition the city council for offsets for contribution of a capital improvement, including road right-of-way, which is not identified in the capital improvements plan, if the improvement will supply capacity to new developments other than to the development seeking the offset, at the time the facility is accepted by the city or a binding facilities agreement for the facility is executed pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations. If the petition is granted, the terms shall be incorporated into an offset agreement as provided in subsection (b)(2) hereof. The agreement shall also provide that the amount of the offset shall not exceed the capacity of the capital improvement that is estimated to be provided. 
(4)  As provided in the offset agreement required by subsection (b)(2), hereof, the developer may apply for reimbursement of excess offsets following either completion of all development subject to the plat with which the offsets are associated or after ten years following execution of the offset agreement. The following rules apply to such reimbursement, and shall be incorporated into the offset agreement. 
a.  The developer must apply for reimbursement within six months following either: 
1.  Completion of all development subject to the plat with which the offsets are associated; or 
2.  Ten years after the date of execution of the offset agreement. 
b.  The following terms shall be incorporated into the reimbursement agreement and the agreement shall be enforced in accordance with such terms: 
1.  A provision stating that the amount to be reimbursed shall be equal to the number of unused offsets (expressed as a number of service units) multiplied by a fraction equal to the capital recovery fee per service unit to be collected, as set forth herein in effect on the date of execution of the offset agreement, divided by the maximum assessable capital recovery fee per service unit, as set forth herein and in the capital recovery plan in effect on the date of execution of the offset agreement; 
2.  A provision stating that the amount to be reimbursed may be further equitably reduced, if fewer than 50 percent of the number of service units in the plat with which the system facility giving rise to the offset have been developed on the date of application for reimbursement; 
3.  A provision stating that repayment shall be made within five years from the date of execution of the reimbursement agreement, from roadway capital recovery fees collected within the same roadway service area in which the property in question is located, subject to the availability of such funds; 
4.  A provision that termination or reduction of the city's authority under state law to impose capital recovery fees for roadway facilities shall terminate or correspondingly reduce any obligation of the city to make payments under the offset agreement; and 
5.  A provision stating that, in converting the offsets from service unit equivalents to a dollar value, the number of service unit equivalents shall be multiplied by the value of a service unit expressed in dollars using the rates set forth herein in effect at the time the offset agreement was executed. 
c.  Execution of a reimbursement agreement shall automatically terminate any offsets associated with a plat pursuant to an offset agreement. Thereafter, new development within the area subject to the plat shall pay roadway capital recovery fees in accordance with schedule 1 then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-179. - Use of proceeds of roadway capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The capital recovery fees collected within each roadway benefit area may be used to finance, pay for or to recoup the costs of any roadway facility identified in the capital improvements plan for the roadway benefit area, including the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees), and amounts designated in any reimbursement agreements executed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Capital recovery fees may be used to pay for the contract services of an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements plan who is not an employee of the political subdivision. 
(c)  Capital recovery fees also may be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvement. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-180. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for a new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city council: 
(1)  The applicability of a capital recovery fee to the new development; 
(2)  The amount of the capital recovery fee due; 
(3)  The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of an offset or a credit; 
(4)  The application of an offset against a capital recovery fee due; 
(5)  The amount of the capital recovery fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or 
(6)  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The appellant shall state the basis for the appeal in writing with particularity. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset was not calculated according to the rules set forth in this article or by administrative guideline adopted by the city council. The appellant shall submit any traffic study or other documents upon which he relies to the city with the request for appeal. 
(c)  The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the city secretary within 30 days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety with offices for local presentment in a form satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the capital recovery fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(d)  The appellant shall promptly pay to the city the full amount of the capital recovery fee determined to be due by the city council regarding such appeal. Failure to promptly pay such capital recovery fee within five business days after the city council's determination on the appeal shall serve as authority for the city to present the bond or other surety to the bonding company or financial institution for performance with no other or further notice or contact with the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-181. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any capital recovery fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been expended within the applicable roadway service area for an authorized purpose within ten years from the date of payment shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid or, if the capital recovery fee, was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in the Texas Finance Code § 302.002 of or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted in writing within 60 days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. A capital recovery fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis. 
(b)  A capital recovery fee collected pursuant to this article shall be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements authorized in this article within the roadway service area within ten years following the date of payment exceed the total fees collected for such improvements during that time period. 
(c)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), the city shall prorate the refund by dividing the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the roadway service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the new development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  If the building permit for a new development for which a capital recovery fee has been paid has expired and a modified or new application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, refund the amount of the capital recovery fee to the applicant. The city may establish guidelines for refunding of capital recovery fees collected for which construction plans have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 78-182. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid a capital recovery fee or an owner of land upon which an capital recovery fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within 60 days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required, pursuant to the ordinance and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. 
(b)  The city council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to the ordinance, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would when regarded as a whole result in confiscation of the property. 
(c)  If the city council grants a variance or waiver to the amount of the capital recovery fee due for a new development under this section, it may cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the capital recovery fee to the account, for the roadway benefit area, in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-M-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018)  
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Tax assessor-collector, § 6.07. 
State Law reference— Taxes to be levied and collected by general laws and for public purposes only, Tex. Const. Art. 8, Sec. 3; power authorized by charter to impose taxes and impose charges for delinquency, Tex. Tax Code, § 302.102(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of home-rule municipality to levy general or special property taxes for lawful purposes, Tex. Tax Code, § 302.001(c). 
 
Sec. 82-21. - Discount for early payment of taxes and split or partial payments not allowed. 
No discount shall be allowed for early payment of current taxes, nor shall split tax payments or partial payment privileges on current taxes be allowed. 
(Code 1976, § 17-1; Ord. No. 68, § III, 2-1-1962)  
Sec. 82-22. - Interest, penalty and costs on delinquent taxes—Imposed. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date on which they become delinquent. 
(b)  If any person shall fail to pay to the city all of the ad valorem taxes levied and imposed by the city upon him or his property for any year, on or before January 31 next succeeding the year for which the levy is made, the following penalty shall be payable on such taxes as are delinquent: 
(1)  One percent if paid at any time during the month of February next succeeding the year for which the levy is made; 
(2)  Two percent if paid at any time during the month of March next succeeding the year for which the levy is made; 
(3)  Three percent if paid at any time during the month of April next succeeding the year for which the levy is made; 
(4)  Four percent of paid at any time during the month of May next succeeding the year for which the levy is made; 
(5)  Five percent if paid at any time during the month of June next succeeding the year for which the levy is made; 
(6)  Eight percent if paid on or after July 1 next succeeding the year for which the levy is made. 
All costs in addition thereto that may be imposed by law shall be, and the same are hereby charged and imposed in addition to penalties and interest accruing under the provisions hereof against any person or property delinquent in such taxes. 
(Code 1976, § 17-2; Ord. No. 68, § VI, 2-1-1962)  
Sec. 82-23. - Same—Need not be shown on delinquent list. 
On any list prepared by the tax assessor-collector showing delinquent taxes owed the city, it shall not be necessary for such assessor-collector to show on any such list the penalties, interest and costs accrued against any land, lots or other property delinquent in taxes, but in each and every instance all such penalties, interest and costs shall be and remain a charge imposed, with the same force and effect as if entered on any such list of delinquent taxes, and the tax assessor-collector shall calculate and charge all such penalties, interest and costs on all delinquent tax statements or delinquent tax reports issued by him. 
(Code 1976, § 17-3; Ord. No. 68, § VI, 2-1-1962)  
Sec. 82-24. - Social security disability exemption. 
(a)  The property tax exemption for persons who are disabled and unable to work and drawing disability benefits as authorized by the Social Security Administration, will be in the amount not to exceed $3,000.00 to be applied to the market value of the residence homestead owned by the applicant and located in the city. 
(b)  Applications may be submitted at any time and must be accompanied by a copy of all supporting documents granting the disability rating. The disability condition and verification by the Social Security Administration must have been in existence and authorized on January 1 for the application to be honored for that particular tax year. Incomplete and illegible applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Initial applications will be honored at any time during the year until the date that the board of equalization certifies that year's tax roll. Applications received after that date will be processed and honored the succeeding year. 
(d)  Once granted, this exemption is renewable yearly as long as the disability exists; however, the applicant must re-apply each year during the rendition period (January 1 through March 30). Renewals submitted after that date may not be accepted. 
(Code 1976, § 17-4; Ord. No. 82-T-12, §§ 1—4, 5-18-1982)  
Sec. 82-25. - Authorized collection expense for delinquent tax collection. 
Ad valorem taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, said penalty to be in the amount of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due the city, which fee shall be an authorized collection expense. 
(Code 1976, § 17-5; Ord. No. 82-T-3, 2-2-1982)  
Sec. 82-26. - Over 65 exemption. 
(a)  The property tax exemption for persons 65 years of age or older will be in the amount not to exceed $10,000.00 to be applied to the market value of the residence homestead owned by the applicant and located in the city. 
(b)  This exemption is not authorized to be used in conjunction with a social security disability exemption within the same year. The applicant must select the exemption desired. 
(c)  Applications may be submitted at any time and must be accompanied by a copy of supporting document verifying age. The application must be filed no later than March 30 of the year the exemption is to take affect. The property owner must have been 65 years of age on January 1 for the application to be honored for that particular tax year. Incomplete and illegible applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(d)  In the case of dual ownership of property, only one exemption will be granted to whichever property owner attains the age of 65 first. Once granted, this exemption will remain in force for the life of the property owner and need not be renewed yearly, except on a change of policy by the Guadalupe County Appraisal District. 
(Code 1976, § 17-6; Ord. No. 84-T-6, §§ 1—4, 2-21-1984) 
State Law reference— Residence homestead exemption, Tex. Const. Art. 8, Sec. 1-b; residence homestead exemptions, Tex. Tax Code, § 11.13.  
Sec. 82-27. - Guidelines and criteria for tax abatement and re-investment zones. 
The guidelines and criteria for tax abatement and re-investment zones is adopted and set forth in exhibit 1 of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 17-7)  
Secs. 82-28—82-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BINGO 
 
Sec. 82-41. - Legalizing bingo. 
Bingo is legalized in the city, and must be conducted in accordance with the Bingo Enabling Act of the State of Texas. 
(Code 1976, § 17-11; Ord. No. 83-T-11, § 1, 9-6-1983) 
Editor's note— The city election of January 16, 1982, majority vote to legalized bingo. 
State Law reference— Bingo Enabling Act, Tex. Occupations Code, § 2001.001 et seq.  
Sec. 82-42. - Gross receipts tax. 
The city does hereby impose a one percent gross receipts tax upon each and every licensee to conduct bingo in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 17-12; Ord. No. 83-T-11, § 2, 9-6-1983) 
State Law reference— Local share of prize fee, Tex. Occupations Code, § 2001.503.  
Secs. 82-43—82-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal hotel occupancy tax, Tex. Tax Code, § 351.001 et seq.; 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 3.161—3.163. 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
The following word, terms and phrases for the purpose of this article, except where the concept clearly indicates another meaning, are respectively defined as follows: 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facility in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room for occupancy and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy therefor by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel means any building or buildings, trailer, or other facility in which a member or members of the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space (regardless of whether the bed space is rented to individuals or groups), apartments and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant shall mean anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms of sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Tax assessor/collector shall mean the tax assessor/collector of the City of Schertz. 
(Code 1976, § 17-21; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 7, 1-3-1984)  
Sec. 82-62. - Levy of room occupancy tax. 
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(Code 1976, § 17-22; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 1, 1-3-1984) 
State Law reference— Tax rates, Tex. Tax Code, § 351.003.  
Sec. 82-63. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which ensures to the benefit of any private share holder or individual. 
(Code 1976, § 17-23; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 2, 1-3-1984)  
Sec. 82-64. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 82-62 hereof for the city. 
(Code 1976, § 17-24; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 3, 1-3-1984)  
Sec. 82-65. - Reports. 
On January 31, April 30, July 31 and October 31 of each year, every person required in section 82-64 hereof to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the tax assessor and collector showing the consideration paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the tax assessor and collector may require, which report shall be in writing. Such persons shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Code 1976, § 17-25; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 4, 1-3-1984)  
Sec. 82-66. - Tax assessor/collector responsibilities. 
The tax assessor/collector shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person and to facilitate the collection of such tax as such collection is required herein. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city secretary. The tax assessor/collector shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall be necessary to enable the tax assessor/collector to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions of this article, or to determine whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due. 
(Code 1976, § 17-26; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 5, 1-3-1984)  
Sec. 82-67. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds from the hotel occupancy tax levied by this article shall be used by the city for those purposes authorized under Tex. Tax Code, § 351.101. 
(Code 1976, § 17-27; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. I, § 6, 1-3-1984) 
State Law reference— Use of tax revenue, Tex. Tax Code, § 351.101.  
Sec. 82-68. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $1,000.00. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as penalty, and after the first 30 days, shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax. Delinquent taxes hereunder shall draw interest at the rate of nine percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date due. 
(Code 1976, § 17-28; Ord. No. 84-M-1, art. II, § 1, 1-3-1984) 
EXHIBIT 1 
City of Schertz 
Guidelines and Criteria for 
TAX PHASE-IN AND 
REINVESTMENT ZONES [4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance creating this exhibit will expire on March 6, 2008. 
 
1. - Introduction. 
a.  Under the authority of the Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act (Section 312 et. seq. Texas Property Tax Code, as amended), the City of Schertz hereby establishes Guidelines and Criteria for Tax Phase-Ins and Reinvestment Zones. 
b.  The intent of this tax phase-in program is to provide an incentive to current and future commercial property owners to invest in the City of Schertz. These guidelines are but a part of the overall incentive program of the City of Schertz. Tax phase-ins granted under this program must take into account any other incentives provided by the city in order to assure the overall incentive package is in the best interests of the citizens of Schertz. 
c.  Nothing in this policy shall imply or suggest that the City of Schertz is under any obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant. All applications for tax phase-ins and other economic development incentives shall be considered on an individual basis. The City Council of the City of Schertz has final approval or disapproval on any application, at its complete and sole discretion.  
2. - Definitions. 
a.  Tax Phase-In means the full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes of certain real property in a reinvestment zone designated for economic development purposes. 
b.  Reinvestment Zone is an area where the city has decided to influence development patterns and attract major investments that will contribute to the development of the city through the use of a tax phase-in. 
c.  Modemization means the replacement and upgrading of existing facilities which increases the productive input or output, updates the technology or substantially lowers the cost of operation. Modernization may result from the construction, alteration, or installation of buildings, structures, fixed machinery or equipment. It shall not be for the purpose of reconditioning, refurbishing, or repairing. 
d.  Base Year Value means the assessed value of property on the 1 st of January preceding the execution of the tax phase-in agreement. 
e.  Manufacturing or Assembly means those companies that make goods from raw materials or assemble component parts into a final product for sale. 
f.  Personal Property is defined as capital equipment required in the manufacture of an end product. It is not inventory that is used up in the manufacture of an end product. 
g.  Other City Revenue means other revenues that inure to a taxing entity. These include sales taxes, hotel/motel taxes, and any other source of revenue other than ad valorem taxes. 
h.  Existing/Expanding business is defined as businesses currently located in the City of Schertz that are expanding their facility, enlarging their workforce, or adding equipment to increase production capacity.  
3. - Criteria for reinvestment zones. 
To be designated a reinvestment zone, an area must meet one of the criteria of Sub-Chapter B of the Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act. The fundamental criteria is based on city Council Intent to create reinvestment zones where creation of such a zone would be reasonably likely to contribute to the retention or expansion of primary employment, attract investment into the zone, generally be a benefit to the property, and contribute to the economic development of the City of Schertz.  
4. - Impact of municipal tax phase-in on other taxing units. 
a.  The benefits of tax phase-ins may vary among taxing entities depending on whether or not the taxing jurisdiction receives benefits from an increase in business activity. These guidelines and criteria take into account these potential differences. 
b.  However, Section 312.206 of the Texas Property Tax Code also recognizes the need for consistency in the application of tax phase-ins among the various taxing jurisdictions. See paragraphs 6 and 7, below which outline the basic tax phase-in to be provided for capital improvements and/or personal property. 
c.  Paragraphs 8 and 9 are optional and special tax phase-in provisions. Other taxing entities have the option of including or not including these provisions in the agreements made with landowners.  
5. - General tax phase-in criteria. 
a.  Creation of new value. Tax phase-ins may be granted for the additional value of eligible real property improvements subject to such limitations as the City of Schertz may require, and 
(1)  Must be reasonably expected to increase the appraised value of the improved property; 
(2)  Must be expected to promote increased employment based on the number of permanent jobs and sustained jobs in each year of the tax phase-in; and 
(3)  Should not have the effect of merely transferring existing employment from one part of the City of Schertz to another without demonstration of increased future investment (dollars or jobs) or unusual circumstances whereby without such a move employment is likely to be reduced. 
b.  The city shall not enter into a tax phase-in agreement if the city council finds that the application for tax phase-in was filed after a permit is issued for construction, expansion, or modemization. 
c.  No Tax phase-in will be approved that exceeds 90 percent of new appraised value of capital improvements and/or personal property, or that will reduce current ad valorem revenues. 
d.  If the computed percentage from a Standard tax phase-in in Table 1, and any additive percentage from the optional or special categories, as defined below, exceeds 90 percent of appraised new value, an extension of the tax phase-in term beyond five years may be considered, up to a maximum of ten years. 
e.  No tax phase-in shall be considered if the ad valorem cost/benefit ratio developed during the evaluation process is below 1.5. If necessary, tax phase-in percentages may be adjusted to fit the ratio.  
6. - Standard tax phase-in. 
a.  The standard tax phase-in is for a period of five years and is based on a minimum of $500,000.00 in capital improvement to real property. Table 1 below establishes the level of capital improvements required and the percentages to be allowed. 
Table 1 
STANDARD FIVE-YEAR TAX PHASE-IN 
Percent Tax Phase-In 	Capital Cost of the 
Projected Improvements 
Ten percent 	$75,000.00 of approved Capital Improvements 
One percent 	Each additional $50,000.00 of Approved Capital Improvements 
 
(Note: The above percentages are not cumulative except "Each additional $50,000.00 of Approved Capital Improvements over the $75,000.00 threshold). 
b.  The provisions of paragraph 5c above apply. 
c.  The term of the Standard Tax Phase-In will run concurrently with any Tax Phase-Ins approved for Capital Improvements derived from Optional Tax Phase-Ins, and or Special Tax Phase-Ins. The term of the Tax Phase-In shall not exceed the term allowed for Capital Improvements derived from Standard Tax Phase-Ins, Optional Tax Phase-Ins, and/or Special Tax Phase-Ins.  
7. - Personal property tax phase-in. 
a.  Tax phase-in of personal property is considered as a special category of tax phase-in intended for new or existing manufacturing companies. Any applicant whose personal property is expected to exceed the cost of capital improvements to real property and also exceeds $500,000 may apply. 
Table 2 
Personal Property Tax Phase-In 
Percent Abated 	Amount Declared 
10% 	$500,000 
1% 	Each additional $100,000.00 of declared personal property 
 
b.  A minimum of $500,000.00 in personal property is required to qualify for a personal property tax phase-in. 
c.  The standard term of a personal property tax phase-in is five years. 
d.  The term of the personal property tax phase-in will run concurrently with any tax phase-ins approved for capital improvements derived from standard tax phase-ins in Table 1, Optional Tax Phase-Ins, and or Special Tax Phase-Ins. The term of the tax phase-in shall not exceed the term allowed for capital improvements derived from standard tax phase-ins, optional tax phase-ins, and/or special tax phase-ins. 
e.  The provisions of paragraph 5c above apply. 
f.  Changes in valuations of personal property from year to year, whether increases or decreases, will not be cause to re-negotiate increases or decreases in the approved tax phase-in percentage. 
g.  Manufacturing companies which expand or relocate operations as tenants of leaseable space in the City of Schertz may apply for tax phase-in on personal property if the company meets the requirements derived from Table 2, Personal Property Tax Phase-In.  
8. - Optional tax phase-in. 
a.  Optional criteria. The following optional tax phase-ins may also be considered with each tax phase-in request. These optional tax phase-ins are to be considered separate and apart from the standard tax phase-in above, and may be added by the city or other taxing entities at their discretion. 
(1)  Job creation has always been an underlying goal of economic development activity. The impact of jobs, however, varies from community to community. The City of Schertz considers jobs to be an important part of this program and will consider lower dollar value assessments in recognition of new employment growth. For each $25,000.00 of additional payroll in facilities based in Schertz, 1% may be added to the Standard Tax Phase-In as derived from Table 1. 
(2)  Other city revenues. Other revenues that inure to a taxing entity may also be considered during the incentive process. These include sales taxes, hotel/motel taxes, and any other source of revenue apart from ad valorem. Those businesses that make a substantial contribution to the "other revenue" stream may also request additive tax phase-in percentages based on those revenues. Subject to paragraph 5c, for each $1,000.00 of added "other revenues" received by the city, an additional two percent may be added to the percentage established by the Standard Tax Phase-In in Table 1. 
(3)  Business retention. Current business retention and growth is a key to the continued stability of the commercial tax base. Some provision to acknowledge the contribution of existing businesses may also be considered. Subject to paragraph 5c, an additional 25% may be added to the percentage established by the Standard Tax Phase-In in Table 1 and may be included for those businesses currently based in the City of Schertz. 
b.  In all cases, in order to be considered for the optional tax phase-in, the applicant must meet the initial $75,000.00 capital improvement criteria of the Standard Tax Phase-In as outlined in Table 1. In addition, the period of the tax phase-in of each of the optional additives will run concurrently with the approved rate from the standard criteria in Table 1, subject to paragraph 5c. 
c.  These optional tax phase-ins, if granted, will be included in the terms of the tax phase-in agreement. The agreement will provide that other taxing entities may or may not choose to allow these tax phase-ins, in the same amounts.  
9. - Special tax phase-ins. 
a.  Research conducted by the city for the comprehensive economic development plan indicates that the City of Schertz has special qualifications for specific types of industries, as well as a need to diversify and expand our commercial tax base. These targeted industries are those we believe to be critical to our future development and as such, should receive special consideration. The targeted industries are listed in the comprehensive economic development plan and shall be reviewed annually by the Schertz Economic Development Corporation and Schertz Economic Development Commission for possible revisions. The comprehensive economic development plan and the current list of targeted industries shall be maintained by the Schertz Economic Development Department. 
b.  For companies in the broad categories below, Table 1 criteria are modified as follows: After achieving the initial $500,000.00 capital investment, ($1,000,000.00 for hotel/motel/retail) and subject to paragraph 5c, a one percent tax phase-in may be granted for each additional $25,000.00 of capital investment. 
(1)  Hotel/motel operations. To qualify for this special tax phase-in, companies must have a minimum capital investment of $1,000,000.00. 
(2)  Industries in a foreign trade zone. With the approval of the tri-county business park as a foreign trade zone, consideration should be given to increased incentives for companies that use the foreign trade zone. 
(3)  Retail operations. To qualify for this special tax phase-in, companies must have a minimum capital investment of $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Automotive sub-assembly manufacturing—New locations. With a major automotive sub-assembly manufacturing plant in the region, consideration should be given to increase incentives for suppliers and vendors which locate in the city to provide "just in time" delivery to the plant. 
(5)  Automotive sub-assembly manufacturing—Local business expansions. With a major automotive sub-assembly manufacturing plant in the region, consideration may be given to increase incentives for suppliers and vendors which are currently located in the city that expand their businesses to provide "just in time" delivery to the plant. 
c.  These special tax phase-ins, if granted, will be included in the terms of the tax phase-in agreement. The agreement will provide that other taxing entities may or may not choose to allow these tax phase-ins in the same amounts.  
10. - Variances. 
a.  As with the creation of any definitive document, all possible circumstances are not likely to be addressed in these guidelines and criteria. The general criteria established throughout this document are for minimum allowances. If the requested tax phase-in deviates in any substantive way from the criteria established herein, a variance is required to be granted by the city council. 
b.  A variance is requested by including the request in the basic application, identifying and justifying the adjustments requested. Approval of a variance request requires a three-fourths vote of city council. In no cases shall variances be approved that exceed a tax phase-in of 90 percent of new appraised value, or a ten-year term.  
11. - Application procedures. 
a.  Applicability and eligibility. These tax phase-in guidelines and criteria apply to any present or potential owner of taxable commercial property in the City of Schertz. 
b.  The application shall consist of a letter requesting consideration for a tax phase-in, including any optional or special tax phase-ins. The following information is required to be attached to the letter: 
(1)  A general description of the project including overall project costs. 
(2)  Estimated values of the following: 
(a)  Capital improvements to be made to the property; 
(b)  Personal property; 
(c)  Land (may be purchase price); 
(d)  Inventory. 
(3)  A brief description of the kinds and number of jobs at the new facility and an estimate of payroll expenses at the new facility. 
(4)  If a tax phase-in percentage is based on the sales tax, briefly describe the products or services being taxed and an estimate of taxes to be collected. 
(5)  The ad valorem tax identification number for the property. 
(6)  A site plan that shows the building footprint, landscaping, fencing, etc. A site plan approved (or proposed) by the City of Schertz Planning and Zoning Commission will satisfy this requirement. 
(7)  If a personal property tax phase-in is requested, a listing of the capital equipment to be installed in the facility, and estimated costs. 
(c)  The completed application will be presented by the applicant to the city's economic development department. A copy of the application will be provided by the economic development department to the city manager. 
(d)  The application may be forwarded by the economic development department to appropriate city departments (Planning and Zoning, Building Inspections, Fire, Public Works, Police, etc.) for staff review and comments. 
(e)  After staff review, the city's economic development commission will review the application for policy implications and make a recommendation to the city council (through the city manager) to approve, modify, or disapprove the requested tax phase-in. The economic development commission may also return the application to the economic development department for additional information without action. 
(f)  If the economic development commission recommends approval, the city's economic development department shall notify the presiding officer of the governing body of each taxing jurisdiction in writing. 
(g)  The city manager will forward the application to city council with comments and/or recommendations. The city manager may also return the application to staff or the commission for additional information. 
(h)  City council will consider the application and all comments and recommendations. If the city council concludes that the application has merit, the city council will approve the original or modified application for tax phase-in by ordinance and authorize the city manager to enter into a tax phase-in agreement within the guidelines established within the ordinance. If a variance was requested, city council must adopt the ordinance by a three-fourths vote of the entire council. 
(i)  In order to enter into a tax phase-in agreement, the city council of schertz must find that the terms of the proposed agreement meet these guidelines and criteria, with any approved variances, and that: 
(1)  There will be no substantial long-term adverse effect on the provision of the city's service or tax base; and 
(2)  The planned use of the property will not constitute a hazard to public safety, health, or morals. 
(j)  If city council does not believe the application has merit, a motion to disapprove the application shall be considered and acted upon. 
(k)  The city council explicitly states that tax phase-in is not applicable to projects wherein the primary purpose of the business is serving alcoholic beverages or where nudity is involved. 
(l)  One major policy function during this review is the creation of new re-investment zones and the size of such a zone as a result of the application, unless the property is already in a re-investment zone (See paragraph 12).  
12. - Public hearings. 
a.  By state law, the governing body of a city may not adopt an ordinance designating a reinvestment zone until it has held a public hearing at which interested persons are entitled to speak and present evidence for or against the designation. Notice of such hearing shall be published in a local newspaper having general circulation within the City of Schertz, at least seven days prior to the public hearing. The presiding officers of other taxing jurisdictions shall be notified in writing at least seven days prior to the public hearing. 
b.  After the public hearing, city council may pass an ordinance approving the re-investment zone, or, adopt a motion to disapprove.  
13. - Tax phase-in agreement. 
a.  After approval of an ordinance by city council, the city manager shall enter into an agreement with the applicant, which may include: 
(1)  Estimated new value to be abated and the base year value; 
(2)  The commencement date and the termination date of the tax phase-in for capital improvements; and/or a personal property tax phase-in. 
(3)  The proposed use of the facility, the proposed construction or modernization time schedule; 
(4)  A map or approved plat of the property and a, property description; 
(5)  Contractual obligations in the event of default, violation of terms or conditions, delinquent taxes, recapture, administration and assignment, or other provisions that may be required for uniformity or state law; 
(6)  Amount of investment and average number of jobs involved; 
(7)  Percent to be abated as provided by paragraphs 5, 6, and 7 of the Tax Phase-In Guidelines and Criteria. 
(8)  City council may approve the tax phase-in and the tax phase-in agreement in a single ordinance if all other statutory and evaluation requirements have been met. 
b.  The agreement shall stipulate the employees and/or designated representatives of the City of Schertz will have access to the applicant's property/reinvestment zone during the term of the tax phase-in to inspect the facility to determine if the terms and conditions of the agreement are being met. All inspections will be made only after giving of 24 hours' prior notice and will only be conducted in such manner as to not unreasonably interfere with the construction and/or operation of the facility. 
c.  The agreement shall also include, within the terms of the agreement, those portions of the tax phase-in amounts that are optional for other taxing entities. 
d.  The agreement shall also include a statement by the company that, on or prior to January 15th of each year during the term of the tax phase-in, it will provide the economic development department a letter certifying the company meets or exceeds the criteria upon which the tax phase-in was approved. Failure to do so will constitute default by the company, and may cause termination of the agreement.  
14. - Default and recapture. 
a.  In the event that the facility is completed and begins producing products or services, but subsequently discontinues producing products or services for any reason excepting fire, explosion or other casualty or accident or natural disaster for a period of one year during the tax phase-in period, then the agreement shall terminate and so shall the tax phase-in of taxes for the calendar year during which the facility no longer produces. 
b.  Should the City of Schertz determine that the company or individuals are in default according to the terms and conditions of its agreement, the City of Schertz may terminate the tax phase-in agreement. Taxes will be due in full for the year in which the agreement is terminated. 
c.  The agreement may be terminated in the event that the company or individuals: 
(1)  Allows ad valorem taxes that are owed to the City of Schertz, or other taxing entities who are a party to the tax phase-in, to become delinquent and fails to timely and properly follow the legal procedures for the protest and/or contest; or 
(2)  Violates any of the terms and conditions of the tax phase-in; or 
(3)  Is in default with any other city sponsored program. 
d.  Taxes will be due in full for the year in which the agreement was terminated in section 14c (1), (2), or (3), above. 
e.  Should a company receiving a tax phase-in decide to relocate the company outside of the designated reinvestment zone or move outside the City of Schertz, and continue to remain in business, the City of Schertz as authorized by an ordinance adopted by city council shall have the right to recapture taxes abated in all previous years.  
15. - General administration. 
a.  The chief appraiser of the Comal, Bexar, or Guadalupe Appraisal District shall annually determine an assessment of the real and personal property comprising the reinvestment zone. Each year, the company or individual receiving tax phase-in shall furnish the chief appraiser with such information as necessary. Once value has been established, the chief appraiser shall notify the affected jurisdiction in the normal fashion. 
b.  Each year the city tax assessor will review all approved tax phase-ins and determines the adjustment to ad valorem taxes based on the tax phase-in agreement. 
c.  The economic development department shall retain administrative responsibility and control over all tax phase-in agreements, and their administration.  
16. - Assignment. 
Tax phase-in agreements may be assignable to a new owner only with city council approval.  
17. - Legal Fees. 
All legal fees incurred by the City of Schertz in the research and preparation of tax phase-ins shall be the responsibility of the applicant requesting the phase-in.  
18. - Sunset provision. 
a.  These guidelines and criteria are effective upon the date of their adoption and will remain in force for two years, at which time all reinvestment zones and tax phase-in contracts pursuant to it's provisions will be reviewed by the City of Schertz to determine whether the goals of guidelines and criteria have been achieved and guidelines and criteria have been followed. Based on that review, the guidelines will be modified, renewed or eliminated as necessary. 
b.  During the two-year period, the guidelines and criteria may be amended, repealed or renewed only by a majority vote of three-fourths of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-T-30, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 06-T-09, 3-7-2006)  
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.203; municipal restrictions on use of state highways, 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 25.601—25.603. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  The Rules of the Road, Tex. Transportation Code, § 541.001 et seq., are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. 
(b)  All definitions contained in the state act referred to in subsection (a) shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-1, 11-21-1995) 
State Law reference— Rules of the Road, Tex. Transportation Code, § 541.001 et seq.  
Sec. 86-2. - Traffic engineer designated. 
The traffic safety engineer is to be the responsibility of the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-2, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-3. - General powers and duties of traffic engineer. 
The traffic engineer shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-3, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-4. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-4, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-5. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-5, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-6. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official vested by this chapter with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-6, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-7. - Permit for funeral processions and parades. 
No funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army and Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-7, 11-21-1995) 
State Law reference— Local authorities may regulate parades and assemblages on highways, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(3).  
Sec. 86-8. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions. 
Funeral cars such as hearses or family cars operated by a funeral home shall display one pennant at the front of the car sufficient to identify it as a funeral car. All other vehicles in the procession shall operate with the headlights on low beam. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-8, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-9. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., in roadway. 
No person upon roller skates, skateboards or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street set aside as a play street. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-9, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-10. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-10, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-11. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride in or on any portion of a motor vehicle not designed for the transport of passengers, except when engaged in the necessary discharge of employment of business duties; and no operator of a motor vehicle shall drive on any public street or right-of-way within the city, while a passenger under the age of 14 is in or on any portion of the vehicle that is not designed for passengers, including the bed of a pickup truck which is not equipped with securely attached passenger seats, or which is not equipped with a camper or other truck-bed accessory that provides a roof and four walls. The city manager may, by regulation or permit, authorize exceptions to this section for authorized parades. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-11, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-12. - General procedure for arrests for traffic violations. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested for violating any provision of this chapter and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as provided in section 86-13, the arresting officer shall prepare, in quadruplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the license number of his vehicle, if any, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where such person shall appear in court; provided, however, that the offense of speeding shall be the only offense making mandatory the issuance of a written notice to appear in court, and only then if the arrested person gives his written promise to appear in court, by signing in quadruplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. It shall not be mandatory for an officer to give a written notice to appear in court to any person arrested for the offense of speeding when such person is operating a vehicle licensed in a state other than the State of Texas, or county other than the United States. 
(b)  The time specified in such notice to appear must be at least ten days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. 
(c)  The place specified in such notice to appear must be before a magistrate within the city or the county, who has jurisdiction of the alleged offense. 
(d)  The arrested person, in order to secure release as provided in this section, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing, in quadruplicate, the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of such notice shall be delivered to the court, a copy shall be retained by the officer and two copies thereof delivered to the person arrested. Thereupon, such officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-12, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-13. - Violators to be taken before magistrate in certain cases. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this chapter, the arrested person shall be immediately taken before a magistrate within the county who has jurisdiction of such offense in any of the following cases: 
(1)  When the person arrested demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate; 
(2)  When the person is arrested upon a charge of failure to stop in the event of an accident, causing damage to person or property; 
(3)  In any other event when the person arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear in court as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-13, 11-21-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Tex. Transportation Code, § 543.002.  
Sec. 86-14. - Giving false information upon arrest for traffic violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for a violation of this chapter, to give as his name to the arresting officer, any other than his true and correct name. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being arrested by a police officer of the city for a violation of this chapter, to give as his address to the arresting officer, any other than his true and correct address. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-14, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-15. - Violation of promise to appear in answer to traffic violation charge. 
Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-15, 11-21-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tex. Transportation Code, § 543.009(b).  
Sec. 86-16. - Payment of fine at municipal court clerk's office for certain violations. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court may designate violations of this chapter which may be satisfied by payment, at the municipal court clerk's office, of fines prescribed by the judge, such fines to be within the limits prescribed by section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge designated in accord with subsection (a) may, within the time specified in the notice, appear at the municipal court clerks office and answer the charge set forth in such notice by paying the prescribed fine and, in writing, pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the police department to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. 
(c)  Any person who has been guilty of three or more traffic violations within the preceding 12 months shall not be permitted to pay a fine under this section, but must make statutory bail for appearance in court. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-16, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-17. - Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. 
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-17, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-18. - No obstructions in street. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall place any unsafe obstruction upon any street. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  The violation by a person of this subsection shall be a class C misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, the violator shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200.00 per offense. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to promote safety and to discourage the placement of unsafe obstructions in streets. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it currently exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
(Ord. No. 13-D-53 , § 1, 1-7-2014)  
Secs. 86-19—86-37. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-38. - No-passing zones. 
The city council is hereby authorized to determine, by ordinance, those portions of any street in the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-29, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 12-D-27, § 1, 9-25-2012 )  
Sec. 86-39. - Restrictions on turning. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver or a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event that same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. Whenever authorized signs are permitted indicating that no right or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic. In no event shall such a turn be made at any intersection or upon any street where the making of such a turn is prohibited by a sign erected pursuant to authority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-30, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 05-D-28, § I(18-30), 6-21-2005) 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate or prohibit turning, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(7).  
Sec. 86-40. - Stopping. 
Every vehicle shall stop before entering a public roadway from property other than a public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-31, 11-21-1995) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-41. - Stop intersections—Designated. 
Stop intersections, generally designated by through street and cross or stop street, shall be as established at: 
(a)  Generally. 
Through Street 	Cross or Stop Street 
Arroyo Verde 	Arroyo Dorado 
Arroyo Verde 	Arroyo Seco 
Arroyo Verde 	Arroyo Sierra 
Ashley Oak Drive 	Ashley Meadow 
Ashley Oak Drive 	Bridgemont Place 
Ashley Oak Drive 	Farm Market 3009 
Ashley Oak Drive 	Olde Moss 
Ashley Oak Drive 	Two Courts Way 
Ashley Park 	Ashley Park Circle 
Ashley Park 	Davenport 
Ashley Park 	Emerson Pass 
Ashley Park 	Wayward Pass 
Ashley Park 	Windway Creek 
Ashley Park 	Schertz Parkway 
Bench Trail 	Chestnut Oak 
Bench Trail 	Turkish Oak 
Bench Trail 	Willow Oak 
Bending Brook Drive 	Sandy Ridge Circle 
Bending Brook Drive 	Town Gate 
Broadleaf 	Twin Branch 
Brook Hollow Drive 	Rolling Brook Lane (all way stop) 
Brook Hollow Drive 	Spring Brook 
Brooks 	Beacon 
Brooks 	Elm 
Canyon Oak 	Chestnut Oak 
Canyon Oak 	Circle Oak 
Canyon Oak 	Turkish Oak 
Chelsea Drive 	Castle Hills Drive 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Chelsea Drive 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Cliffside Drive 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Country View 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Harvest 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Meadow Head Drive 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Morning Drive 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Turnabout Loop 
Chestnut Oak 	Canyon Oak 
Circle Oak 	Canyon Oak 
Circle Oak 	Circle Oak at Golden Oak, northbound 
Circle Oak 	Circle Oak at Golden Oak, southbound 
Circle Oak 	Crown Oak 
Circle Oak 	Golden Oak 
Circle Oak 	Lazy Oak 
Circle Oak 	Shady Oak 
Circle Oak 	Silver Oak 
Circle Oak (North and South) 	Spanish Oak (East and West sides) 
Cliffside Drive 	Stoneybrook Drive 
Country Club Drive 	Charleston 
Country Club Drive 	Columbia 
Country Club Drive 	Foxbriar 
Country Club Drive 	Portage Lane 
Country Club Drive 	Scenic Drive 
Country Club Drive 	Wimbleton 
Cove Brook 	Tree Crown 
Cove Trail 	Cove Brook 
Cove Trail 	Crested Height 
Crest Oak 	Crown Oak 
Crest Oak 	Golden Oak 
Crest Oak 	Lazy Oak 
Crest Oak 	Shady Oak 
Crested Height 	Black Pine 
Crested Height 	Cove Crest 
Crested Height 	Sombra Hill 
Crossbranch Drive 	Arbor Dawn Lane 
Crossbranch Drive 	Quiet Creek Drive 
Dietz Road 	Parkfair Gate 
Dietz Road 	Town Gate 
Dimrock Drive 	Woodland Village Place 
Doerr Lane 	Bell North Drive 
Dogwood Lane 	Cottonwood Drive 
Dogwood Lane 	Mulberry Drive 
Elbel Road 	Westchester Drive 
Enterprise 	Verde Parkway (West Side) 
Farm Market 1103 	Chelsea Drive 
Farm Market 1518 	Nell Deane 
Farm Market 3009 	Arroyo Verde 
Farm Market 3009 	Ashley Oak Drive 
Farm Market 3009 	Bell North Drive 
Farm Market 3009 	Berry Creek 
Farm Market 3009 	Forest Ridge 
Golden Oak 	Bench Trail 
Green Valley Road 	Wynn Brook 
Grove Park 	Cove Trail 
Grove Park 	Sycamore Drive 
Hawthorne Pass 	Thoreau Trail 
Hemingway Trail 	Faulkner Drive 
Jasmine Drive 	Lotus Park 
Jasmine Drive 	Wild Cherry 
Jonas Drive 	Hemingway Trail (two-way) 
Jonas Drive 	Melville Lane (two-way) 
Lauran Park Drive 	Cottage Park 
Lookout Road 	Enterprise (East Side) 
Lotus Park 	Fir Circle 
Lotus Park 	Osage Lane 
Lotus Park 	Royal Palm Drive 
Maple Drive 	Beacon 
Marilyn Drive 	Linda Court 
Marilyn Drive 	Melissa Court 
Marilyn Drive 	Sharon Court 
Mayfair Drive 	Angels Drive 
Mayfair Drive 	Brookhead Lane 
Mayfair Drive 	Crestwood Drive 
Mayfair Drive 	Tiffany Lane 
Meadow Head Drive 	Brookhead Lane 
Melville Lane 	Faulkner Drive 
Mid-Cities Parkway 	Verde Parkway 
Misty Hollow 	Shady Brook 
Mitchell 	Beacon 
Mitchell 	Elm 
Morning Drive 	Stoneybrook Drive 
Morning Drive 	Wedgewood Drive 
Morningmist Lane 	Parkfair Gate 
Nell Deane Blvd 	Chestnut Drive 
No 	No [or] Shady Brook and Misty Hollow Drive 
Northern Heights 	Crestwood Drive 
Northern Heights 	Tiffany Lane 
Olde Moss 	Boxer Pass Drive 
Osage Avenue 	Pond Apple 
Peachtree Lane 	Sherman Drive 
Peachtree Lane 	Saratoga Place 
Saratoga Place 	Peachtree Lane 
Savannah Drive 	Chapel Hill 
Savannah Drive 	Inglewood 
Savannah Drive 	Saratoga 
Schertz Parkway 	City hall exit 
Schertz Parkway 	Emergency services exit 
Schertz Parkway 	Jonas Drive 
Schertz Parkway 	Prairie Lane 
Schertz Parkway 	Woodland Oaks Drive (two-way) 
Sherwin Drive 	Angels Drive 
Silver Oak 	Circle Oak 
Summer Haven Lane 	Millcross Lane 
Sycamore Drive 	Ashley Oak Drive 
Sycamore Drive 	Smokey Creek 
Thomas Wolfe 	Thoreau Trail 
Thurber Drive 	Walt Whitman Way 
Tree Branch 	Cove Hill 
Tree Branch 	Moss Wood 
Tree Branch 	Wooded Trail 
Turkish Oak 	Canyon Oak 
Turnabout Loop 	Wensledale Drive 
Union Pacific Railroad 	Doerr Lane (each side of crossing) 
Valencia Lane 	Black Oak Drive 
Valencia Lane 	Hickory Lane 
Wayward Pass 	Inglewood Drive 
Wedgewood Drive 	Meadow Head Drive 
Wedgewood Drive 	Portage Lane 
Wensledale Drive 	Country View 
Wensledale Drive 	Harvest (two-way) 
White Pine Drive 	Dogwood Lane 
White Pine Drive 	Yucca Park 
Wild Cherry 	Bold Cypress 
Wild Cherry 	Osage Avenue (two-way) 
Woodbridge Way 	Cedar Bridge 
Woodbridge Way 	Covered Bridge 
Woodbridge Way 	Holliwell Bridge 
Woodbridge Way 	McBride Way 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Broadleaf 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Cove Brook 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Crested Height 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Grove Park 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Hemingway Trail 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Lotus Park 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Tree Branch 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Valencia Lane 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Walt Whitman Way 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	White Pine Drive 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Woodbridge Way 
Ashley Place 
Ashley Park 	Fresno Place 
Ashley Park 	Emerald Point 
Ashley Park 	Camaron Woods 
Boxer Pass Drive 	Windway Creek 
Victoria Point 	Freeport 
	Fallen Stone 
	Prichard Place 
	Rosewell Place 
Deer Haven Subdivision 
Antler Drive 	Deer Run 
Fawn Drive 	Deer Run 
Greenfield Village 
Richardson Drive 	Menlo 
Thomas Edison Drive 	Fulton Drive 
Robert Stevens 	Patrick Henry 
	Will Rogers Drive 
	Henry Ford Drive 
	Dearborn Drive 
Robert Derrick 	Dearborn Drive 
Lincoln Drive 	Thomas Edison Drive 
Lincoln Drive 	Howard Drive 
Robert Derrick 	Henry Ford 
Greenshire 
Bent Tree Drive 	Mt. Laurel 
	Oak Tree Circle 
Lone Oak Subdivision 
Roundtree Drive 	Valley Oak Drive 
Valley Oak Drive 	Roundtree Drive 
	Greentree Drive 
	Forest Way 
Roundtree Drive 	Cloverleaf Drive 
	Meadow Lane 
Cloverleaf Drive 	Oakdale 
Meadow Lane 	Greentree Drive 
	Cloverleaf Drive S.W. Corner 
	Forest Way N.E. Corner 
	Arrowhead Lane 
River Road 	Pentonville 
	Dartmoor Drive 
	Oakdale 
	Laurel Lane 
Val Verde 
Maple Drive 	Vicki Lynn 
Woodland Oaks 
Dimrock 	Witten 
	Hidden Grove Lane 
	Newning 
	Cedar Lane 
Hidden Grove Lane 	Andre 
Kline Circle 	Midwell 
Grove Park 	Mocine Elm 
Sycamore Drive 	Chasefield Drive 
Hillview Lane 	Mossy Oak Lane 
 
(b)  Three-way stops: 
Through Street 	Cross or Stop Street 
Ashley Park (east and west) 	Baldwin Park 
Cherry Tree Drive 	Turnabout Loop 
Savannah Drive (north and south) 	Inglewood (east) 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Wild Cherry 
 
(c)  Two-way stops: 
Through Street 	Cross or Stop Street 
Tractor Pass (south-bound) 	Tractor Pass (north-bound) and Planters Pass 
 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-32, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 96-D-2, § I, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-19, § I, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-23, §§ I, III, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 97-D-1, § I, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 97-D-7, § I, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 97-D-23, § II, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 98-D-10, § 1, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 99-D-11, § I, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 99-D-15, § I, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 99-D-22, § I, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 00-D-8, § 1, 3-21-2000; Ord. No. 00-D-22, § 1, 9-5-2000; Ord. No. 00-D-28, § 1, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 00-D-37, § I, 12-5-2000; Ord. No. 01-D-1, § I, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 01-D-4, § 1, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 01-D-17, § I, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 02-D-12, § 1, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 02-Q-25, § I, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 03-D-31, § I, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-D-12, § I(18-32), 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 05-D-47, § I(18-32), 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 07-D-14, § I, 2-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-D-48, § 1, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 08-D-53, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-D-15, § I, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-16, § I, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-28, § I, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-39, § I, 9-29-2009; Ord. No. 10-D-14, § I, 6-1-2010 ; Ord. No. 10-D-39, § I, 1-4-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-19, § I, 7-5-2011 ; Ord. No. 13-D-43 , § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 15-D-12 , § 3, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 16-D-06 , § 1, 4-26-2016) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-42. - Same—All-way stops. 
Four-way stop intersections shall be as established: 
Ashley Oak Drive and Ashley Park 
Ashley Park and Schertz Parkway 
Ashley Park and Wayward Pass 
Brook Hollow Drive and Rolling Brook Lane 
Cherry Tree and Chelsea 
Chestnut Oak at Bench Trail 
Davenport and Wayward Pass 
Mayfair Drive and Brookhead 
Morning Rose at Cottage Park 
Nell Deane and Oak Street 
Savannah Drive and Davenport 
Savannah Drive and Saratoga Place 
Savannah Drive and Schertz Parkway 
Savannah Drive and Whitaker 
Turkish Oak at Bench Trail 
Wiederstein Road and Dean Road 
Woodland Oaks Drive and Bent Tree 
Woodland Oaks Drive and Tree Branch 
Woodland Oaks Drive and Woodbridge Way 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-33, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 96-D-2, § II, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-19, § II, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-34, § I, 12-5-1996; Ord. No. 97-D-1, § II, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 97-D-23, § I, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 99-D-17, § I, 8-17-1999; Ord. No. 00-D-3, § I, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 00-D-8, § 2, 3-21-2000; Ord. No. 01-D-4, § 2, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 01-D-11, § 1, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 03-D-31, § II, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 05-D-13, § I(18-33), 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 05-D-07, I(18-33), 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-49, § I, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-D-18, § I, 7-6-2010 )  
Sec. 86-43. - Same—Signs; duty of drivers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to place and maintain stop signs at the intersections designated in sections 86-41 and 86-42. Such signs shall be erected in such manner as to indicate which vehicle approaching the intersection are required to stop and shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk, or if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(b)  Except where directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal, the driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign erected under this section shall stop his vehicle before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before entering the intersection. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from another street or which are approaching so closely on another street as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-34, 11-21-1995) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-44. - Yield intersections—Designated. 
Yield intersections are established at: 
Right-of-Way Street 	Yield Street 
Bending Brook Drive 	Lauran Park Drive 
Boxer Pass Drive 	Windway Creek 
Country Club Blvd. 	Subdivision exit Gate 
Crossbranch Drive 	Morningmist Lane 
Grove Park 	Mocine Elm 
Morning Rose 	Crossbranch Drive 
Pond Apple 	Ebony Lane 
Sycamore Drive 	Chasefield Drive 
Windway Creek 	Boxer Pass Drive 
 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-35, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 96-D-2, § III, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-19, § III, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-23, § II, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 99-D-11, § II, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 99-D-15, § II, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 05-D-12, § II(18-35), 4-5-2005) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-45. - Same—Signs; duty of driver. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall erect yield-right-of-way signs at every intersection designated in section 86-44, in such manner as to indicate which vehicles approaching the intersections are required to yield the right-of-way. Such signs shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk, or if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection with a yield-right-of-way sign facing him shall slow down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from another street or are approaching so closely on such other street as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. When directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, a driver approaching such sign shall proceed in accordance with the directions of such officer or traffic-control signal. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-36, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-46. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in the direction designated. 
(c)  The following streets are hereby designated for one-way traffic: 
(1)  IH-35 North Access Road from South City Limits to FM 3009. 
(2)  IH-35 South Access Road from FM 3009 to South City Limits. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-37, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-47. - Driving in processions. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-38, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-48. - Driving between vehicles of procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by section 86-8. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-39, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-49. - Driving through, around or under railroad crossing gate or barrier. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-40, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-50. - Driving into or through school crossing zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle into or through any school crossing zone at a time when there is a child or children crossing or standing therein, provided that such school crossing zone has been indicated by signs not less than 100 feet from the zone and further provided that such zones have been established across paved streets indicated by lines of white or yellow paint marking its boundaries, which zones shall not be greater in width than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-41, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-51. - Spinning wheels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle being driven upon a public street or other public place in the city to accelerate such vehicle in such a fashion as to cause one or more of its wheels to spin against the surface of the street, or other driving surface, if not a public street, and thereby leave markings or other physical evidence of spinning wheels thereon. 
(b)  Police officers, ambulance drivers, drivers of fire trucks and other emergency vehicles and drivers acting under a sudden emergency are exempt from the operation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-42, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-52. - Negligent collision. 
(a)  If any person driving or operating or in charge of any vehicle, animal, railroad engine or railroad car shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, and/or with criminal negligence, cause, suffer or permit such vehicle, animal, railroad engine or railroad car to come into collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatever, or with any animal, person, street sign, street post, fire hydrant, mailbox or any other obstacle or object whatever in or on any public street or any public place whatever, in the city, such person shall be deemed guilty of the offense of negligent collision and a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The words "intentionally", "knowingly", "recklessly" and "with criminal negligence" as used herein, shall be defined as it is defined in Tex. Penal Code, art. 6.03. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-43, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-53. - Crime watch signs. 
Crime watch signs are authorized to be placed with speed limit signs and street identification signs. Neighborhood crime watch organization presidents will submit recommendations for placement of crime watch signs in the neighborhood to the chief of police and the director of public works. Upon approval of sign location, the crime watch organization will provide the street department with the necessary signs and hardware at no cost to the city. Installation of signs by the city will be at no cost to the crime watch organization. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-44, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-54. - Vehicular weight limits on roadways maintained by the city. 
(a)  No vehicle weighing more than 15,000 pounds may travel on any roadway that is maintained by the city, other than Federal Highways, i.e. IH 35, or State Roads i.e. FM 78, FM 482, FM 1518, FM 2252, and FM 3009, or roads that are maintained by Bexar, Comal or Guadalupe Counties. 
A vehicle weight limit of 15,000 pounds is placed on the following: 
(1)  Schertz Parkway from its intersection with Elbel Road north to IH 35 Access Road. 
(2)  East Live Oak Road from its intersection with Schertz Parkway to its intersection with Farm to Market Road 3009 (Roy Richard Drive). 
(3)  Pfeil Road from IH10 Access Road to the intersection of Ware-Seguin Road. 
(4)  Lower Seguin Road from Farm to Market Road 1518 to the westernmost city limits. 
(5)  Ware-Seguin Road from FM 1518 to the westernmost city limits. 
(6)  Wiederstein Road from IH 35 to FM 1103. 
(7)  Friesenhahn Lane from IH 35 frontage road to FM 482. 
(8)  Hubertus Road from IH 35 frontage road to FM 482. 
(9)  Schwab Road from the intersection of FM 482, Approximately 500 feet toward IH 35. 
(b)  The following are the exceptions to subsection (a): 
(1)  Public conveyance. 
(2)  Any vehicle making a delivery, or leaving the city after making a delivery. 
(3)  Any empty vehicle being driven by the owner of the vehicle leaving or returning to his residence. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-45, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 05-D-15, § 1(18-45), 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 12-D-07, § 1, 4-17-2012 ; Ord. No. 15-D-35 , § 1, 11-10-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of loads and equipment, Tex. Transportation Code, § 621.303.  
Sec. 86-55. - Through truck route. 
Any interstate highway or state highway within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a through truck route. 
(1)  Interstate 35 from city limits to city limits. 
(2)  FM 482 from northern city limits to FM 2252. 
(3)  FM 1518 from city limits to city limits. 
(4)  FM 2252 from northern city limits to IH 35. 
(5)  FM 3009 from northern city limits to FM 78. 
(6)  FM 78 from city limits to city limits. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-46, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-56. - Vehicle races prohibited. 
No person shall drive any vehicle in any race, speed competition or contest, drag or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration or for the purpose of making a speed record and no person shall in any manner participate in any such race, competition, contest, test or exhibition; on any federal highway, state highway or alley, easement, road or street maintained by the city. The city manager may, by permit, authorize races or similar events which shall be exceptions to this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-47, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-57. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to sections 86-57 through 86-62 of this Code. 
All-terrain vehicle means a motor vehicle 50 inches or less in width, having an unladen dry weight of 1,000 pounds or less, traveling on three or more low pressure tires and having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebar-type steering control. 
Light truck means a truck, including a pickup truck, panel delivery truck, or carryall truck that has a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of 2,000 pounds or less. 
Motor vehicle means a mechanical device used exclusively to transport a person or property on a public highway and includes automobiles, trucks, truck-tractors, buses, motorcycles, or any other device in or upon which any person or property may be transported. Motor vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled, including, without limitation, passenger cars, light trucks, single axle vehicles, tandem axle vehicles, and any other vehicles that may enter the market that fit the general profile of vehicles operated on the highway for transportation purposes, as well as those that are identified by this Code, the Texas Constitution, or Texas Statutes as motor vehicles. 
Off-highway motorcycle means a motor vehicle traveling on not more than two tires and having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator and that has handlebar-type steering control. 
Off-highway motor vehicle means a non-agricultural motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer for operation exclusively off the highway or road and includes all-terrain vehicles, off-highway motorcycles, recreational off-highway vehicles, and any other vehicles that may enter the market that fit the general profile of vehicles operated off the highway for recreational purposes, as well as those that are identified by this Code, the Texas Constitution, or Texas Statues as off-highway or recreational motor vehicles. Off-highway motor vehicle does not include tractors or other equipment while such tractors and equipment are being used for agricultural purposes. 
Passenger car means a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, used to transport persons and designed to accommodate ten or fewer passengers including the operator. 
Recreational off-highway vehicle means a motor vehicle designed for travel on four or more non-highway tires, for recreational use by one or more persons, and having: 
(1)  A steering wheel for steering control; 
(2)  Saddle seating for a rider and/or passenger; 
(3)  Maximum speed capability greater than 35 miles per hour; 
(4)  Gross vehicle weight rating no greater than 1,750 pounds; 
(5)  Less than 80 inches in overall width, exclusive of accessories; 
(6)  Engine displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters; and 
(7)  Identification by means of a 17-character vehicle identification number. 
Single axle vehicle means a unit whose center may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes approximately 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
Tandem axle vehicle means a unit whose weight is transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles which centers may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches and not more than 96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
Unimproved land means any tract or parcel of land which lacks any above ground structure or facilities designed, intended, or operated for residential, commercial, or agricultural use. The presence of improved drainage ditches, drainage easements, or drainage rights-of-way on such tract or parcel does not affect the status of such tract or parcel as unimproved land. Unimproved land includes, but is not limited to, dikes, levees, and roads or paths providing access adjacent to drainage ditches, drainage easements, and drainage rights-of-way that have been dedicated, granted, or conveyed to, or acquired by, the city. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial feature that conveys water within a defined channel, whether on a regular or intermittent basis, and includes, but is not limited to, canals, drainage ditches, flood control channels, and retention or detention basins associated with any such water conveyance feature. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 )  
Sec. 86-58. - Operation of motor vehicles in city drainage easements, drainage ditches, and drainage rights-of-way prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle or off-highway motor vehicle upon or in any watercourse, drainage way, natural channel, stream or other location that has been dedicated, granted, or conveyed to, or acquired by, the city as a drainage easement, drainage ditch, or drainage right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 )  
Sec. 86-59. - General limitation on operation of motor vehicles and off-highway motor vehicles on unimproved land. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon or in any watercourse, drainage way, natural channel, stream, or any unimproved land that has been dedicated, granted, or conveyed to, or acquired by, the city, except within areas clearly designated and set aside for motor vehicle use such as paved, graveled, or graded roadways, driveways, alleys, and designated parking areas. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicles or off-highway motor vehicles within any canal, ditch, or other watercourse or waterway, perennial or intermittent, within the city, regardless of whether any water is flowing in such watercourse or waterway at the time. 
(c)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or any off-highway motor vehicle on any irrigation ditch banks or levees. 
(d)  The operation of all motor vehicles and all off-highway motor vehicles on designated trails and similar pedestrian passages and pedestrian rights-of-way that have been dedicated, granted, or conveyed to, or acquired by, the city is expressly prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 )  
Sec. 86-60. - Posting of warning signs. 
The director of public works, or his or her designee, is authorized to erect and post signs along drainage easements, drainage ditches, drainage rights-of-way, and other unimproved lands warning persons that operation of all motor vehicles and all off-highway motor vehicles is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 )  
Sec. 86-61. - Exceptions: public safety and maintenance vehicles and vehicles operated by property owners; proof of authorization. 
The foregoing limitations and prohibitions contained in sections 86-58 and 86-59 shall be subject to the following exceptions for permitted uses, which shall be strictly construed: 
(1)  Operation of a motor vehicle on private property by the owner of such private property; 
(2)  Operation of public safety vehicles on any lands, public or private; 
(3)  Operation of maintenance and service vehicles of the city, Guadalupe County, Bexar County, Comal County, CCMA, or GBRA, as well as any other authorized public bodies, including the contractors and agents thereof, on the land, easements, and rights-of-way of such public bodies; and 
(4)  (i) Operation of a small motor vehicle, such as a passenger car or a light pickup truck, with or without an attached utility trailer, a riding lawnmower, or similar small utility vehicle; (ii) for purposes of conducting periodic maintenance and/or upkeep of a public drainage way, drainage easement, or drainage right-of-way (containing no concurrent general right of access) located on private property; (iii) by the owner of such private property or his/her agent; and (iv) with the consent of all owners of the private property in such drainage way, easement, or right-of-way required to be crossed in order to access the area to be maintained. If any drainage way, easement, or right-of-way belonging to the city must be crossed to access the area to be maintained, the director of public works or his designee are authorized to consent to such access. 
Any person operating any motor vehicle or off-highway motor vehicle on unimproved land with the written approval of the owner thereof shall have such written approval in his or her possession and available for inspection at all times while operating the motor vehicle or off-highway motor vehicle on such lands. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-D-14, § 1, 5-7-2013 )  
Sec. 86-62. - Penalties—Misdemeanor; fine; towing. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of sections 86-57 through 86-61 of this chapter 86, article II shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed more than $200.00. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition, if a person is convicted of violating, or pleads no contest to the charge of violating, the provisions of sections 86-57 through 86-61 of this chapter 86, article II, the city shall be authorized, in connection with any subsequent violation of sections 86-57 through 86-61 of this chapter 86, article II within one calendar year from the initial violation or plea of no contest, to cause the vehicle involved in the subsequent violation to be towed and stored by an authorized wrecker service. Such vehicle will only be released to the owner upon payment of all towing and storage fees duly imposed by the wrecker service provider. If the person operating the motor vehicle does not appear to be the registered owner thereof, the city shall cause notice of the towing to be sent by certified or registered mail or delivered by other reliable means, including personal service, to the registered owner of the vehicle shown in the records of the state's motor vehicle division. 
( Ord. No. 13-D-02, § 1, 1-29-2013 )  
Sec. 86-63. - Engine braking. 
(a)  Use of engine brakes prohibited. No person may use an engine braking system while operating a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of Schertz, except on an interstate highway, or in an emergency situation. 
(b)  Engine braking system defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "engine braking system" shall mean an engine-exhaust braking system device which converts diesel-engine power into an air compressor and when engaged, operates to slow the vehicle and creates an excessive, loud, unusual, explosive, or otherwise unreasonable noise. 
(c)  Emergency situation defined. For purpose of this section, the term "emergency situation" shall mean a situation in which there is imminent danger of collision with property, persons, or animals. 
(d)  Authorized emergency vehicles exempt. Authorized emergency vehicles, as defined by Section 541.201 of the Texas Transportation Code, shall be exempt from this section. 
(e)  Notice. Notice of this section shall be posted at such necessary and appropriate locations, as determined by the city, by an appropriate sign notifying motorists of the passage of this section. 
(f)  Offense. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provisions hereof. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each day that a provision of this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13-D-41 , § 1, 9-17-2013)  
Secs. 86-64—86-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate by traffic control devices, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(1). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-86. - Installation and maintenance generally. 
The traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances, to make effective the provisions thereof, or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-55, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-87. - Conformity with state highway department requirements; uniformity. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway department. All signs and signals required for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-56, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-88. - Designation of crosswalks and safety zones; laning streets for traffic. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-57, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-89. - Traffic light locations. 
The following electrical traffic-control signals within the corporate limits of the city are hereby established as official electrical traffic-control signals in full signal operation at such street intersections: 
(1)  Intersection of Farm Market 78 and First Street. 
(2)  Intersection of Farm Market 3009 (Roy Richard Drive) and Borgfeld/Elbel Road. 
(3)  Intersection of Farm Market 78 and Farm Market 3009 (Roy Richard Drive). 
(4)  Intersection of Farm Market 78 at Schertz Parkway. 
(5)  Intersection IH 35 North Access Road and Farm to Market 3009 (Roy Richard Drive). 
(6)  Intersection IH 35 South access Road and Farm Market 3009 (Roy Richard Drive). 
(7)  Intersection of Schertz Parkway at Woodland Oaks Drive. 
(8)  Intersection of Schertz Parkway at Savannah Drive. 
(9)  Intersection of FM. 3009 (Roy Richard Dr.) at Live Oak Road. 
(10)  Intersection of Schertz Parkway at Live Oak. 
(11)  Intersection of Schertz Parkway at Elbel. 
(12)  Intersection of Schertz Parkway at Aero. 
(13)  Intersection of Farm Market 1518 and Lower Seguin Road. 
(14)  Intersection of Farm Market 78 and Rive Road. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-58, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 03-D-26, § I, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 09-D-05, § I, 2-3-2009; Ord. No. 11-D-18, § I, 6-28-2011 )  
Sec. 86-90. - Necessity for signs. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-59, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-91. - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or officers of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-60, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-92. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any officer of the city permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to streets of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the traffic engineer is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-61, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-93. - Injuring, removing, etc., devices. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-62, 11-21-1995)  
DIVISION 2. - PHOTOGRAPHIC TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 86-94. - Construction; definitions. 
Section 86-94 through and including section 86-100 are referred to herein as "this article". Words and phrases used in this subchapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly requires otherwise. Words and phrases that are not defined below shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense (and vice versa); words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). Headings and captions are for reference purposes only. 
Department shall mean the Police Department of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two or more streets intersect. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act (Chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended). 
Notice of violation shall mean a notice mailed to a person identified as having violated this article and that complies with the content requirements set out in this article. A notice of violation is not a criminal citation. 
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. The term "owner" includes: 
(1)  A lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six months or more; or 
(2)  The lessee of a motor vehicle rented from a motor vehicle rental or leasing company, but does not include the motor vehicle rental or leasing company itself. 
Photographic traffic enforcement system or system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera and vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing, depicting, photographing or recording at least two recorded images of a license plate attached to the front or rear of a motor vehicle. 
Recorded image means an image recorded by a photographic traffic enforcement system that depicts the license plate attached to the front or rear of a motor vehicle and is automatically produced, depicted, photographed, or recorded on a photograph or digital image. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic enforcement system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic control signal means a traffic control device that displays alternating red, amber, and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-95. - Offense. 
It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to proceed into an intersection when the traffic control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal. The owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for a violation of this section, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-96. - Administration of photographic traffic enforcement system. 
(a)  The department shall implement, administer, and enforce the city's photographic traffic enforcement system and shall maintain a list of system locations where photographic traffic enforcement systems are installed. 
(b)  All enforcement records including, but not limited to, a recorded image resulting from a photographic traffic enforcement system shall be confidential to the extent allowed by Texas law and may be used only to pursue a violation of this article. 
(c)  Signs shall be posted and maintained advising motorists that photographic traffic enforcement systems are in operation. Every sign shall be clearly visible to all directions of traffic at every intersection with a photographic traffic enforcement system. The department shall only issue warning notices (rather than notices of violation) for the first 30 days after operation of a new photographic traffic enforcement system at an intersection. Warning notices shall contain the same information required by subsection (e), below. 
(d)  A notice of violation shall be mailed to the owner of the motor vehicle no later than 30 days after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred. The notice of violation shall be mailed to: 
(1)  The owner's address as indicated on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country that is analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(e)  A notice of violation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the alleged violation; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The license plate number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image depicting the license plate number of the vehicle; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty imposed for the violation; 
(8)  The date by which the civil penalty must be paid; 
(9)  A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty; 
(10)  A statement that the person named in the notice may pay the civil penalty in lieu of appearing at a nonjudicial administrative adjudication; 
(11)  Information informing the person: 
a.  Of the right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in a nonjudicial administrative hearing; 
b.  Of the manner and time in which the civil penalty may be contested; 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability; 
d.  That failure to appear at a nonjudicial administrative hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability; 
e.  That failure to timely pay the civil penalty may result in the imposition of a late payment fee of $25.00; and 
f.  That the request for a nonjudicial administrative hearing may subject the person to a $50.00 administrative hearing charge if found liable or if the person fails to appear; 
(12)  A statement that, if at the time and place of the violation the vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner, the owner may transfer liability for the violation to the person who was operating the vehicle at that time and place if the owner submits to the department by verifiable affidavit, on a form provided by the department, or under oath at an administrative adjudication hearing, the name and current address of the person: 
a.  Operating the vehicle at the time and place of the violation; 
b.  Who was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation, if the vehicle was rented or leased tram a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles at that time; or 
c.  Who was the subsequent owner of the motor vehicle, if ownership of the vehicle was transferred by the owner before the time of violation; and 
(13)  Any other information the department deems prudent and necessary. 
(f)  If it is determined, through affidavit or oath, that the motor vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner, the department shall reissue notice of violation to the actual operator within 15 days of such determination. 
(g)  No notice of violation shall be issued and no civil penalty shall be imposed if the department determines that the motorist was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation of Section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, recorded by the photographic traffic enforcement system. 
(h)  No notice of violation shall be issued if the quality of the image captured by the system is so inferior as to prohibit positive identification of the license plate. 
(i)  A notice of violation under this section is presumed to have been received on the tenth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. All notices shall be mailed United States first class mail, return receipt requested. 
(j)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner that must contain the information in subsection (e), above. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-97. - Affirmative defense. 
The owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for a violation of this article, unless the owner can, by preponderance of the evidence, show that: 
(a)  The traffic control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently visible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(b)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(c)  The operator of the motor vehicle was part of a funeral procession or made a legal, permitted turn at a red light following a complete stop; 
(d)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(e)  The motor vehicle was being operated as authorized emergency vehicle under Chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and the operator was acting in compliance with that Chapter; 
(f)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner; 
(g)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate has been issued; 
(h)  The motor vehicle was leased, rented, or otherwise in the complete care, custody, or control of another natural person; 
(i)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain, or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that made compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance; 
(j)  The owner was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation; or 
(k)  The owner was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation of Section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, recorded by the photographic traffic enforcement system. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-98. - Penalty; enforcement. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall be deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty will be assessed. The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  The civil penalty for which the owner or, when applicable, the operator is liable is $75.00, provided that for a third or subsequent violation in any 12-month period, the amount of the penalty shall be $200.00. 
(c)  A person who fails to pay a civil penalty within the time allowed by this article shall be additionally liable for a late-payment fee of $25.00. 
(d)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty assessed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-99. - Nonjudicial administrative hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this article may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in writing a nonjudicial administrative hearing within the time provided in the notice, which period shall not be less than 21 days after notification of the violation. 
(b)  The department shall establish an administrative process to review objections to violation notices including the selection of a hearings officer who shall preside over the nonjudicial administrative hearing and, at a minimum, shall be a person knowledgeable in the laws governing traffic control and enforcement with competencies in due process, municipal law, effective writing and speaking, fair and impartial decision making, and related areas as evidenced through application, interview, and competency-based training. 
(c)  Failure to pay a civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission in the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 86-100 of this article. 
(d)  Failure to appear at a nonjudicial administrative hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability for the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 86-100, of this article. 
(e)  The civil penalty shall not be assessed if: 
(1)  After the hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability; or 
(2)  Within the time prescribed in the notice of violation, the person against whom the civil penalty is to be assessed submits the proof described in section 86-96(e)(12), of this chapter. 
(f)  A person who is found liable after a nonjudicial administrative hearing or who requests a hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing costs in the amount of $50.00 in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after a nonjudicial administrative hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten days of the determination of liability. 
(g)  In a nonjudicial administrative hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to in a nonjudicial administrative hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation based an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit, and is prima facie evidence of the violation alleged in the notice of violation. 
(h)  Notwithstanding anything in this article, a person who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to a nonjudicial administrative hearing on the violation if: 
(1)  The person files an affidavit with the hearings officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Within the same period required for a hearing to be timely requested but measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the affidavit, the person requests a nonjudicial administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-100. - Appeal. 
A person who is found liable after a nonjudicial administrative hearing may appeal that finding of liability to the municipal court of the city by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. The notice of appeal must be filed, in writing, not later than the 31st day after the date on which the nonjudicial administrative hearing officer enters the determination of liability and shall be accompanied by the payment of an appeal fee of $50.00. Unless the person, on or before the filing of the notice of appeal, posts a bond in the amount of the civil penalty and any late fees, an appeal does not stay the enforcement of the civil penalty. An appeal shall be determined by the municipal court in a trial de novo. The affidavits submitted under section 86-99(h), of this article shall be submitted to the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and the issues must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-59, II, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 86-101. - Violations. 
City of Schertz Police Officers shall have the authority to issue citations for violations regarding all traffic signals/traffic lights within the City of Schertz city limits. 
(Ord. No. 99-D-4, § I(18-50), 12-10-1999)  
Secs. 86-102—86-114. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities may alter speed limits subject to state law requirements, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(12). 
 
Sec. 86-115. - Maximum limits generally on specific streets. 
(a)  As a result of a traffic and engineering survey conducted by the traffic engineer, the maximum, reasonable, safe and prudent speed limit has been found and is hereby declared to be 20 miles per hour on any street in any residential or business district in the city, except as may be otherwise provided in this article...the limits specified in this section shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable and prudent and that it is unlawful. 
Street 	Extent 	Speed Limit (MPH) 
Baptist Health Drive 	Entire length 	20 
Bear Oak 	Entire length 	20 
Bell North Drive 	Doerr Lane to FM 3009 	30 
Bench Trail 	Entire length 	20 
Boenig Drive 	Ware Seguin Road to Scenic Lake Drive 	30 
Canyon Oak 	Entire length 	20 
Chelsea Drive 	Entire length 	20 
Chestnut Oak 	Entire length 	20 
Cibolo Valley Drive (formerly known as Wiederstein Road) 	IH 35 to the intersection with Old Wiederstein Road (city limits) 	25 
Circle Oak 	Entire length in Oak Trails subdivision 	20 
Corridor Parkway 	Entire length 	30 
Country Club Drive 	Entire length 	30 
Doerr Lane 	Tri-County Parkway to City Limits 	35 
FM 78 	Entire length within the Schertz city limits 	45 
FM 1103 	Entire length within the Schertz city limits 	45 
	From IH-35 to Cibolo City Limits 	45 
	FM IH 35 Frontage Rd. to 260' South of Old Wiederstein Rd. for a distance of 0.74 	40 
FM 1518 	Schertz northern city limit at MP 2.513 to MP 3.322 	45 
FM 1518 	MP 3.322 to MP 3.659 	35 
FM 1518 	MP 3.659 to FM 78 at MP 4.155 	30 
FM 1518 	Schertz city limit (boundary with Bexar County) at MP 1.594 to MP 6.151 	55 
FM 1518 	MP 6.151 to Schertz city limit at IH 10 at MP 6.413 	45 
FM 2252 	FM 2252 from MP 1.000 at the intersection of FM 482 northwesterly to MP 1.663 at the west city limits for a total distance of 0.663 miles approximately 	45 
FM Road 3009 (Roy Richard Dr) 	From FM 3009 from MP 5.388 miles southeast of the centerline of IH 35 to MP 7.050 at the intersection of East Live Oak Road/Dietz Road for a total distance of 1.662 miles approximately 	45 
Friesenhahn Lane 	From IH 35 frontage road to FM 482 	30 
Graytown Road 	From Boenig Drive to IH 10 	45 
Guada Coma 	Entire length 	30 
Hillbrook Drive 	Schaefer Road to Ray Corbett Drive 	20 
Hubertus Road 	from IH 35 frontage road to FM 482 	30 
IH 35 Frontage Roads 	IH 35 frontage roads from MP 1.441 which is approximately 580 ft. southwest of FM 103, northeasterly to MP 1.668 which is approximately 618 ft. northeast of FM1103, for a distance of 0.227 miles approximately 	45 
IH 35 Frontage Roads 	IH 35 frontage roads from Selma city limit to F.M. 3009 (M.P. 0.809 to M.P. 2.006) 	45 
IH 35 Frontage Roads 	F.M. 3009 to Schertz city limit (M.P. 2.006 to M.P. 4.402) 	50 
IH35 Main lanes 	From MP 0.357 (F.M. 2252) to MP 3.549 (approximately 317 feet north of Schwab Rd.) for a total of 3.192 Miles. 	60 
IH35 Frontage Roads 	From MP 0.357 (F.M. 2252) to MP 3.549 (approximately 317 feet north of Schwab Rd.) for a total of 3.192 Miles. 	45 
IH 10 Frontage Roads 	Within Schertz city limits 	50 
Interstate 35 	From frontage road to Wiederstein Road 	30 
Interstate 35—Main lanes 	From Farm Market 3009 to south city limits 	
	Cars, day 	70 
	Cars, night 	65 
	Trucks, day 	60 
	Trucks, night 	55 
Interstate 35—Main lanes 	From Farm Market 3009 to north city limits (at all times) 	55 
Live Oak Road 	Entire length 	35 
Lookout Road 	Entire length 	35 
Lower Seguin Road 	From FM 1518 West to approximately 518 ft. West of Aranda Lane 	40 
	From Approximately 518 ft. West of Aranda Lane to the westernmost city limits 	50 
	From westernmost city limits east to approximately 518 ft. west of Aranda Lane 	50 
	From approximately 518 ft. west of Aranda Lane east to FM 1518 	40 
Nell Deane 	Oak Street to FM 1518 	30 
Old Wiederstein Road 	Entire length 	35 
Pfeil Road 	From Ware Seguin Road to IH 10 	30 
Randolph Avenue 	From Farm Market Road 78 to Main Street 	20 
	From Main Street to Marilyn Drive 	20 
Ray Corbett Drive 	Entire Length 	30 
Ripps - Kreusler 	Entire length 	20 
Schertz Parkway 	From IH-35 to 100 yards north of Savannah Drive 	40 
	From a point 100 yards north of Savannah Drive to Live Oak Road intersection 	35 
	From 500 feet north of center- line of Live Oak Road to east right-of-way line of East I-35 Service Road 	35 
	Between the posted school signs during the posted hours 	20 
	From 500 feet north of center-line of Live Oak Road to north right-of-way line to FM 78 	30 
	Between the posted school signs during the posted hours 	20 
Silver Oak 	Entire length in Oak Trails subdivision 	20 
Triton 	Entire length 	30 
Verde Parkway 	Entire length 	35 
Wares Seguin Road 	From FM 1518 to Pfeil Road 	40 
Wares Seguin Road 	From Pfeil Road to City Limits 	45 
Westchester Drive 	Gettysburg Drive to Elbel Road (Westchester has now been completed All the way through from Gettysburg Drive to Elbel Road) 	20 
Wiederstein 	From intersection of Wiederstein Road to FM 1103 	30 
Wiederstein Road 	IH 35 to city limits 	35 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	From Kline Circle to Cedar Lane 	20 
 
(b)  Establish permanent speed zone from (from 30' South of Mineral Springs Road to 167' North of Ashwood Drive) this stretch of road is zone residential: 
Street 	Extent 	Speed Limit (MPH) 
Fairlawn Avenue 	1900' 	30 
 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-74, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 95-D-39, § I, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 96-D-8, § I, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 96-D-34, § II, 12-5-1996; Ord. No. 99-D-17, § II, 8-17-1999; Ord. No. 02-D-10, § 1, 5-21-2002; Ord. No. 02-D-11, § II, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-D-20, 1(18-76), 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 03-D-21, 1(18-75), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 04-D-41, § I(18-76), 8-21-2004; 05-D-13, § II(18-76), 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 05-D-30, § I(18-76), 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-14, § I(18-76), 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 06-D-15, § I(18-76), 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 07-D-15, § II, 2-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-D-05, § 1, 1-29-2008; Ord. No. 08-D-18, § 1, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 08-D-22, § 1, 4-22-2008; Ord. No. 08-D-54, § I, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 09-D-01, § I, 1-13-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-04, § I(18-76), 2-3-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-14, § I, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-25, § I, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-27, § I, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-47, § I, 12-1-2009 ; Ord. No. 10-D-13, § I, 6-1-2010 ; Ord. No. 11-D-14, § I, 5-24-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-16, § I, 6-14-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-32, § I, 11-1-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-38, § I, 12-13-2011 ; Ord. No. 12-D-04, § I, 1-31-2012 ; Ord. No. 12-D-05, § I, 1-31-2012 ; Ord. No. 12-D-18, § 1, 8-4-2012 ; Ord. No. 12-D-19, § 1, 8-14-2012 ; Ord. No. 13-D-11, § 1, 4-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-D-44 , § 1, 10-22-2013; Ord. No. 14-D-22 , § 1, 5-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-32 , § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-33 , § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-34 , § 1, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 16-D-07 , § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 16-D-14 , § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 17-D-38 , § 1, 9-26-2017; Ord. No. 17-D-45 , § 1, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-D-18 , § 1, 6-5-2018; Ord. No. 19-D-08 , § 1, 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 20-D-10 , § 1, 4-14-2020; Ord. No. 20-D-20 , § 1, 6-9-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-D-14, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011 renamed § 86-115 from "Maximum limits generally" to Maximum limits generally on specific streets". 
_____ 
Sec. 86-116. - Minimum limit. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-77, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-117. - Exceptions from article. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating speeds of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the fire department responding to calls, nor to police officers acting in their official capacity, nor to physicians or ambulances responding to emergency calls.  
Sec. 86-118. - Maximum limits in school zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of that which is posted within a school speed zone, the limits of which shall be designated by school speed limit signs, on any day of any regular or any special or summer school term, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., or as specifically referenced in the table below, or between any other designated and posted hours. 
Street 	Extent 	Speed Limit (MPH) 
Aero Avenue 	From Schertz Parkway to 215 feet east of Schertz Parkway from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 	20 
Curtiss Avenue 	From 150 feet east of Pfeil Street to 150 feet west of Randolph Boulevard. All day school zone. 	15 
	From Beacon Avenue to FM 1518 during the posted hours 	
Elbel Road 	From Schertz Parkway to 1,230 feet west of F.M. 3009 from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 	20 
Fairlawn Avenue 	From Wiederstein Road to Mineral Springs 	20 
Farm Market Road 1518 	Between the posted school signs when the lights are flashing 	20 
FM 482 	1,580 feet from MP 1.333 to M.P. 1.655 	30 
FM 1518 	TxDOT mile marker 3.085 to TxDOT mile marker 3.331 	35 
	From 130 feet east of Oak Street to 290 feet east of Curtiss Avenue when the lights are flashing 	
	800' in front of FM 1518 Founders Classical Academy 	35 
FM 1518 	1,200 feet in front of FM 1518 Rose Garden Elementary 	35 
Green Valley Road 	130 feet southwest from Greenshire, to 600 feet northeast from Greenshire, 300 feet southeast from Misty Hollow to 270 feet northeast from Wynn Brook during posted hours 	20 
Hubertus Road 	800 feet from the intersection of FM 482 to the south 	35 
Inglewood 	3500 block, between the posted school signs during the posted hours 	20 
Mitchell Avenue 	From Schertz Parkway to 215 feet east of Schertz Parkway from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 	20 
Old Wiederstein Road 	300 feet northeast of Fairlawn Avenue to 300 feet southwest of school property 	20 
Pfeil Street 	Between the posted school signs, all day 	15 
Randolph Avenue 	150 feet south of Brooks Avenue to 76 feet north of Exchange Avenue 	20 
Ray Corbett Drive 	From FM 1518 to 300 feet southwest of Alsation Way 	20 
Savannah Drive 	800 block, between the posted school signs during the posted hours 	20 
	1050 feet Southwest from Schertz Parkway, to 75 feet Northeast of Davenport from Schertz Parkway, during posted hours 	20 
Schertz Parkway 	From Ashley Park, north on Schertz Parkway, to 300 feet north of Savannah Drive 	20 
	142 feet from Ashley Place Drive north to 205 feet north of Savannah Drive during posted hours 	20 
Westchester Drive 	Westchester Drive be considered school zone beginning approximately 776 feet south of Elbel Road from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 	20 
Winburn Avenue 	From Randolph east to dead end 	20 
Wright Avenue 	From Oak Street to Beacon Avenue 	15 
Wright Avenue 	From Randolph east to dead end 	20 
 
(Ord. No. 97-D-7, § II, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 98-D-5, § I, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 00-D-27, § I, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 02-D-11, § I, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-D-21, § 1(18-75), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 06-D-47, § 1, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 06-D-55, § I, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-D-15, §§ I, II, 2-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-D-41, § I, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 08-D-47, § I, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 09-D-26, § I, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-29, § I, 7-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-D-44, § I, 11-24-2009 ; Ord. No. 13-D-01, § 1(Exh. A), 1-15-2013 ; Ord. No. 13-D-40 , § 1, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 13-D-59 , § 1, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 16-D-15 , § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-D-35 , § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 18-D-26 , § 1, 8-14-2018; Ord. No. 18-D-27 , § 1, 8-14-2018) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-119. - Maximum limits in city parks. 
The speed limit on all internal streets and roads in City of Schertz parks shall be 15 mph, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed on any internal street or road in any city park. The department of public works is authorized to post appropriate speed limit signs on internal streets and roads in city parks. 
( Ord. No. 09-D-41, Art. I, 10-27-2009 )  
Secs. 86-120—86-147. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 86-148. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Oil changes, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(b)  Parking in a 95-foot portion of the 500 block of Main Street shall be for no longer period of time than 15 minutes during the hours of 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(c)  The portion of the 500 block of Main Street from the east curb line of Lindbergh Avenue, for 95 feet east on Main Street is hereby designated for limited parking and appropriate signs are authorized for placement. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-90, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 98-D-6, § 1(18-90), 5-5-1998; Ord. No. 05-D-29, § I, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 09-M-42, § I(a), 12-15-2009 ; Ord. No. 10-M-03, § I(a), 2-16-2010 ) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, § I of Ord. No. 05-D-29, adopted June 21, 2005, has been codified as herein set out as § 86-148(b). Said provisions did not expressly amend the Code. 
_____ 
Sec. 86-149. - Parking prohibited. 
(a)  When signs are erected and/or, when recommended by the city engineer or the chief of police, curb(s) are marked by painting them red with "No Parking" painted in white letters thereon, giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time (or at times as limited) upon any of the following streets or portions thereof. 
Street 	Extent 
Aero Avenue 	30 feet on either side of exit from parking lot located between pavilion and swimming pool 
Arroyo Seco 	Either side of the (3) islands between the posted "No Parking" signs 
Arroyo Verde 	From the driveway of the Oaks of Green Valley II Shopping Center to the bridge structure on the north side of the road, approximately 115 feet. 
Arroyo Verde 	From the driveway of the Oaks at Green Valley Shopping Center to the bridge structure on the south side of the road, approximately 150 feet. 
Assembly Circle 	Entire length, either side 
Associates Drive 	Entire length, either side 
Aviation Boulevard 	Either side from Main Street to Cibolo Creek 
Borgfeld Road 	On either side of the Borgfeld Road from FM 3009 to city limits of Dietz Road, between the posted "No Parking" signs. 
Cameron River 	25 feet of linear curb in front of Drainage Inlet at intersection with Eagle Valley 
Castle Hill Drive and 
Sherwin Drive 	From a center point of the drainage ditch on the outer curve to a point 116.8 feet in both directions, or from a point of the drainage ditch on the inside curve to a point 110.1 feet in both directions 
Colony Drive 	West side from Brooks Avenue to Aviation Avenue and from Maple Drive to Marilyn Drive 
Corridor Loop 	No Parking in areas shown in Exhibit A from I.H. 35 Frontage Rd. to FM 3009. 
Corridor Parkway 	Entire length, either side 
Curtiss 	Either side from Schertz Parkway to Westchester 
David Lack Blvd. 	No Parking on David Lack Blvd. from the intersection of Schwab Rd. to 1900-feet east of the intersection of David Lack Blvd. and Schwab Rd. 
Dimrock 	North side from FM 3009 (Roy Richard Dr.) to Star Light Lane 
Dove Meadows 	Entire length, either side 
Dowman Street 	Entire length, west side 
East Live Oak Road 	Either side from Schertz Parkway to Farm to Market 3009 
Elbel Road 	Either side from Farm to Market 3009 to Schertz Parkway 
Emerald Gate 	Entire length, either side 
Exchange Avenue 	North side from Schertz Parkway to Koch Street 
Fairlawn Avenue 	Either side of the "calming circle" at 420 Fairlawn, between the posted "No Parking" signs 
Farm to Market 78 	North side from Dietz Creek to Cibolo Creek Bridge 
Farm to Market 3009 	Either side from Farm to Market 78 to most northwesterly city limits 
First Street 	Either side from Farm to Market 78 to Main Street 
FM 1518/Main Street 	North side from Oak Street to 220 feet east of 1 st Street 
FM 1518/Main Street 	South side from Oak Street to 140 feet east of 1 st Street 
FM 2252 	150 feet on the approach on each side of the railroad crossing identified as DOT 415590X, RRMP 236.460 within the city limits 
Guada Coma Drive 	Entire length, either side 
Hickory Lane 	No parking on cul-de-sac around the island in the cul-de-sac as outlined in Exhibit A 
Inglewood Drive 	Changing the "No Parking Zone" on Inglewood Drive between Wayward Pass and Savannah Drive to hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
IH 35 Access Road East and West 	Either side from city limits to city limits 
Lindbergh Avenue 	Either side from Exchange Avenue to Aviation Avenue, West side from Main Street to Exchange Avenue 
Lindbergh Avenue 	East side 15 feet from intersection of Lindbergh Avenue and Main Street 
Livingston Drive 	Creating a "No Parking Zone" 94 feet east of the closed gate and 40 feet west of the closed gate on Livingston Drive 
Lookout Road 	Northeast side from IH 35 to city limits 
Marilyn Drive 	24 feet of linear curb in front of Drainage Channel mid-block 
Maske Road 	From the intersection of East Live Oak Road to the westerly city limits, either side 
Mayfair 	South side of Mayfair Avenue, from the intersection of Cherry Tree Drive and Mayfair Drive to the intersection of Wedgewood Drive and Mayfair Drive 
Oak Street 	Either side from Farm to Market 1518 to Marilyn Drive 
Parkfair Gate 	Entire length, either side 
Pecan Drive 	Either side from Colony Drive to Schertz Parkway 
Pecan Drive 	24 feet of linear curb in front of Drainage Channels mid-block 
Randolph Avenue 	Either side from Farm to Market 78 to Marilyn Drive 
Savannah Drive 	Entire length, either side 
Schertz Parkway 	Either side from Fm 78 to IH 35 Access Road 
Silvertree Blvd. 	No Parking on Silvertree Blvd. from the intersection of Silvertree Blvd. and Dove Meadows to 110-feet southeast of Idlewood on Silvertree Blvd. 
Town Gate 	Entire length, either side 
Tractor Pass 	5 minute only parking along 110 feet adjacent to the common lot on which the mail kiosk is located 
Tri County Parkway 	The entire length of Tri County Parkway on the west side 
Triton Drive 	Entire length, either side 
Westchester Drive 	On southwest side of Westchester Drive between the posted "No Parking" signs. 780 feet south on Elbel Road. 
Westchester Drive 	60 foot on southeast side of Elbel Road as shown in Exhibit A 
Woodland Oaks Drive 	Either side from eastern city limits to western city limits 
Wuest Street 	Either side from intersection of First Street to western city limits. 
 
(b)  Commercial vehicles in excess of one ton, recreational vehicles, trailer houses, camping trailers, livestock trailers, boats and boat trailers, or other trailers shall not be parked, or stored on any city street, right-of-way, alleyway or easement except for temporary parking by a customer in front of a commercial establishment. This shall not restrict the parking of a commercial vehicle for the purpose of loading and unloading. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a recreational vehicle may park such vehicle on a city street in front or on the side of the owner's residence or a residence to which the owner is invited, for a period not to exceed three days in a calendar month. 
(c)  No vehicle or auxiliary system of a vehicle left running shall be parked on any residential street between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(d)  This provision is subject to stopping or standing required by other traffic regulations. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-91, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 99-D-26, § 1, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 05-D-14, § I, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 97-D-25, § I, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 05-D-29, § II, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-37, § 1, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 06-D-50, § 1, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 06-D-52, § I, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 07-D-02, § I, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 08-D-52, § I, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 09-D-30, § I, 7-28-2009; 09-M-42, § I(b), 12-15-2009 ; Ord. No. 10-M-03, § I(b), 2-16-2010 ; Ord. No. 10-D-12, § I, 6-1-2010 ; Ord. No. 11-D-12, § I, 5-24-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-13, § I, 5-24-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-23, § I, 8-16-2011 ; Ord. No. 11-D-29, § I, 9-27-2011 ; Ord. No. 12-D-10, § 1, 6-5-2012 ; Ord. No. 12-D-20, § 1, 8-14-2012 ; Ord. No. 14-D-04 , § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-16 , § 1, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-21 , § 1, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 14-D-17 , § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 16-D-01 , § 1, 2-2-2016; Ord. No. 16-D-16 , § 1, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-D-33 , § 1, 10-11-2016; Ord. No. 17-D-14 , § 1, 4-25-2017; Ord. No. 17-D-28 , § 1, 8-29-2017; Ord. No. 18-D-17 , § 1, 6-5-2018; Ord. No. 20-D-03 , § 1, 2-25-2020; Ord. No. 20-D-05 , § 1, 2-25-2020) 
_____ 
Sec. 86-150. - Parked vehicles to leave at least ten feet of roadway available for traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-92, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-151. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the driver of a vehicle shall not park such vehicle on a roadway other than parallel with edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic, and with the curb-side wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be lawful to park vehicles at an angle not greater than 45 degrees to the line of traffic at such places in the city as the city council shall, by resolution, determine that angle parking shall be permitted and shall cause the same to be marked or signed, and in all places where sidewalks have been set back and provisions made for parking vehicles across or inside of the usual curb line on any street in the city. In leaving an angle parking space, a vehicle shall not be backed into the traffic lane any further than necessary to get straightened out and faced in the proper direction for traffic between such space and the center of the street. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-93, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-152. - Permit for backing to curb for loading or unloading. 
The traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-94, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-153. - Vehicle owner not to permit parking violations. 
No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-95, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-154. - Impoundment of standing or parking vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street, highway, alley, any easement, park or other public place in the city to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury or incapacity, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(3)  When a vehicle is left unattended upon any easement where such vehicle constitutes or may cause an obstruction for the intended use. 
(4)  When a vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is parked in violation of this chapter, state law or any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows, or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle, the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent written report of such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reason of such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(d)  The owner of a vehicle impounded under this section, or his duly authorized agent, shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the city of the sum of $2.00, together with all costs of removal and storage that may accrue thereon. 
(e)  The remedy and impounding fee and costs provided in this section shall be cumulative of any and all other penalties provided for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-96, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-155. - Designated parking regulations on city-owned property. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to establish parking regulations, including the establishment of no parking or restricted parking zones, relating to city-owned property. Such regulations with respect to specific parcels of city property shall be reflected in appropriate signage, giving reasonable notice to the public. 
(Ord. No. 99-D-13, § I, 7-20-1999)  
Sec. 86-156. - Parking regulations on FM 78 public parking lots. 
The city council is hereby authorized to establish parking regulations, including the establishment of 24-hour, two-hour parking zones relating to public parking lots on FM 78. Such regulations shall be reflected in appropriate signage, giving reasonable notice to the public. 
(Ord. No. 00-D-5, § 1, 2-15-2000)  
Sec. 86-157. - Enforcement of designated disabled parking space violations on private property. 
The City of Schertz, Texas, provides that Texas Transportation Code Section 681.011 applies to a parking space or area for persons with disabilities on private property that is designated in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in Texas Transportation Code Section 681.009(b). 
(Ord. No. 06-S-62, § II, 12-19-2006)  
Secs. 86-158—86-176. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local authorities may regulate and license bicycles, Tex. Transportation Code, § 542.202(a)(4); operation of bicycles and other vehicles, Tex. Transportation Code, § 551.001 et seq.; applicability of traffic laws to bicycles, Tex. Transportation Code, § 551.101. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-177. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to exceptions herein stated. The parent or guardian of any child or ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. The term "bicycle" as used in this article, shall mean a bicycle, unicycle, tricycle, or any similar play vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-108, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-178. - Rights and duties of riders. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall subject to all of the duties applicable to drivers of motor vehicles except as provided herein and except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-109, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-179. - Bicycle seat; number of persons to be carried. 
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto; and no bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-110, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-180. - Operation upon roadways. 
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the road as practicable exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction and shall not ride more than two abreast on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Whenever a usable path for bicycle riders exists, riders shall use such path and shall not use such roadway. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-111, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-181. - Carrying of packages, bundles, etc. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping, at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-112, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-182. - Riding at night. 
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light, visible from a distance of at least 500 feet from the front; and shall also be equipped with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Texas Department of Public Safety which shall be visible for a distance of at least 300 feet from the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps of a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet from the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. Every bicycle shall also be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-113, 11-21-1995)  
Sec. 86-183. - Bicycle races prohibited. 
No person shall drive any bicycle (as defined in section 86-177) in any race, speed competition or contest, drag or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or acceleration or for the purpose of making a speed record and no person shall in any manner participate in any such race, competition, contest, test or exhibition; on any federal highway, state highway or alley, easement, road or street maintained by the city. The city manager may, by permit, authorize races or similar events which shall be exceptions to this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-114, 11-21-1995)  
Secs. 86-184—86-204. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS 
 
Sec. 86-205. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child means any individual under 16 years of age. 
Helmet means properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation, or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets at the time of the manufacture of the helmet. 
Moped means a motor driven cycle whose speed attainable in one mile is not more than 30 miles per hour and that is equipped with a motor that produces not more than two-brake horsepower. If an internal combustion engine is used, the piston displacement may not exceed 50 cubic centimeters, and the power driven system may not require the operator to shift gears. 
Motor assisted scooter has the meaning assigned by Tex. Transportation Code § 551.301(2), as it currently exists or may be amended, and includes a self-propelled device (electric or gas operated) with at least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation; a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; a gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and the ability to be propelled by human power alone. A motorized wheelchair or scooter permitted by the laws of the state to be used by the disabled is not a motor assisted scooter as defined in or regulated by this division. 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian or conservator of a child. 
Wearing a helmet means that the person has a helmet fastened securely to his/her head with the straps of the helmet securely tightened in the manner intended by the manufacturer to provide maximum protection. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-01, § 2, 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 86-206. - Restrictions and prohibitions for motor assisted scooters/penalty for violation. 
(a)  Restrictions and prohibitions on locations of use. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride on a motor assisted scooter: 
a.  on a sidewalk, or 
b.  on a street or highway within the city having a posted speed limit of greater than 30 miles per hour. 
Motor assisted scooters may be walked across a street or intersection having a posted speed limit of greater than 30 miles per hour. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a parent to allow a child to operate or ride on a motor assisted scooter: 
a.  on a sidewalk, or 
b.  on or across any street or highway within the city having a posted speed limit of greater than 30 miles per hour. 
If a child is operating or riding on a motor assisted scooter, it is presumed for purposes of this division that a parent allowed the child to do so. 
(3)  This division does not permit "go-carts" to be driven within the city. 
(4)  This division does not permit a moped to be driven within the city unless the operator and the moped comply with the state laws that govern mopeds and their operation. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  The violation by a person over the age of ten of any provision of subsection (a) shall be a Class C misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, the violator shall be fined an amount not exceeding $500.00 per offense. Conviction of a child for a violation of subsection (a)(1) shall not be a prerequisite for a conviction of a parent for violation of subsection (a)(2). 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to promote safety and to discourage the use of motor assisted scooters in unsafe areas or in an unsafe manner. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it currently exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-01, § 3, 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 86-207. - Helmets required/penalty for failure to wear helmet. 
(a)  Helmet required. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any child to operate or ride on a motor assisted scooter unless the child is wearing a helmet. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a parent to allow a child to operate or ride on a motor assisted scooter unless the child is wearing a helmet. If a child is operating or riding on a motor assisted scooter without a helmet, it is presumed for purposes of this division that a parent allowed the child to do so. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  The violation by a person over the age of ten of any provision of subsection (a) shall be a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the violator shall be fined an amount not exceeding $50.00 upon the first conviction and an amount not exceeding $100.00 upon the second and each subsequent conviction. Conviction of a child for violation of subsection (a)(1) shall not be a prerequisite for a conviction of a parent for violation of subsection (a)(2). 
(2)  The municipal court or municipal court of record shall dismiss a charge against a child and/or parent for a first offense under subsection (a) upon receiving proof that the child who was operating or riding on the motor assisted scooter in violation of subsection (a) acquired a helmet on or before the tenth day after receiving the citation of the violation. 
(3)  If the charge against a person is dismissed pursuant to subsection (b)(2), a later conviction for a violation of subsection (a) shall be considered a second or subsequent conviction for purposes of subsection (b)(1). 
(4)  The purpose of this section is to promote safety and to encourage the use of helmets. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it currently exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-01, § 4, 1-4-2005)  
Secs. 86-208—86-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIAN RIGHTS AND DUTIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrian provisions, Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.001 et seq.; local ordinances concerning pedestrians, Tex. Transportation Code, § 552.009. 
 
Sec. 86-221. - Use of sidewalk, pathway required; manner of walking on roadway. 
No pedestrian shall walk or run upon the traveled portion of the roadway when said roadway is paralleled by a sidewalk or pathway designated for pedestrian traffic. When pedestrians must walk in the roadway, they are required to walk or run no more than two abreast on the side of the roadway facing oncoming traffic. The city manager may, by permit, authorize races or similar events which shall be exceptions to this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-121, 11-21-1995)  
Secs. 86-222—86-233. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC SAFETY HAZARDS 
 
Sec. 86-234. - Obstruction of intersections and traffic-control devices prohibited. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any property adjacent to any intersection where a traffic-control device is erected shall not permit any vegetation, fences or other structures to obstruct any such intersection. 
(b)  Any vegetation, fence or other structure in excess of 36 inches above roadway within the visibility triangle is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a traffic hazard. For the purpose of this section visibility triangle shall have the following meaning. Triangle sight area would be from the corner of a converging street to a distance of 25 feet along each street with the triangle completed by drawing a line through the property from both 25 foot street setbacks. 
(c)  In the event the owner, tenant, lessee or agent fails to remove or remedy the condition within ten days after the notice has been given, the city may do whatever is deemed necessary to remove or remedy the condition or cause same to be done, and charge the expense incurred thereby to the owner, agent or lessee of the lot or parcel, and such expense shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work is done. 
(Ord. No. 95-D-36, § 18-131, 11-21-1995)  
Secs. 86-235—86-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SPEED HUMPS 
 
Sec. 86-251. - Speed hump defined. 
A speed hump is a gentle rise and fall of pavement surface placed across a roadway intended to reduce the speed of vehicles. See Attachment I for basic design of speed humps. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-16, § I(18-132), 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-11, § I, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 86-252. - Eligible streets and location of speed hump. 
(a)  In order to qualify for consideration as a location for a speed hump, a street segment must meet criteria set from time to time by the public works department, including at least the following criteria: 
(1)  The street segment must be primarily a residential street or provide access to abutting residential properties. 
(2)  The street segment must have no more than one lane for moving traffic in each direction. 
(3)  The street segment may not be designated as an arterial street on the city's major thoroughfare plan. 
(4)  The street must have a posted speed limit of only 20 mph. 
(5)  Traffic volumes on the street segment must be 500 vehicles per day or greater within a 24-hour period. 
(6)  The 85th percentile vehicle speed on the street segment must be at least five miles per hour over the posted 20 miles per hour speed limit. 
(7)  The street segment must not be so close to a fire department or emergency services facility as to significantly interfere with emergency vehicle operations. 
(8)  The street segment must be at least 750 feet long without interruption by a traffic control device. 
It is the responsibility of the Public Works Department to conduct the necessary studies to determine if the street segment meets the required criteria. 
(b)  The department of public works shall determine the final location of all speed humps in accordance with safe engineering principles, considering at least the following criteria: 
(1)  Speed humps will usually be placed no closer than 300 feet apart. 
(2)  A speed hump shall not be located in front of a driveway or within 50 feet of an intersection. 
(3)  Speed humps should not be located within 250 feet of a traffic control device. 
(4)  A speed hump will normally be placed at the property line between the two properties when possible. 
(5)  "No Parking" signs may be placed within 50 feet of the approaching side of the speed hump if deemed necessary by engineering site conditions. 
Other factors such as curves and grade changes on the street, emergency access, and safe sight distances will also be considered by the public works department. 
(c)  Once installed, the speed hump shall be the property of the city, and the city shall be responsible for appropriate maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-16, § I(18-133), 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-11, § I, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 86-253. - Application. 
(a)  A request for installation of a speed hump begins with a "Request for Speed Hump Investigation" in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A being filed with the department of public works. A group of residents of at least ten properties abutting on the street segment proposed for a speed hump can make a request. 
(b)  The director of public works, or his designee, will evaluate all requests and recommend approval or denial to the city manager, taking into account the requirements of this chapter. Requests will be evaluated on an annual basis. 
(c)  The city may at any time install speed humps when and where it deems necessary, upon the advice of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 05-D-16, § I(18-134), 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 06-D-11, § I, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 86-254. - Appeal process. 
If the city determines that a speed hump is not warranted in a particular subdivision or on a certain street within the city, a group of residents of at least ten properties abutting on the street segment proposed for a speed hump, may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(1)  The city council may overturn the previous decision based on the new information provided by the citizens. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-11, § I, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 86-255. - Removal. 
The city will consider removal of speed humps upon the request of the director of public works due to circumstances such as the addition of traffic lights at an intersection negating the need for speed humps in that location. 
(Ord. No. 06-D-11, § I, 3-21-2006)  
Secs. 86-254, 86-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - HAND-HELD MOBILE COMMUNICATION AND PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
 
Sec. 86-256. - Regulating the use of hand-held mobile communication devices and portable electronic devices while driving. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1)  Engaging in a call means talking to, dialing, or listening on a hand-held mobile communication device, but does not include holding a mobile communication device to activate or deactivate the device. 
(2)  Hand-held mobile communication device means a text-messaging device or other electronic, two-way communication device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 332, that is designed to receive and transmit voice communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by internet or other electronic means. The term includes a mobile telephone and a personal digital assistant (PDA). 
(3)  Hands-free mobile telephone means a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of the mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person) whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate or deactivate the mobile telephone. 
(4)  Park or parked shall mean for the operator to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For purposes of this section, "parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
(5)  Portable electronic device shall mean an MP3 or other hand-held music player, electronic reading device, laptop computer, pager, global positioning system or navigation system, electronic game device, or portable computing device. 
(6)  Text message means a two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers, images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted through either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. The term does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or navigation system. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person uses a hand-held mobile communication device and/or a portable electronic device to 1) engage in a call, 2) send, read, or write a text message, 3) view pictures or written text whether transmitted by internet or other electronic means, 4) engage in gaming, or 5) engage in any other use of the device while operating a motor vehicle. 
(c)  This section does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle using a hand-held mobile communications device and/or portable electronic device: 
(1)  While the vehicle is legally parked or is being driven on private property; 
(2)  That is affixed to the vehicle and used as a global positioning or navigation system; 
(3)  That is used with a hands-free mobile communication telephone or other such device to engage in telephone communications or to listen to audio transmissions; 
(4)  While operating an authorized emergency vehicle in an official capacity; or 
(5)  Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a hand-held mobile communication device. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the person was using a hand-held mobile communication device or portable electronic device for the purpose of: 
(1)  Reporting illegal activity to a law enforcement agency; 
(2)  Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician's office, or a health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation; or 
(3)  Preventing injury to a person or property. 
(e)  A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 per violation. 
(f)  An offense under this section is not a moving violation and may not be made a part of a person's driving record or insurance record. 
(g)  To the extent this section conflicts with V.T.C.A. Texas Transportation Code § 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, V.T.C.A. Texas Transportation Code § 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, or V.T.C.A. Texas Transportation Code § 545.4252, regarding the use of wireless communication devices on school property, this section does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 15-D-16 , § 1, 6-16-2015)  
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public utilities, Art. XI. 
State Law reference— Municipal utility systems, general powers, Tex. Local Government Code, § 402.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Provisions of article deemed incorporated into service contracts; compliance with chapter. 
(a)  All of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be incorporated into every contract between the city and its water and wastewater customers, and each customer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of this chapter and, by applying for and accepting water and sewer service from the city, shall be deemed to have acceded to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the water system of the city or to utilize the services of the city's sewer system or to utilize the services of the solid waste franchise holder, except under the terms and conditions specified and stipulated in this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 19-1)  
Sec. 90-2. - Failure to comply with chapter. 
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the water system of the city shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of water, wastewater and solid waste services. 
(Code 1976, § 19-2)  
Sec. 90-3. - Public works director. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of public works director for the city, which officer shall, under the direction of the city manager, have supervision of the water and sewer systems, streets, drainage and animal control of the city. He shall have general supervisory powers over all employees of the water and sewer systems, street, drainage, and animal control; shall make frequent trips of inspection over such systems and shall make all repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his duties. In the absence of the public works director, all of the duties designated concerning the water and sewer system will be assigned to the assistant public works director. 
(b)  The public works director shall report violations of all ordinances governing the establishment, maintenance and operation of the water system and sewer system, streets, drainage, and animal control to the city manager and shall forthwith proceed to have all offenders prosecuted as provided by the ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-3)  
Sec. 90-4. - Certain words or titles to have same definition. 
(a)  Throughout this chapter where public works director or utility superintendent are used they may be interchangeable. 
(b)  Throughout this chapter where wastewater or sewer are used they may be interchangeable. 
(Code 1976, § 19-4)  
Sec. 90-5. - Charge for transferring service(s) from one address to another address. 
Whenever a customer of the city water service and/or the wastewater service and/or the garbage service terminates such service(s) at one address and renews such service(s) at a different address, a $10.00 transfer fee shall be assessed against such customer. 
(Code 1976, § 19-5)  
Sec. 90-6. - No free service; city to pay same rate as other consumers. 
No free water or wastewater service shall be allowed. To the extent the city and its various departments avail themselves of the service afforded by the sanitary sewer system and water system, they shall pay therefor the same rate charged other consumers. 
(Code 1976, § 19-6)  
Sec. 90-7. - Deposit to assure payment. 
(a)  Deposit requirements. A deposit will be required for each customer applying for water service, and/or wastewater service and/or garbage service. 
(b)  Deposit payment plan. At the request of the customer, a deposit payment plan may be set up. The deposit may be paid as follows: one-third at the time of application, one-third on the first and second billing following start of service. 
(c)  Deposit amounts. 
(1)  Residential, $60.00. 
(2)  Commercial, $60.00 for office and professional. 
(3)  Commercial, $100.00 or 2½ times estimated monthly billing for all other commercial customers. 
(4)  Residential, garage only, $25.00. 
(d)  Deposit refund regulations. After the deposit has been held by the city for a period of two years, and provided the customer has not been in default excessively in the payment of bills for services during such period of time, such deposit shall be refunded to the customer. Refunds made under the provisions hereof will be made annually as of January 1. Excessive default shall include but may not be limited to more than two extensions during a calendar year, one turn off for nonpayment within the two-year period, or two returned checks within the two-year period. 
(e)  Service to start and additional service without deposit. Water service will not begin until a deposit has been made and an application and agreement for city water and allied services has been signed. A customer who has established a good credit rating with the city, (two years or longer continuous residence with deposit refunded for good payment), may have one additional service without additional deposit. 
(Code 1976, § 19-7)  
Sec. 90-8. - New construction utility customers, temporary services. 
(a)  New construction charges. All new construction utility customers will be charged according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Water service charges begin the date of service turn-on. 
(2)  Sewer service charges begin the date of the sewer tap. 
(3)  Garbage service charges begin the date of occupancy. 
(b)  Temporary services. 
(1)  Extended absence: When the owner or occupant of a residence plans to leave the area for 30 or more days, by request, the utility department will do a complete turn-off of services on the date requested and provide a final bill to the customer. Any deposit will be retained until the customer returns. Upon notification that the customer has returned, a service turn-on will be accomplished and the customer will be charged a service fee of $15.00, and billing will commence effective the date of turn-on. 
(2)  Realtors and rental property owners: Realtors or rental property owners that desire service for a specified period of time in order to clean or perform maintenance on their property are authorized to make a $60.00 deposit that will be credited to a specific property address, a turn-on at that address will be accomplished. The customer must notify the utility department of the date and time that service is to be started and terminated. Upon termination of that service a utility bill will be prepared reflecting a $7.00 fee for a specified period of time not to exceed five working days and/or 3,000 gallons of water usage. Any water usage exceeding the limit will be billed according to set water rates at time of usage. 
(3)  Developers, buildings, and subdividers: Developers, builders, and contractors that are in the process of constructing two or more homes and require a water turn-on at the construction site are required to make a deposit based on 2½ times the estimated water usage for all homes under construction. 
(4)  Bulk sales from fire hydrant, connection fee, deposit and user charge: The sale of bulk water from fire hydrants throughout the city water distribution system must be approved by the public works director or authorized representative. Under normal conditions, bulk water customers must use a city owned three inch water meter and the public works director shall determine the nearest fire hydrant suitable for the customers needs, or the water may be obtained through a dispenser machine located at 10 Commercial Place at the utility department. When a customer must use a fire hydrant to procure water, the customer will be required to make a deposit of $90.00, pay a service charge of $50.00 which is not refundable, and pay a minimum rate of $30.00 for the first 10,000 gallons of water and $3.00 per thousand gallons of water obtained thereafter. In the event the customer advises the city that he will no longer be purchasing water, and all charges have been paid to the city, the deposit will be refunded. If, after refund of a deposit, the customer again desires to purchase bulk water, the service charge and deposit will each again be required. 
(Code 1976, § 19-8)  
Sec. 90-9. - Responsibility of applicant for service for payment. 
The person who makes application for water, wastewater and/or garbage service shall be responsible for payment of charges provided for in this chapter, until notice is given to the city by such person of the intention to discontinue such service. 
(Code 1976, § 19-9)  
Sec. 90-10. - Billing; when and where due and payable. 
All charges to a consumer for water, wastewater and garbage service shall be billed to the customer on one bill. Such bill shall be due and payable upon receipt and must be postmarked or paid at our office no later than the due date printed on bill. 
(Code 1976, § 19-10)  
Sec. 90-11. - Penalty for delinquency. 
If a bill for water, wastewater and/or garbage service is not paid on or before the due date printed on the bill, it shall be deemed delinquent and ten percent of the total amount of such bill shall be added to same as a penalty for nonpayment. Mail postmarked on or before the due date shall be accepted without penalty. Payments in the drop-box at 8:00 a.m. the day after the due date, with checks or money orders dated on or before the due date, shall be accepted without penalty. An additional ten percent of the balance due shall be added for each additional 30-day period for which such customer is delinquent. On the business day following the date on which an account becomes delinquent, the city shall mail a notice of delinquency to the account address notifying the account holder that service will be disconnected if the account balance, including all penalties, is not paid in full by 12:00 noon on the business day referenced in such letter, which shall normally be ten days after date of such letter. 
(Code 1976, § 19-11; Ord. No. 10-F-16, § 1, 6-15-2010 )  
Sec. 90-12. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay. 
(a)  In the event of discontinuance of service under this section the service will not be reinstated until all past due bills plus a reconnection charge of $20.00 have been paid. 
(b)  No service will be discontinued on a Friday or a day before a holiday. Discontinuance of service will be extended until the next succeeding date when the municipal office is open. 
(c)  In the event that a customer of the city sewer system is supplied with water service by a waterworks or supplier other than the city, such waterworks or supplier shall discontinue water service to such customer, upon notice from the city that such customer is delinquent in payment of his wastewater service bill. 
(d)  In the event the water meter servicing a customer must be removed after discontinuance of service under this section, the service will not be reinstated until all past due bills, all reconnection charges, penalties and a re-installation fee of $50.00 have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 19-12; Ord. No. 10-F-16, § 1, 6-15-2010 )  
Sec. 90-13. - Cash payment required in cases of returned checks and when service has been discontinued for nonpayment. 
(a)  Returned checks. When more than one check issued by the same customer for payment of any bill due the city is returned by the bank, such customer will be required to pay all future bills in cash. The customer will be assessed a fee of $10.00 for each and every time a check is returned to the city. Any deviation from this policy will be at the discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  Cash for discontinued service. When a customer's service is discontinued for nonpayment as set forth in section 90-12, payment must be made by cash, certified check or money order before service will be restored. 
(Code 1976, § 19-13)  
Sec. 90-14. - Extended time to pay. 
Customers may request an extension of time to pay their account for good cause. 
(1)  Number of extensions granted per calendar year: A total of two extensions may be granted per calendar year. 
(2)  Maximum extension time: No account will be extended for a period which exceeds ten days after turn off date. 
(3)  Charge for extension: There will be a $5.00 charge for each extension granted after the two allowed under subsection (a) of this section. This charge will be due at the time of payment of the extended amount. 
(4)  Waiver of requirements under this section: Any deviation from the requirements of this section must be performed by the public works director or the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 19-14)  
Sec. 90-15. - Public works director to make adjustment for private water line breaks. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the public works director to review and make any adjustment to either the water or sewer charges to an account when a customer's private water line breaks. 
(b)  A customer requesting an adjustment for a private water line break, must present either a bill from a plumbing shop or a bill for plumbing parts or both before any review will be made. 
(Code 1976, § 19-16)  
Secs. 90-16—90-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water systems in home-rule municipalities, Tex. Local Government Code, § 402.017. 
 
Sec. 90-34. - Water general policy. 
In the sale of water by the city, to any person, firm or corporation within and without the city limits of the city, and in the supply of water for municipal use for the protection of property against fires in the city, the city does not agree, unless by specific contract, nor is the city bound to furnish water of any special or specific or specified amount, but only undertakes to furnish such water and the amount of water that may be supplied from the wells of the city, or such other source or sources as the city may select, and in an amount within the capacity of the city's pumping plants. 
(Code 1976, § 19-21)  
Sec. 90-35. - Nonliability of city in case of failure to supply water for firefighting purposes. 
In the event for any reason the city may become unable to supply water to its patrons within the city, or to the municipality for the prevention or suppression of fire, the city will in no manner be liable for damages by reason of any such failure to any patron or patrons of the water system, or to any person or persons whose property may have been destroyed by fire, or otherwise damaged. 
(Code 1976, § 19-22)  
Sec. 90-36. - Water connections generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit to be made any connection with the main or service pipes of the water system or to turn on or use water of such system without first obtaining a permit to so do. Application for such permit shall be filed in the Municipal Office, 1400 Schertz Parkway or the Public Works Building, 10 Commercial Place stating fully the several and various uses for which water is wanted, giving the name of the owner of the property, the number of the lot and block and the name of the street and house number. If the application is approved, the permit shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon issuance of the permit and payment of the connection fee, the public works director shall make, or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a locking stop box and curb cock, the cost of which is included in the meter connection fee. 
(c)  Every premises connected with any water main, or being supplied with any water from the city's system, shall have a separate service connection, locking curb stop box and curb cock. 
(Code 1976, § 19-23)  
Sec. 90-37. - Water connection charge. 
Water connection charges shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 19-24)  
Sec. 90-38. - City to make water taps and connections, extend service pipes, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person, other than the taper employed by the city, to tap any water main, make connections with mains or extend service pipes from the main to the meter or to place a stopcock and stop box at that point. All of this equipment shall be under the exclusive control of the city and such tap service shall be paid for by the plumber or owner ordering the work done before the work is commenced. 
(Code 1976, § 19-25)  
Sec. 90-39. - Repair and renewal of water service pipes. 
The city will make all repairs and renewals of water service pipes from the main to the meter, and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized agent of the city, to repair or renew any such service pipe from the main to the meter. 
(Code 1976, § 19-26)  
Sec. 90-40. - Water meters generally. 
(a)  All water furnished by the city to its customers shall be measured by meters. All meters shall conform to city specifications; and size, type, right to own or control all meters installed or used by customers of its water shall be determined by the city, which shall keep all meters owned by it in repair, without expense to the customer, except that the property owner will be charged for meters, boxes and materials damaged or destroyed through negligence and for labor costs incurred in reestablishing service. 
(b)  Not more than one customer shall purchase water through any single meter, without the written approval of the city manager. Single metering is authorized for more than one unit of occupancy, provided responsibility for payment of all utility services for the single meter billing is assumed by the single property owner. In cases where single metering is to be used for more than a single unit occupancy and where one of those occupancies requires a higher water use than a single family residence, a meter sufficient in size to meet the total requirements will be required. The size of the meter will be determined by the public works director at the time of the request for service. Where more than one living unit equivalent (LUE) is connected to a single metering device, the base rate for each LUE shall be assessed on the single meter. 
(Code 1976, § 19-27)  
Sec. 90-41. - Removing or tampering with water meters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any such water meter. The city provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity. 
(Code 1976, § 19-28)  
Sec. 90-42. - Cross connections between water supplies prohibited. 
No water, other than water furnished by the city, shall be used in any line to which water is delivered by the city. No unknown water shall be permitted in any such line. 
(Code 1976, § 19-29)  
Sec. 90-43. - Water service outside city limits generally. 
(a)  No water shall be furnished by the city to customers beyond the corporate limits of the city unless all plumbing, including fixtures and appliances, through which city water is to pass has been approved by the public works director or his authorized representative. In the event additional plumbing is installed on such premises, water services shall be discontinued to such customer, unless such additional plumbing installation is approved by the public works director. 
(b)  Nothing in this section or any other section of this chapter or any other ordinance shall be construed to compel the city to furnish water to customers beyond the corporate limits or to continue such service once begun, and the city reserves the right to furnish service to such customers it deems advisable and to, at any time, wholly or partially discontinue the water supply upon violation of any of the terms of this chapter, the same as though such customer's residence is in the city. 
(c)  No water shall be sold by the city for farm irrigation purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 19-30)  
Sec. 90-44. - Extension of water service from one premises to another. 
After water is introduced into a building or upon any premises, the same shall not be extended by any plumber or any other person to any other premises for additional living units, except on the consent of the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 19-31)  
Sec. 90-45. - Extension of mains. 
The cost of main extension will be prorated to property owners, who will benefit from such extension, on a per front foot basis. The per front foot cost will be applied to the front footage of the lot to which water service is desired. The cost will be based upon construction cost at the time of connection and shall be due at the time connection is made. 
(Code 1976, § 19-32)  
Sec. 90-46. - Manner of making connections. 
All connections within the city limits or outside the city limits made from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  It shall be the policy of the city to supply water to its customers through mains and lines owned or controlled by the city and which shall be located in the streets, between the curb and sidewalk lines, or in alleys adjacent to property being served, or on easements controlled or owned by the city. 
(2)  If the property to be served is on a dedicated street, the city will construct such line to the customers property line upon payment by the customer of the regular connection charge; utility extension policy fees; capital recovery fees; an additional payment per linear foot for labor, engineering and materials; and 15 percent administrative fee. 
(3)  The city may assess, in addition to the service connection charge, the estimated cost of breaking and replacing pavement necessary to make such connections; such assessment to be paid prior to the work being done. In event the assessment is more than the actual cost of such breaking and replacing, the difference shall be refunded to the customer upon completion of the work. 
(4)  In the event any connection requires boring under or crossing over any street or highway, the city may also assess the estimated cost of boring under or crossing over any street or highway in furnishing service. In the event the assessment is more than the actual cost of such boring under or crossing over any street or highway, the difference shall be refunded to the customer upon completion of work. 
(5)  The city will set a meter at the property line and extend a six inch service line where the cutoff will be installed for use by the customer. Said cutoff shall become the property of the owner after 90 days from the date of installation. 
(6)  All lines constructed and meters installed under the provisions of this chapter shall be the property of the city and the city shall have full control and jurisdiction over such lines and meters. 
(Code 1976, § 19-33)  
Sec. 90-47. - Water supply to steam boilers and closed water heaters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to draw water from any city supply pipe directly into any steam boiler which is equipped or arranged for more than 15 pounds pressure per square inch. 
(b)  All persons having boilers or closed water heaters supplied with city water are cautioned against the danger of explosion or collapse. The city will not be liable for any damages that may occur on account of the water being shut off for any reason or on account of the breaking of any pipe or fixture by pressure of the water from the city main. 
(c)  Where city water is used to supply a steam boiler of over 15 pounds pressure, the owner shall provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply of at least four hours into which the service pipe must be discharged over the top of the tank, and never into the bottom or side. 
(Code 1976, § 19-34)  
Sec. 90-48. - Wasting water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and negligently waste-water supplied by the city in any manner whatsoever, and any person having knowledge of any condition whereby water is being wasted shall at once notify the city. Wasting water shall include but is not limited to running water onto a nonporous surface such as streets, paved parking lots, driveways, etc.; or permitting service lines to go un-repaired when water is being discharged from same. 
(b)  The refusal or neglect of an owner or occupant to equip and maintain the premises with proper service connections, utilities or fixtures of approved character and quality to prevent waste of water shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal of the city to connect the premises with the city water system or to continue water service, after having given notice of the intention to shut off the water pending the necessary correction. 
(Code 1976, § 19-35)  
Sec. 90-49. - Permit to turn water on or off at city valve. 
No plumber or any other person, except authorized employees of the city, shall turn water on or off at any city valve without written permit first being obtained from the public works director. 
(Code 1976, § 19-36)  
Sec. 90-50. - Unlawful opening, closing, etc., of fire hydrants or stopcocks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or close any fire hydrant, gate valve or stopcock connected with the water system of the city or to lift or remove the covers of any gate valve or shutoff thereof, without the permission of the public works director except in case of fire and then under the direction of officers of the fire department. 
(Code 1976, § 19-37)  
Sec. 90-51. - Turning on water supply after turnoff by city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe, where the supply has been turned off for any reason by the city, without permission from the public works director. 
(Code 1976, § 19-38)  
Sec. 90-52. - Procuring water by fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to city regulations or ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 19-39)  
Sec. 90-53. - Duties of customers; nonliability of city. 
Water customers shall keep their own service pipe lines and apparatus in good repair and condition, protected from freezing, at their own risk and expense; and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water. It is especially stipulated by the city that no claim shall be made against them by reason of the breakage of any service pipe or service cock or from any damage by reason of shutting off the water to repair mains, or for any other purpose, and in case of neglect or refusal to promptly repair any imperfection in the service pipes, lines, stops, or other fixtures by the property owner or customer. 
(Code 1976, § 19-40)  
Sec. 90-54. - Maps of water works system. 
The public works director shall keep in his office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipes laid or belonging to the city, giving the size of same and showing the locations of all valves and fire hydrants. 
(Code 1976, § 19-41)  
Sec. 90-55. - Private fire protection water service lines. 
(a)  Private fire protection water service line connections permitted may be one of the following three types: 
(1)  A line utilized exclusively to supply service for closed circuit automatic sprinkler head systems. 
(2)  A line to supply service for systems which have water outlets such as open head sprinkler systems, standpipes, hose connection outlets, external private fire hydrants on the premises, or other outlets used solely for fire protection purposes. 
(3)  A line to supply service for a combination domestic and private fire protection system where the fire system is composed of automatic sprinkler heads, standpipes, hose connections, external private fire hydrants, and other outlets which shall be classed as a domestic account. 
(b)  The water service rates on the types of connections are: 
Type Nos. 1 and 2 
(non-metered) 	Minimum annual charge 
	Inside city limits 	Outside city limits 
4 inch service line connection 
(or smaller) 	$175.00 	$225.00 
6 inch 	$235.00 	$305.00 
8 inch 	$290.00 	$375.00 
10 inch 	$340.00 	$440.00 
12 inch 	$405.00 	$525.00 
 
(Code 1976, § 19-42)  
Sec. 90-56. - Water rates established. 
(a)  A uniform monthly rate shall be charged to all customers for the use of city water within the corporate limits of the city. Such rate is hereby established from time to time by ordinance or as set forth in exhibits attached to duly adopted ordinances. 
(b)  Where a residence, business establishment, complete apartment or mobile home is not in reach of a city water main, arrangements may be made, only with the consent and at the option of the city and for which a permit must be obtained from the city council, to secure water from another user of city water. In this case the minimum monthly charge shall be made for each additional unit taking water through such meter. The regular minimum, the additional minimum, and all water used by such customer shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(c)  The customer shall be charged for all water that passes through a meter whether used or not. 
(d)  Whenever water is purchased by any customer other than through a service connection through the mains of the city and such water is purchased from taps belonging to the city, such customer shall pay $0.30 for each 100 gallons or portion thereof of water purchased. 
(e)  The uniform monthly rate charged to persons living outside the corporate limits of the city shall be 200 percent the amount of that charged persons living within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-43)  
Sec. 90-57. - Obstructed access, bills may be estimated. 
(a)  Obstructed access. It is a violation when easy access to a meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever, the entrance to the premises is made dangerous by a vicious animal, or a vehicle is parked on or over the meter box preventing reading of the meter or turn-off of service. 
(b)  Notification of obstruction. The public works director shall cause written notice to be given to the customer stating the nature of the obstruction, giving the customer 24 hours to remedy the situation and stating the results of continued violation of this section. 
(c)  Penalty. 
(1)  Estimating charges, discontinuance of service. When any violation occurs the charges may be estimated for the amount not to exceed triple the normal charge. It is further provided that should the customer fail to remedy the condition within the time stated on written notice, the public works director shall have the right to discontinue service without further notice. 
(2)  Vehicle to be towed at owner's expense. Should the owner fail to remove a vehicle which is in violation of this section, the public works director shall cause said vehicle to be towed away at the owners expense. 
(d)  Reinstatement of services. Services shall not resume until the obstruction has been remedied and all charges for water services, disconnection and reconnection fees have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 19-44)  
Sec. 90-58. - Estimated bills when meter fails. 
(a)  Meter failure. If a meter fails to register the water actually consumed by reason of the register or meter being out of order, the charge may be estimated based on the consumption of the previous six-month period. 
(b)  Obstruction by natural causes. If access to a meter is obstructed due to natural causes, the charge may be estimated based on the consumption of the previous six-month period. When access is again available an adjustment will be made to the customer's account based on actual usage. 
(Code 1976, § 19-45)  
Sec. 90-59. - Checking meters. 
If a customer complains of the charges for water supplied through his meter, the city water department will remove and test the meter. The customer or his representative shall witness such test. If it is found that the meter registers in error more than two percent fast, no fee will be assessed against the customer and an adjustment of the charges shall be made. If, however, the meter should register less than two percent fast, a $10.00 fee shall be assessed the customer on his next billing and no adjustment to charges shall be made. 
(Code 1976, § 19-46)  
Secs. 90-60—90-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WASTEWATER SERVICE AND DISPOSAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power regarding sewers and privies, Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 342.002; municipal protection of streams and watersheds from pollution and degradation, Tex. Local Government Code, § 401.002. 
 
Sec. 90-77. - Authority for and purposes of article. 
The provisions of this article are adopted in the exercise of the powers granted to this city by the laws of Texas and the city Charter for the following purposes: 
(1)  To prevent or eliminate pollution of underground and surface waters and the environment generally. 
(2)  To establish regulations limiting the discharge of all wastes into the sanitary sewer system which could or would cause damage or obstruction to the sewage collection system, or would damage or interfere with operation of the sewage treatment plants or that would be detrimental to the quality of the effluent, or cause unreasonable maintenance attention and expense to either the collection system or the treatment facilities. 
(3)  To establish surcharge rates for discharges of industrial wastes which exceed the specified limits as described herein and to provide for the method of payment for such charges. 
(4)  To provide penalties for violations of the regulations established herein. 
(Code 1976, § 19-68)  
Sec. 90-78. - Required sewer connections and fixtures; unlawful disposal of wastewater. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of buildings or agents for such owners, situated in any section of the city where sanitary sewer facilities now exist, or where they may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within 500 feet of a residential structure or 1,500 feet of a commercial business of such sewer facility, are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sewer. It shall be the duty of any such property owner or occupant to keep and maintain such water closets and connections thereof in good working condition and free from any obstruction. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any permanent privy vault above or below the ground in the city on any lot parcel of land, the property line of which, at any point extends to within a distance of 500 feet for residential and 1,500 feet for commercial of a city sanitary sewer facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated on a lot extending within 500 feet of a residential structure or 1,500 feet of a commercial business of any sewer facility of the city, any portion of which building is used for a residence or where persons are required to be on the premises, for extended periods of time, during any portion of the day, to fail to have at least one water closet suitably arranged for use as a urinal, unless a separate urinal is provided. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building, situated within 500 feet of a residential structure or 1,500 feet of a commercial business of any sanitary sewer facility, in which food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of wastewater; provided, however, that if the water closet is of the kind suited to such use, it may receive the wastewater, and the sink or hopper may be dispensed with. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, or allow any person under his control to throw, or deposit on the surface of the ground, or any lot reaching within 500 feet of a residential structure or 1,500 feet of a commercial business of any city sanitary sewer facility, except in the proper and necessary manuring of the soil, any water which has been used for domestic purposes, any human or animal wastes or any other liquid or solid wastes. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his house, if the same are within 500 feet of a residential structure or 1,500 feet of a commercial business of any sanitary sewer facility of the city, or to allow any slops, wash or waste-waters of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Ord. No. 00-F-11, § 1, 4-18-2000)  
Sec. 90-79. - Wastewater disposal service districts. 
The city is located within two wastewater districts which are Cibolo Creek Municipal Authority and New Braunfels Utility. A map describing the service area for each district is provided under an exhibit to the ordinance adopting this section. 
(Code 1976, § 19-70)  
Sec. 90-80. - Adoption of wastewater district regulations. 
(a)  Cibolo Creek Municipal Authority Industrial Waste Order 1991-1 and any future additions and revisions are hereby adopted as though set forth in its entirety within this article to govern those customers within that service district. 
(b)  City of New Braunfels Ordinance No. 92-22 adopted on third and final reading on June 8, 1992 and any future revisions or additions is hereby adopted as though set forth in its entirety within this article to govern those customers within that service district. 
(Code 1976, § 19-71)  
Sec. 90-81. - Sewer rates established. 
Sewer rates shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 19-73)  
Sec. 90-82. - Waste discharges to conform to article. 
All discharges of waste shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-74)  
Sec. 90-83. - General disposal requirements. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; or 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify, prior to discharge, that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1976, § 19-75)  
Sec. 90-84. - Prohibited sewer deposits generally. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewer systems any waste which, by itself or by interaction with other wastes, may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with waste-water treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the waste-water treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  No discharge to public sewer systems may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 2.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand. 
(c)  No waste or waste-water discharged to public sewer systems may contain strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(Code 1976, § 19-76)  
Sec. 90-85. - Discharge of garbage into sewer system; approval of garbage grinders. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewer systems, unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1976, § 19-77)  
Sec. 90-86. - Discharge of radioactive wastes into sewer systems. 
(a)  No person shall discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewer systems without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for the discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewer systems. 
(Code 1976, § 19-78)  
Sec. 90-87. - Discharge of substances capable of impairing sewer facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewer systems any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewer systems; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which extend or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues; sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 800 mg/l, including but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person shall discharge into public sewer systems any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewer systems; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal waste-water treatment processes due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action; or as described by Cibolo Creek Municipal Authority or New Braunfels Utility; 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge into public sewer systems any substance which is: 
(1)  Not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal waste-water; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewer systems solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section, if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes. 
(2)  Cinders. 
(3)  Sand. 
(4)  Mud. 
(5)  Straw. 
(6)  Shavings. 
(7)  Metal. 
(8)  Glass. 
(9)  Rags. 
(10)  Feathers. 
(11)  Tar. 
(12)  Plastics. 
(13)  Wood. 
(14)  Unground garbage. 
(15)  Whole blood. 
(16)  Paunch manure. 
(17)  Hair and fleshings. 
(18)  Entrails. 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(20)  Slops. 
(21)  Chemical residues. 
(22)  Paint residues. 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Code 1976, § 19-79)  
Sec. 90-88. - Disposal of unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewer systems: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process water; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1976, § 19-80)  
Sec. 90-89. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1976, § 19-81)  
Sec. 90-90. - Control manholes, meters, etc., for building sewer systems carrying industrial wastes. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer system carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenance to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain such equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 19-82)  
Sec. 90-91. - Charges and agreement for collection and treatment of industrial waste. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement providing for the terms of acceptance by the city and payment by the person making the discharge. 
(c)  If the volume or character of industrial waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges set out in this section. 
(d)  If the volume or character of industrial waste to be treated by the city requires that waste-water collection, treatment or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste. Such agreement shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense. 
Amortization shall be completed in a 30-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs. 
(e)  Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following formula: 
ISS = V[0.12 (BOD-250) + 0.08(SS-250)] 
ISS = Industrial Waste Surcharge in dollars 
V = Volume discharge in million gallons 
BOD = Five days at 20 degrees C BOD of the industrial waste (mg/l) 
SS = Suspended solids of the industrial waste (mg/l) 
The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in waste-water treatment costs based on the previous year's experience. 
(f)  The city shall adjust charges to a discharger at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of waste-water based on the results of sampling and testing. Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods, unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased. 
(g)  The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and wastewater charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with the provisions of article I of this chapter and the city is entitled to exercise the sanction provided for by article I for failure to pay the bill when due. 
(Code 1976, § 19-83)  
Sec. 90-92. - Termination of disposal service to industrial customers. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and waste-water disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to wastewater lines or the treatment process are released to the sewer system causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the waste-water treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering waste-water to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or required treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or a violation of Cibolo Creek Municipal Authority and New Braunfels Utility Code. 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or waste-water that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges waste-water at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the waste-water treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and wastewater services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewer systems. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designated to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1976, § 19-84)  
Sec. 90-93. - Entering property for enforcement of article; indemnification of owner or occupant against damages. 
(a)  The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Any employee acting under this authority shall observe the rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection promulgated by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(b)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant of the premises to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to his property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and growing out of any sampling operation conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purpose of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair. 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements. 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1976, § 19-85)  
Sec. 90-94. - Limitation on inquiries under article. 
No person acting under authority of this article may inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewer systems. 
(Code 1976, § 19-86)  
Sec. 90-95. - Notice of and penalty and remedies for violations of article. 
(a)  The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. No person shall continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in such notice. 
(b)  Any person who continues prohibited discharges beyond the time limit prescribed in the notice given pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8 of this Code for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(c)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (b) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of state statutes or other city ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1976, § 19-87)  
Secs. 90-96—90-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-F-17, § 2, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed Ch. 90, Art. IV, §§ 90-119, 90-120, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
State Law reference— Public water suppliers required by rule to develop drought contingency plans, Tex. Water Code, § 11.1272; drought contingency plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 288.20. 
 
Sec. 90-119. - Drought contingency and water emergency response plan adopted. 
The city adopts by reference the City of Schertz Drought Contingency and Water Emergency Response Plan, as amended from time to time by ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 09-F-17, § 2, 5-26-2009 ; Ord. No. 09-F-21, 6-23-2009; Ord. No. 13-F-26 , § 1, 8-20-2013; Ord. No. 14-F-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-22-2014)  
Sec. 90-120. - Water conservation plan adopted. 
The city adopts by reference the City of Schertz Water Conservation Plan, as amended from time to time by ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 09-F-17, § 2, 5-26-2009 )  
Sec. 90-121. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable plan adopted by section 90-119 or section 90-120. To the extent penalties for particular violations of this article are not set forth in the plan, any person, firm, or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $200.00, and each and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
( Ord. No. 09-F-17, § 2, 5-26-2009 )  
Secs. 90-122—90-138. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND WASTEWATER CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Financing capital improvements by local governments, Tex. Local Government Code, § 395.001 et seq.; permissible impact fee includes capital recovery fees, Tex. Local Government Code, § 395.001(4). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-139. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the Water and Wastewater Capital Recovery Fees Article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-106)  
Sec. 90-140. - Intent. 
This article is intended to impose water and wastewater capital recovery fees, as established in this article, in order to finance public facilities, the demand for which is generated by new development in the designated service area. 
(Code 1976, § 19-107)  
Sec. 90-141. - Authority. 
The city is authorized to enact this article by its charter and chapter 395, as amended, the Local Government Code, (Senate Bill 336 enacted by the 70th Texas Legislature) and its successors, which authorize home rule cities, among others, to enact or impose impact fees (Capital Recovery Fees) on land within their corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdictions, and on persons with whom they have a water or wastewater service contract, as charges or assessments imposed against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to such new development. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to adopt this article pursuant to any other source of local authority, nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. Guidelines may be developed by resolution or otherwise to implement and administer this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-108)  
Sec. 90-142. - Definitions. 
As applied in this article, the following words and terms shall be used: 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum capital recovery fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article. 
Building permit means written permission issued by the city for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
Capital construction cost of service means costs of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees) and the fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital improvements program who is not an employee of the city. 
Capital improvements advisory committee (advisory committee) means advisory committee, consisting of the planning and zoning commission, including one regular or ad hoc member who is not an employee of the city and is a representative of the real estate, development, or building industries, and including one member representing the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city if fees are to be assessed in the extraterritorial jurisdiction; which committee is appointed to regularly review and update the capital improvements program in accordance with the requirements of the act. 
Capital improvements program (CIP) means plan which identifies water and wastewater capital improvements or facility expansions pursuant to which capital recovery fees may be assessed. 
Capital recovery fee means fee to be imposed upon new developments, calculated based upon the costs of facilities related to the development that creates the need for such facilities. Capital recovery fees do not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements, or construction or dedication of site-related water distribution or wastewater collection facilities required by other ordinances of the city code; or fees placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or sewer mains or lines. 
City means City of Schertz. 
City council (council) means governing body of the City of Schertz. 
Commercial development means all development which is neither residential nor industrial. 
Comprehensive plan (master plan) means the comprehensive long-range plan, adopted by the city council, which is intended to guide the growth and development of the city which includes analysis, recommendations and proposals for the city regarding such topics as population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use. 
Duplex means a structure on a single lot designed to accommodate two dwelling units, as authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
Existing development means all property within the service area which has a water or wastewater connection. 
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility which serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development. Facility expansion does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development. 
Final subdivision plat means the map, drawing or chart on which is provided a subdivider's plan of a subdivision which has received final approval by the planning and zoning commission or city council and is recorded with the office of the county clerk of the county in which subdivision is located. 
Fourplex means a structure on a single lot designed to accommodate four dwelling units, as authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
Growth-related costs means capital construction costs of service related to providing additional service units to new development, either from excess capacity in existing facilities, from facility expansions or from new capital facilities. Growth-related costs do not include: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition, or expansion of public facilities or assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements program; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansions; 
(3)  Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the city; and 
(6)  Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness, except for such payments for growth-related facilities contained in the capital improvements program. 
Industrial development means development which will be assigned to the industrial customer class of the water or wastewater utilities; generally development in which goods are manufactured, or development which is ancillary to such manufacturing activity. 
Land use assumptions means service area, and projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities, and population therein over at least a ten-year period, adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvement program is based. 
Living Unit Equivalent (LUE) means basis for establishing equivalency among and within various customer classes based upon the relationship of the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a water meter of a given size and type compared to the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a five-eighths-inch diameter simple water meter, using American Water Works Association C700-C703 standards. LUE'S for water meters are as follows: 
METER SIZE AND TYPE 	LUE'S 
5/8 " Simple 	1.0 
¾" Simple 	1.5 
1" Simple 	2.5 
1½" Simple 	5.0 
2" Simple 	8.0 
2" Compound 	8.0 
2" Turbine 	10.0 
3" Compound 	16.0 
3" Turbine 	24.0 
4" Compound 	25.0 
4" Turbine 	42.0 
6" Compound 	50.0 
6" Turbine 	92.0 
8" Compound 	80.0 
8" Turbine 	160.0 
10" Compound 	115.0 
10" Turbine 	250.0 
12" Turbine 	330.0 
 
New development means subdivision of land; or the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of the land; any of which increases the number of service units for water or wastewater service and requires the purchase of a new water or wastewater tap. New development includes the sale of water or wastewater taps resulting from the conversion of an individual well, or septic or other individual waste disposal system, to the city's water or wastewater utility. 
Offset means the amount of the reduction of a capital recovery fee designed to fairly reflect the value of system-related facilities, pursuant to rules herein established or administrative guidelines, provided and funded by a developer pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements. 
Residential development means a lot developed for use and occupancy as a single-family residence, a duplex, a triplex or a fourplex. 
Service area means area within the corporate boundaries and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as defined by the Municipal Annexation Act Chapter 43, as amended, Local Government Code, to be served by the water and wastewater capital improvements or facilities, expansions specified in the capital improvements program applicable to the service area. 
Service unit means standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements or facility expansions, expressed in living units equivalent. 
Single-family residence means single-family dwelling unit, as authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
Site-related facility means improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the capital improvements program, and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of the city water and wastewater utilities. 
System-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. A system-related facility may include a capital improvement which is located offsite, within or on the perimeter of the development site. 
Tap purchase means the filing with the city of a written application for a water or wastewater tap and the acceptance of applicable fees by the city. The term "tap purchase" shall not be applicable to a master water meter or master wastewater connection purchased from the city by a wholesale customer such as a water district, political subdivision of the State of Texas, or other wholesale utility customer; nor shall it be applicable to a meter purchased for and exclusively dedicated to fire protection. 
Triplex means a structure on a single lot designed to accommodate three dwelling units, as authorized under the city's zoning regulations. 
Wastewater facility means improvement for providing wastewater service, including but not limited to, land easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, or interceptor mains. Wastewater facility excludes wastewater lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities and which are maintained in dedicated trusts. Wastewater facilities also exclude dedication of on-site wastewater collection facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to the new development. 
Wastewater facility expansion means expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing wastewater facility to serve existing development. 
Wastewater improvements plan means portion of the CIP, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, and for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this article. 
Water facility means improvement for providing water service, including, but not limited to, land or easements, water supply facilities, treatment facilities, pumping facilities, storage facilities, or transmission mains. Water facility excludes water lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities and which are maintained in dedicated trusts. Water facilities also exclude dedication of right-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site water distribution facilities required by valid ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to the new development. 
Water facility expansion means expansion of the capacity of any existing water improvement for the purpose of serving new development, not including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing water facility to serve existing development. 
Water improvements plan means portion of the CIP, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, and for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities fees pursuant to this article. 
Wholesale customers means water or wastewater customers of the city's utilities who purchase utility service at wholesale rates for resale to their retail customers. 
(Code 1976, § 19-109)  
Sec. 90-143. - Applicability of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  This article shall be uniformly applicable to new development which occurs within the water and wastewater service areas, except for new development which occurs within the service areas of the city's wholesale customers. 
(b)  No new development shall be exempt from the assessment of capital recovery fees as defined in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-110)  
Sec. 90-144. - Capital recovery fees as conditions of development approval. 
No application for new development shall be approved within the city without assessment of capital recovery fees pursuant to this article, and no water and wastewater connection shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the capital recovery fees imposed by and calculated hereinunder. 
(Code 1976, § 19-111)  
Sec. 90-145. - Establishment of water and wastewater service areas. 
(a)  The water and wastewater service areas are established as shown on the service area map which has been adopted by city council and is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  The service areas shall be established consistent with any facility service area established in the CIP for each utility. Additions to the service area may be designated by the city council consistent with the procedure set forth in Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 395 and its successors. 
(Code 1976, § 19-112)  
Sec. 90-146. - Land use assumptions. 
Land use assumptions used in the development of the capital recovery fees are shown on the zoning map on file in the city secretary's office. These assumptions may be revised by the city council according to the procedure set forth in Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 395 and its successors. 
(Code 1976, § 19-113)  
Sec. 90-147. - Service units. 
(a)  Service units are established in accordance with generally accepted engineering and planning standards. 
(b)  Upon application for a building permit (for properties inside the city corporate limits) or upon tap purchase (for properties outside the city corporate limits), service units for the property in question shall be calculated based on living units equivalent as determined by the size of the water meter(s) for the development, or alternatively, if in the judgment of the superintendent such compensation overstates or understates the impact of such new development, the superintendent, at the cost and expense of the applicant, may obtain an engineer's report prepared by a qualified professional engineer licensed to perform such professional engineering services in the state, which demonstrates that the number of LUE's of service for the new development will be different. 
(c)  If a fire demand meter (tap) is purchased for a property, the meter size utilized to calculate the number of LUE's shall be the dimension of the portion of the fire demand meter which reflects the meter size which would provide only domestic service to the property. Said reduced meter size shall then be utilized to calculate the number of LUE's. 
(1)  The meter types used to calculate the number of LUE's shall be either simple or compound meters. 
(2)  To avoid the use of fire flow volumes for calculating domestic usage, the owner of any property for which a fire demand meter is purchased shall be required to execute a restrictive covenant on a form approved by the city attorney, which covenant shall acknowledge the right of the city to assess such capital recovery fees to subsequent owners of the property at the full meter size. Said covenant shall be executed prior to the purchase of the fire demand meter and shall be filed in the deed records of the county. 
(d)  Upon application for a building permit for lots for which no water meter has been purchased, service units for wastewater for said property shall be established by a professional engineer licensed in the state, retained by the applicant at no cost to the city, and shall be approved by the superintendent. 
(e)  The city council may revise the service units designation according to the procedure set forth in the act. 
(Code 1976, § 19-114)  
Sec. 90-148. - Capital recovery fees per service unit. 
(a)  The maximum capital recovery fee per service unit for each service shall be computed by dividing: (i) the growth-related to the capital construction cost of service for new development, less the amount of any credits against such amount that are attributable to rate or future tax contributions to CIP funding by, (ii) the total number of new service units anticipated to be needed within the service area. The capital construction cost of service and the projected number of new service units shall be based on the land use assumptions for the service area as established as part of the CIP. The maximum capital recovery fees per service unit for each service shall be established by category of capital improvements and shall be set forth in ordinances and exhibits thereto as are adopted from time to time. 
(b)  Exhibits may be amended by the city council according to the procedure set forth in the act. 
(c)  Current capital recovery fees for water/wastewater shall be as established from time to time by ordinance and exhibits attached thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 19-115)  
Sec. 90-149. - Assessment of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The assessment of the capital recovery fee applicable to such development shall be a prerequisite to the approval of any subdivision of land or of any new development. 
(b)  Assessment of the capital recovery fee for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations following the effective date of this article, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval, and shall be the amount of the capital recovery fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in section 90-148(a). The city may provide the subdivider with a copy of fees and assessments prior to final plat approval, but such shall not constitute assessment within the meaning of this article. 
(2)  For a development which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of this article or for which no re-platting is necessary, assessment shall be upon issuance of building permit (for properties within the corporate boundaries) or upon tap purchase (for properties outside the corporate boundaries). 
(3)  Water demand related solely to fire protection is not subject to assessment of a capital recovery fee. However, if the fire protection capacity of the fire demand meter is routinely utilized for domestic purposes as evidenced by the registration of consumption recorded on the city's meter-reading and billing systems, the current owner of the property, on the date of such determination, shall be assessed the current capital recovery fees for the fire protection capacity which has been converted to domestic capacity by its routine usage as domestic capacity. 
(c)  Following assessment of the capital recovery fee pursuant to subsection (b), no additional capital recovery fees or increases thereof shall be assessed against that development unless the number of service units increases, as set forth under section 90-147. 
(d)  Following the lapse or expiration of approval for a plat, a new assessment must be performed at the time a new application for such development is filed. 
(Code 1976, § 19-116)  
Sec. 90-150. - Calculation of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  Upon application for a building permit (for properties within the corporate boundaries of the city) or upon application for a water or wastewater tap (for properties outside the corporate boundaries of the city), the city shall compute the capital recovery fees due from the applicant in the following manner: 
(1)  The number of LUE's shall be determined by the size of the water meter purchased or by evaluation of the superintendent as determined according to section 90-147 of this article. 
(2)  LUE's shall be summed for all meters purchased for the development. 
(3)  The total service units shall be multiplied by the appropriate per-unit fee amount determined as set forth in section 90-148 of this article. 
(4)  Fee credits and offsets shall be subtracted as determined by the process prescribed in section 90-148 of this article. 
(b)  The amount of capital recovery fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the fee assessed per service unit pursuant to section 90-148 of this article by the number of service units generated by the development. 
(Code 1976, § 19-117)  
Sec. 90-151. - Collection of capital recovery fees. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued and no tap shall be purchased until all capital recovery fees have been paid to the city, or until a "notice of capital recovery fee due" is recorded as provided in this section, except as provided otherwise by contract. 
(b)  Capital recovery fees shall be collected at the time of building permit issuance (for properties within the corporate boundaries of the city) or at the time of tap purchase (for properties outside the corporate boundaries). 
(c)  In the event that a water or wastewater tap is sold as the result of a conversion from an individual well, or septic or other individual waste disposal system, the appropriate capital recovery fee shall be collected at the time of tap purchase, except as provided below: 
(1)  At the request of the applicant, and with the approval of the superintendent, the capital recovery fees for such customers may be paid in increments over a period of not more than 12 months, with interest computed on the unpaid balance at the statutory rate as set forth in state law. 
(2)  If the applicant chooses this extended payment option, the applicant shall, as a condition of tap sale, sign and file with the city clerk, and consent to the recordation of, a "notice of capital recovery fee due", which shall be recorded as a lien against the subject property. The city shall release the lien held only upon payment in full of the capital recovery fees and any late penalties and applicable interest. 
(3)  Late payments shall subject the applicant to a penalty of ten percent of the amount due and additional interest in addition to all other remedies available to the city as lien holder. 
(d)  Upon the request of an applicant, the city may, at its sole discretion, determine that lump sum payment by a fee payer would result in undue economic hardship and may enter into a payment agreement subject to the provisions below and according to guidelines established by the city, as amended from time to time. 
(1)  At the request of the applicant, and with the approval of the superintendent, the capital recovery fees for customers may be paid in increments over a period of not more than 12 months, with interest computed on the unpaid balance at the statutory rate as set forth in state law. 
(2)  If the applicant chooses this extended payment option, the applicant shall, as a condition of tap sale, sign and file with the city clerk, and consent to the recordation of, a "notice of capital recovery fee due", which shall be recorded as a lien against the subject property. The city shall release the lien held only upon payment in full of the capital recovery fees and any late penalties and applicable interest. 
(3)  Late payments shall subject the applicant to a penalty of ten percent of the amount due and additional interest in addition to all other remedies available to the city as lien holder. 
(4)  Customer hardship cases, at the discretion of the superintendent, may be assisted with a financial assistance plan not to exceed 12 months with a ten percent administrative fee for handling the paperwork. 
(e)  It shall be the policy of the city to attempt to revise any contracts which might exist with wholesale customers, or which in the future may be entered into for wholesale service, in such a manner that capital recovery fees are collected from the wholesale customer according to the number of LUE's attributable to each retail meter for new development within the wholesale customer's service area. 
(Code 1976, § 19-118)  
Sec. 90-152. - Offsets and credits against capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The city shall offset the present value of any system-related facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section, and which have been dedicated to and have been received by the city, including the value of rights-of-way or capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city, against the amount of the capital recovery fee due for that category of capital improvement due from the contribution. 
(b)  The city shall credit capital recovery and pro rata fees which have been paid pursuant to this chapter of the city Code prior to the effective date of this article, and during the period following adoption of this article, against the amount of a capital recovery fee due for that category of capital improvement, subject to guidelines established by the city. 
(c)  All offsets and credits against capital recovery fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this article and additional standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines. 
(1)  No offset credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the capital improvements program for the category of facility within the service area for which the capital recovery fee is imposed. 
(3)  If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been exhausted within ten years from the date of the acquisition of the first building permit issued or connection made after the effective date of this article or within such period as may be otherwise designated by contract, such offset or credit shall lapse. 
(4)  In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no capital recovery fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to this article or for any amount exceeding the total capital recovery fees due for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(d)  An applicant for new development must apply for an offset or credit against capital recovery fees due for the development either at the time of application for final plat approval or at the time of building permit application (for properties within the corporate boundaries) or at the time of tap purchase (for properties outside the corporate boundaries), unless the city agrees to a different time. The applicant shall file a petition for offsets or credits with the city. 
(e)  The available offset credit associated with the plat shall be applied against a capital recovery fee at time of the first fee payment for properties within that plat in the following manner: 
(1)  Such offset or credit shall be prorated equally among all living units equivalent within the development, as calculated in section 90-147 of this article, and remain applicable to such LUE's, to be applied at the time of filing and acceptance of an application for a building permit (or at the time of tap purchase for properties outside the corporate boundaries) against capital recovery fees due. 
(2)  If the total number of LUE's used by the city in the original offset or credit calculation described in subsection (1) is eventually exceeded by the number of total LUE's realized by the actual development, the city may, at its sole discretion, collect the full capital recovery fee exclusive of any associated offsets or credits for the excess LUE's. 
(3)  At its sole discretion, the city may authorize alternative credit or offset agreements upon petition by the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 19-119)  
Sec. 90-153. - Establishment of accounts. 
(a)  The city finance department shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds, for each major category of capital facility for which a capital recovery fee is imposed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds authorized in section 90-154 of this article. 
(c)  The city's finance department shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that capital recovery fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in section 90-154 of this article. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article; provided, however, that any capital recovery fee paid to the city shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(d)  The city finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all monies received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in the capital improvements program as system-related capital projects. The city finance department shall also maintain such records as are necessary to ensure that refunds are appropriately made under the provision in section 90-156 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-120)  
Sec. 90-154. - Use of proceeds of capital recovery fee accounts. 
(a)  The capital recovery fees collected pursuant to this article may be used to finance or to recoup capital construction costs of service. Capital recovery fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facilities expansions. 
(b)  Capital recovery fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified for growth-related costs for the appropriate utility in the capital improvements program; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities expansions, unless growth related; 
(3)  Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that capital recovery fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; or 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-121)  
Sec. 90-155. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the superintendent: 
(1)  The applicability of a capital recovery fee to the development; 
(2)  The amount of the capital recovery fee due; 
(3)  The application of an offset or credit against a capital recovery fee due; 
(4)  The amount of the refund due, if any. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the capital recovery fee or the amount of the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable capital recovery fee schedule or the guidelines established from determining offsets and credits. 
(c)  The appellant may appeal the decision of the superintendent to the city manager. If the appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city manager in an amount equal to the original determination of the capital recovery fee due, the development application or tap purchase may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(Code 1976, § 19-122)  
Sec. 90-156. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any capital recovery fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been expended within ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded, upon written application therefore by the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. If the capital recovery fee was paid by another governmental entity, such refund shall also include interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in article 1.03, title 79, (article 5069-1.03, Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, as amended)(Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-1.03), or any successor on the amount of the capital recovery fee. 
(b)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the refund of unexpended fee payments, including interest from the date of payment, shall be made to the current record owner or governmental entity. 
(c)  Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facilities expansions identified in the capital improvements program upon which the fee was based, the city shall recalculate the maximum fee per service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than the fee per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the fee paid by more than ten percent. The refund to the record owner or governmental entity shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  Upon the request of an owner of the property on which a capital recovery fee has been paid, the city shall refund such fees if: 
(1)  Existing service is available and service is denied; or 
(2)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and the city has failed to commence construction of facilities to provide service within two years of fee payment; or 
(3)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and has not subsequently been made available within a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility expansion to be constructed, but in any event later than five years from the date of fee payment. 
(e)  The city shall refund an appropriate proportion of capital recovery fee payments in the event that a previously purchased water meter is replaced with a smaller meter, based on the LUE differential of the two meter sizes and the per-LUE fee at the time of the original fee payment, less an administrative charge of $50.00. 
(f)  Petition for refunds shall be submitted to the superintendent on a form provided by the city for such purpose. Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the superintendent must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the superintendent shall notify the city treasurer and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. The petitioner may appeal the determination to the city council, as set forth in section 90-155 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-123)  
Sec. 90-157. - Updates to plan and revision of fees. 
The city shall review the land use assumptions and capital improvements program for water and wastewater facilities at least every three years, the first three-Year period which shall commence from the date of the adoption of the capital improvements program referenced herein. The city council shall accordingly then make a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions, capital improvements program or capital recovery fees are needed and shall, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the act, either update the fees or make a determination that no update is necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 19-124)  
Sec. 90-158. - Functions of advisory committee. 
(a)  The functions of the advisory committee are those set forth in the act, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the capital improvements program regarding water and wastewater capital improvements and file written comments thereon; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements program; 
(4)  Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements program and capital recovery fees; and 
(5)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the city in achieving the capital improvements program and identifying any problems in implementing the plans or administering the capital recovery fees. 
(b)  The city shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital improvements program. 
(c)  The council shall adopt procedural rules for the committee to follow in carrying out its duties. 
(Code 1976, § 19-125) 
State Law reference— Advisory committee, Tex. Local Government Code, § 395.058.  
Sec. 90-159. - Agreement for capital improvements. 
(a)  The city council may approve the owner of a new development to construct or finance some of the public improvements identified in the CIP. In the case of such approval, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city prior to fee collection. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city, and shall establish the estimated cost of improvement, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement shall be completed to city standards, and any other terms and conditions the city deems necessary. The superintendent shall review the improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine the amount of the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied to the otherwise applicable capital recovery fee before submitting the proposed agreement to council for approval. 
(b)  The city and such owner either may agree that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be credited against the capital recovery fees otherwise due from the new development, or they may agree that the city shall reimburse the owner for such costs from capital recovery fees paid from other new developments which will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, which fees shall be collected and reimbursed to the owner at the time the other new development records its plats. 
(Code 1976, § 19-126)  
Sec. 90-160. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  The city may, at its sole discretion, finance water and wastewater capital improvements of facilities expansions designated in the capital improvements program through the issuance of bonds or other obligations, through the formation of public improvement districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of capital recovery fees. 
(b)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of a capital recovery fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The council may decide that the city shall pay all or part of capital recovery fee due for a new development taking into account available offsets and credits pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Code 1976, § 19-127)  
Sec. 90-161. - Capital recovery fees as additional and supplemental regulation. 
(a)  Capital recovery fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or the sale of water or wastewater taps or the issuance of certificates of occupancy. Such fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of city's comprehensive plan, capital improvements program, zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(b)  This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Code 1976, § 19-128)  
Sec. 90-162. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid a capital recovery fee or an owner of land upon which a capital recovery fee has been paid may petition the city manager to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within 60 days of the request. If the city manager determines that the duty is required pursuant to this article and is late in being performed, he shall cause the duty to commence within 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. 
(b)  The council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to this article, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property. 
(Code 1976, § 19-129)  
Secs. 90-163—90-192. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER FACILITIES FEES 
 
Sec. 90-193. - Water service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established a water service area as depicted on Exhibit 7 to the ordinance from which this article is derived, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The boundaries of the water service area may be amended from time to time, and new water service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 90-145 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-139)  
Sec. 90-194. - Water improvement plan. 
(a)  The water improvement plan for the city is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The water improvement plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the act. 
(Code 1976, § 19-140)  
Sec. 90-195. - Water facilities fees. 
(a)  The maximum capital recovery fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in Exhibit 9 to the ordinance from which this article is derived attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. 
(b)  The capital recovery fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated hereto and may be amended form time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 90-148 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 19-141)  
Secs. 90-196—90-213. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER FACILITIES FEES 
 
Sec. 90-214. - Wastewater service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established a wastewater service area as depicted on Exhibit 7 to the ordinance from which this article is derived, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The boundaries of the wastewater service area may be amended from time to time, and new water service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 90-145. 
(Code 1976, § 19-151)  
Sec. 90-215. - Wastewater improvement plan. 
(a)  The wastewater improvement plan for the city is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  The wastewater improvement plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures set forth in the act. 
(Code 1976, § 19-152)  
Sec. 90-216. - Wastewater facilities fees. 
(a)  The maximum capital recovery fees per service unit for wastewater facilities are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by reference. 
(b)  The capital recovery fees per service unit for wastewater facilities are hereby adopted by reference and may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 90-148 of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes, which are hereby found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any member of the council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of said duties. 
(Code 1976, § 19-153)  
Secs. 90-217—90-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NEW AND ABANDONED OR DETERIORATED WELLS 
 
Sec. 90-241. - Well construction and drilling. 
(a)  Wells not permitted. No person, firm, or corporation will be permitted to construct or drill a well within the city where such well would be located within 500 linear feet of an existing water distribution main. 
(b)  Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, drill, cap or plug a well within the corporate limits of the city without obtaining a permit. Said permit must certify that any new well site is no closer than 500 linear feet to an existing water distribution main. 
(c)  Permit fee. Permit fee for construction, drilling, capping or plugging a well is $25.00. 
(d)  License required. Any person, firm or corporation constructing, drilling, capping or plugging a well within the corporate limits of the city shall possess a current license issued by the state. 
(e)  Bond required. Any person, firm or corporation constructing, drilling, capping or plugging a well within the corporate limits of the city shall furnish a performance bond made in the amount of $5,000.00 made in favor of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-161)  
Sec. 90-242. - Regulations for constructing or drilling a new well. 
Any person, firm or corporation constructing or drilling a well within the corporate limits of the city shall comply with the drilling rules and regulations as set forth by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(Code 1976, § 19-162)  
Sec. 90-243. - Abandoned or deteriorated wells. 
No person, firm or corporation shall abandon a well or maintain a well which has deteriorated without plugging or capping. Plugging or capping procedures will be performed within 30 days after notification by the city of the wells condition. All plugging or capping procedures must comply with standards and procedures adapted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(Code 1976, § 19-163)  
Sec. 90-244. - Plugging or capping old well when new well drilled. 
Any person, firm or corporation drilling a new well to replace an existing well, is required to plug or cap the old well within 15 days after completion of the new well. 
(Code 1976, § 19-164)  
Sec. 90-245. - Inspections required. 
Inspections as necessary will be performed by the inspection department or the water and wastewater department to guarantee the health and safety of the public. 
(1)  Types of inspections: Required inspections are preliminary site inspection and final inspection. 
(2)  Inspection fees: 
a.  Preliminary site and final inspection, $100.00. 
b.  Re-inspection fee (all inspections required after subsection (1) above), $50.00. 
(Code 1976, § 19-165)  
Secs. 90-246—90-268. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 90-269. - Establishment of drainage utility system. 
The city has established, pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, Tex. Local Government Code, ch. 402, subch. C, as amended from time to time, a utility system known as the city drainage utility system and that the drainage of the property within the boundaries of the city as it may exist from time to time (the "service area"), is a public utility of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(A), 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 90-270. - Schedule of drainage utility charges. 
The schedule of drainage utility charges are not set forth herein but can be found in the office of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(B), 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 08-M-43, § 1, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 12-M-17, § 1, 8-7-2012 ; Ord. No. 12-M-22, § 1, 10-9-2012 ) 
Note— See current fee schedule on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 90-271. - Segregation of income. 
The city may transfer income in the drainage utility system account in whole or in part to the municipal general fund, except for any part pledged to retire any outstanding indebtedness or obligation incurred or as a reserve for future construction, repair, or maintenance of the city's drainage utility system. The city shall not transfer the segregated drainage utility income to the city's general fund. Funds may be co-mingled for investment but accounted for separately. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(C), 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 90-272. - Discontinuance of utility services. 
(a)  The user of the drainage utility service shall be subject to discontinuance of all utility services provided by the city upon failure to pay all drainage utility system charges promptly when due. 
(b)  Upon determination that a user has failed to pay drainage utility system charges when due, the city may discontinue all utility services to the user of that lot or tract ten days after the city deposits in the United States Mail, addressed to the user of the property, a notice advising that it is the intention of the city to discontinue all utility services to the lot or tract ten days after the date of the notice if the delinquent drainage utility service charges are not paid by such date. 
(c)  A user may, within the ten day period after notice, request a hearing before the city manager of the city concerning the delinquency and proposed discontinuance of utility services. Where a timely request for hearing has been made by the user, the city shall not discontinue any utility services to the property until such time as the city manager has determined, after hearing, that a delinquency in the payment of the drainage utility charges exists. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(D), 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 90-273. - Exemptions. 
The following property shall be exempt from the drainage utility system charges: 
(1)  Property with properly engineered designed drainage system and maintenance of a wholly sufficient, privately owned drainage utility system; 
(2)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and the public structure constructed thereon has been accepted by the city for maintenance; 
(3)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city; and 
(4)  Property owned by the city; and 
(5)  A property owner with a properly engineered drainage system, may apply for credits regarding LUE's assessment to the director of public works. If owner disagrees with the assessment an appeal may be requested to the city manager within 14 business days from the date of notification from the city director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(D), 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 90-274. - Due date and delinquency charges. 
(a)  Drainage utility charges shall be due and payable on the tenth day after the issuance date on the billing statement for drainage utility charges directed to the user of the property. All drainage utility charges not paid when due shall be increased by ten percent as a delinquency charge. 
(b)  In the event a drainage and any other utility charges is paid by check and the check is subsequently returned, unpaid, for any reason, a service charge will be assessed. 
(c)  Interest shall accrue upon delinquent drainage utility charges at the maximum rate allowed by law from the due date until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(E), 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 90-275. - Billings; deposits. 
(a)  The city may bill for drainage utility charges, identified separately, with the city's other utility services billings. 
(b)  No deposit shall be required for drainage service as a pre-condition to accepting surface flow in the city's drainage utility system. 
(Ord. No. 03-F-17, § 4(F), 6-17-2003)  
PART III - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE 
  Click here to access the Unified Development Code. 


UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF SCHERTZ, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2016 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete publication of the ordinances of the City of Schertz of a general and permanent nature. The Code supersedes all ordinances of the city not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2010 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the city Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinances included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by a period, the figure before the period representing the section number and the figure after the period indicating the position of the section within the article. Thus, the first section of Article 1 is numbered 21.1 and the sixteenth section of Article 16 is 21.16. Under this system, each section is identified with its article, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole articles can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 21.1.1 and 21.2.1 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 21.1.1.1, 21.1.2.1 and 21.1.3.1, respectively. New articles may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Articles 21.8.1 and 21.9.1 it will be designated as Article 21.8.2.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of articles is maintained when including new articles. New sections and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the section or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Powell Burke, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the members of the city's staff for their cooperation and assistance and for the interest shown by them in the preparation of the manuscript of this publication. Credit is gratefully acknowledged also to the members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout this project. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 14-S-47 11-18-2014 Included 15-S-24  8-11-2015 Included 16-S-27  8-30-2016 Included Supp. No. 2 17-S-39 10-24-2017 Included 17-S-40 10-24-2017 Included 17-S-41 10-24-2017 Included 17-S-42 10-24-2017 Included 17-S-43 10-24-2017 Included 18-S-03  1-23-2018 Included 18-S-04  1-23-2018 Included 18-S-08  2-27-2018 Included  
SCHERTZ UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE 
ARTICLE 1. -  GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 24, 2017, amended Art. 1, §§ 21.1.1-21.1.12, in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former Art. 1 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 21.1.1. - Short title. 
    Chapter 21 of the City of Schertz Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Unified Development Code of the City of Schertz, Texas or simply as the Unified Development Code or the UDC. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.2. - Purpose and intent. 
    This UDC is adopted to: 
• protect, promote, improve and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City; 
• ensure the safe, orderly and efficient development and expansion of the City in accordance with and pursuant to its Comprehensive Land Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan; 
• conserve, develop, protect and utilize natural resources, in keeping with the public interest; 
• prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration or diffusion of population; 
• protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
• provide for open space; 
• minimize pollution of air and water, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, safeguard water resources and preserve the integrity and aesthetic quality of the community; 
• lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe and efficient circulation for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
• facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks, public safety and recreational facilities, and other public facilities and services. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.3. - Authority. 
    This UDC is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City and subject to any limitations imposed by the constitution and other laws of the State of Texas and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.4. - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this UDC apply to all property within the corporate limits of the City and in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) as listed in part B below. 
A.  Jurisdiction within City Limits . The City has the statutory authority to exercise a broad range of powers within its City limits. Many of those powers are specifically authorized by Chapters 211, 212, and 216 of Texas Local Government Code, as amended (LGC). All provisions of this UDC apply within the City limits. 
B.  Jurisdiction within Extraterritorial Jurisdiction . The City extends to its ETJ the regulation of subdivisions and property development adopted under LGC Chapter 212. The City also extends to its ETJ its authority to regulate signage as adopted under LGC Chapters 216, 245, and 43 in its ETJ. 
    The following Articles of this UDC apply within the ETJ: 
1.  Article 1 - General Provisions 
2.  Article 3 - Boards and Commissions 
3.  Article 4 - Procedures and Applications 
4.  Article 9 - Sec. 21.9.10 Parkland and Open Space Dedication Requirements 
5.  Article 9 - Sec. 21.9.11 Lighting and Glare Standards 
6.  Article 11 - Signs and Advertising Devices 
7.  Article 13 - Land Disturbing Activities 
8.  Article 14 - Transportation 
9.  Article 15 - Easements and Utilities 
10.  Article 16 - Definitions 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.5. - Consistency with Comprehensive Land Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
    This UDC is intended to implement the policies and objectives contained in the Comprehensive Land Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan for the City and provide for adequate and necessary public facilities and service. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.6. - Vested rights "issuance of local permits". 
A.  Introduction . LGC Chapter 245 - Issuance of Local Permits, commonly referred to as the State's "Vested Rights Law", provides an opportunity for landowners or developers to "grandfather" or "vest" government regulations that apply to development at the time of the filing of a permit application. The City has established in this section an administrative procedure for consideration of any claim of a vested right. 
B.  Definitions . The following terms shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed to them under this section: 
    "LGC" means the Texas Local Government Code. 
    "Project" means an endeavor over which the City (a regulatory agency, as defined by LGC Chapter 245) exerts its jurisdiction and for which one or more permits are required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor. 
    "Permit" means a license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract, or other agreement for construction related to, or provisions of, service from a water or wastewater utility owned, operated, or controlled by the City, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order or ordinance that a person must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a Project for which the permit is sought (i.e. master plan, preliminary plat or final plat). 
C.  Administrative Procedure for Consideration of Claim of Vested Rights . Any property owner claiming vested rights under Chapter 245 of the LGC, or other applicable vesting law, shall submit a letter explaining in sufficient detail the basis upon which the property owner is claiming vesting and, consequently, is exempt from or not subject to a particular current regulation, ordinance, rule, expiration date, or other requirement. Such written submission shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly authorized agent); 
2.  Identification of the property, including the address (if it exists) and the plat reference (if it exists) or metes and bounds (if not platted), for which the property owner claims a vested right; 
3.  Provide Project name, type of Permit and date the Permit was filed; 
4.  If a property owner claims that certain regulations do not apply to the Project, the property owner must identify, with particularity, all requirements that the property owner claims do not apply; and 
5.  Attach all supporting documents, if any. 
The letter should be addressed to the Planning and Community Development Department - Planning Division. 
D.  Vested Rights Determination . The Planning Division will review the request and supporting documents and issue a final administrative determination of whether a vested right exists in relation to the Project, and shall identify in writing to the property owner all claims for which vested rights have been granted (the "Vested Rights Determination"). 
E.  Appeal of Vested Right's Determination . If the property owner believes that the Vested Rights Determination is in error, the property owner shall have the right to appeal such Vested Rights Determination to the City Council, which will have jurisdiction to hear and decide the appeal pursuant to the UDC and LGC Chapter 245- Municipal Zoning Authority. 
F.  Recognition of Vested Rights . 
1.  A property owner's original permit application expires on or after the 45th day after the date the application is filed if: 
a.  the property owner fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the permit application; 
b.  the City provides to the property owner, not later than the 10th business day after the date the application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
c.  the property owner fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the written notice. 
2.  Basis for Vested Rights . Only a Project which was in progress (as defined by LGC Section 245.003) or for which a Permit application was filed after September 1, 1997 may be eligible to claim vested rights; any Project for which the Permit application was filed prior September 1, 1997, or has expired, is not eligible. 
Vested rights do not begin to accrue until the filing of an original application or Master Development Plan or plat application that gives the City fair notice of the project to which the permit applies and the nature of the permit sought. 
3.  A Project will expire in five (5) years from the date the first Permit application was filed for the Project with City if progress, as defined in LGC Section 245.005, has not been made towards completion of the Project. An expired Project is considered dormant, vested rights lapse and the Project must comply with all current ordinances and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.7. - Apportionment of municipal infrastructure costs (rough proportionality). 
A.  If the City requires as a condition of approval for a property development project that the property owner bear a portion of the costs of municipal infrastructure improvements through dedication of property to the City, the payment of impact fees, the payment of construction costs, or the payment of other infrastructure related costs authorized by applicable law, the property owner's portion of the costs may not generally exceed the amount required for infrastructure improvements that are roughly proportionate to the proposed development as approved by the City Engineer. 
B.  A property owner who disputes the determination made by the City Engineer under Subsection A. above must appeal to the City Council in accordance with UDC, Sec. 21.4.14 Appeals, or the City Engineer's determination is final. At the appeal, the property owner may present evidence and testimony under procedures adopted by the City Council. After hearing any testimony and reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall make the applicable determination as to the appeal within thirty (30) days after the final submission of any testimony or evidence by the property owner. 
C.  A property owner may appeal the determination of the City Council to a county or district court of the county in which the development is located within thirty (30) days after the final determination by the City Council. 
D.  The City may not require a property owner to waive the right of appeal authorized by this section as a condition of approval for a development project. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.8. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this UDC, or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, or who shall build any project or facility in violation of any detailed statement of specification or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) or the appropriate legal maximum as determined by statute. In the case of a violation of section 21.9.9, the penalty shall be the sum as determined above plus the value of the tree as determined by a certified arborist hired by the City. Each and every day that such violation and/or noncompliance shall exist shall be deemed a separate offense. In case any person, firm, or corporation violates any of the provisions of this UDC or fails to comply therewith, the City, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about any land, and the definition of any violation of the terms of this UDC as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the City from invoking the civil remedies given it by law in such cases, but same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.9. - Validity. 
    The issuance or granting in error of a permit or approval of plans or plats, site designs, or specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, a violation of any provision of this UDC or any other City ordinance. No permit purporting to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this UDC shall be valid. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.10. - Development manual. 
    The Development Manual is prepared by the City of Schertz Planning and Community Development Department - Planning Division and is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. The Development Manual shall contain application forms, required application materials, fees, and application submittal deadlines. The Development Manual may be amended by the City Manager or his/her designee from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.1.11. - Public works specification manual. 
    The Public Works Specification Manual prepared by the City of Schertz Public Works Division is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. The Public Works Specification Manual shall contain specifications necessary to complete public projects. The Public Works Specification Manual may be amended by the City Manager or his/her designee from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
ARTICLE 2. -  OFFICIAL MAPS 

Sec. 21.2.1. - Official Zoning Map. 
A.  There shall be a map known and designated as the Official Zoning Map, which shall show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the City and which is by reference made a part of this UDC. One (1) original official and five (5) copies of the Official Zoning Map are hereby adopted bearing the affidavit of the City secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
1.  The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City planning department; 
2.  One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be maintained in the office of the City Secretary; 
3.  One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be filed with the City building inspection division; 
4.  One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be posted in the conference room where the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission meet and shall be maintained by the City Planning Department; 
5.  One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be posted in the City's public library; and 
6.  One (1) Zoning Map shall be posted on the City's website. 
B.  The boundaries of the zoning districts as set out in Article 5 are delineated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City; said map being a part of this UDC as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
C.  All amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made immediately after their enactment and the date of the change shall be the effective date of the amending ordinance adopted by the City Council. The official copies of the zoning map posted in accordance with subsection 21.2.1.A. above shall be updated quarterly to reflect changes adopted by ordinance of the City Council. 
D.  Should the Official Zoning Map be lost, destroyed or damaged, the Planning Department may have a new map drawn. No further authorization or action is required so long as no district boundaries are changed in this process. 
E.  Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of the Official Zoning Map. This map is available to the public. 
Sec. 21.2.2. - District boundary interpretation. 
A.  The boundaries of zoning districts are indicated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply. 
1.  Boundaries indicated as following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed to follow such shorelines; and in the event of their movement, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water should be construed to follow such centerlines. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
6.  In unsubdivided property, the zoning district boundary lines on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
7.  In case of a zoning district boundary line dividing a property into two (2) parts, the property will remain divided until the property owner, City, firm or corporation petitions the City Council for rezoning. 
8.  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
ARTICLE 3. -  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 24, 2017, amended Art. 3, §§ 21.3.1-21.3.6, in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former Art. 3 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 21.3.1. - General provisions. 
A.  Source of Authority . Authority under this UDC shall be vested in and delegated to the officials and decision-makers designated in this Article 3, under the City Charter, the Constitution and other laws of the State and the City's Code of Ordinances. This authority shall be deemed supplemental to any other authority lawfully conferred upon the officials and decision-makers. The omission of a citation in this UDC to any authority conferred upon the officials and decision-makers under the City Charter, the Constitution or other laws of the State or the Code or Ordinances shall not be construed as limiting the actions of such officials and decision-makers taken in accordance with and in reliance upon such authority. 
B.  Authority Granted . The City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, Historic Preservation Committee, Transportation Safety Advisory Commission and Building and Standards Commission have the powers and authority as granted by State law, the City Charter and the Code of Ordinances to initiate, undertake, and decide matters as identified in this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.3.2. - City council. 
A.  Duties and Approval Authority . In addition to other rights of approval, the City Council shall render final decisions pertaining to applications for development on the following applications: 
1.  amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan; 
2.  establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including creation or amendment of an overlay district; 
3.  amendment to the UDC; 
4.  annexation; 
5.  a Development Agreement within the City's corporate boundaries and in the City's ETJ; 
6.  rezoning requests including applications for a Specific Use Permit; 
7.  Historic Landmark or District Designation; 
8.  an a appeal of a vested rights determination; and 
9.  an appeal of the decision of any City Board, Commission or Committee, except the Board of Adjustment and Building and Standards Commission or as expressly provided for in this UDC or the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.3.3. - Planning and zoning commission. 
A.  Structure of the Commission . The Planning and Zoning Commission is established in accordance with the City Charter and Commission members are appointed by the City Council. 
B.  Duties and Approval Authority . 
1.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the City Council on the following applications: 
a.  amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan; 
b.  establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including creation or amendment of an overlay district; 
c.  rezoning requests including an application for a Specific Use Permit. 
d.  amendment to the UDC; and 
e.  a Development Agreement as set forth in the LGC and this UDC; 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have final approval authority on the following applications: 
a.  Subdivision Master Plan. 
b.  preliminary plat; 
c.  final plat; 
d.  amending plat; if forwarded by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
e.  minor plat; if forwarded by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
f.  replat; and 
g.  waivers relating to Article 12, Subdivisions. 
3.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to make final determinations relating to appeals of staff determinations on the following items: 
a.  Required Conditions for Home Occupations and denial of a Home Occupation permit. 
b.  Site Design Standards including Tree Preservation & Mitigation, Revisions to Approved Site Plans. 
c.  Signs & Advertising Devices including general requirements, removal of signs. 
d.  Additional Design Requirements including off street parking, building setback lines, and landscape buffers. 
e.  An appeal of a driveway waiver determination. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.3.4. - Board of adjustment. 
A.  Structure and Procedure of the Board of Adjustment . 
1.  Composition and Procedures . 
a.  The Board of Adjustment (BOA) is established in accordance with the City Charter and provision of Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code (LGC). The Board members are appointed by the City Council. Each case before the BOA must be heard by at least 75 percent of the members. 
2.  Vote Required for Decisions . 
a.  The concurring vote of four (4) of the five (5) members of the BOA is necessary to: 
i.  reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official; or 
ii.  authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning regulation. 
B.  Duties and Approval Authority . The BOA shall have the following duties: 
1.  The BOA shall hear and decide appeals when error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the City in the enforcement of this UDC or an ordinance, with respect to zoning and zoning related decisions. 
a.  The BOA may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the BOA has the same authority as the administrative official. 
2.  The BOA may authorize, in specific cases, a variance from this UDC in relation to zoning related items, unless specified otherwise, if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this UDC or an ordinance adopted hereunder would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this UDC or an ordinance adopted hereunder is observed and substantial justice is done. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this UDC to other parcels of land in the district. In order to make a finding of hardship and grant a variance from the zoning regulations of this UDC, the BOA must determine the following: 
a.  the requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its amendments; 
b.  special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features exist that are peculiar to the subject parcel of land and are not applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district; 
c.  the hardship is in no way the result of the applicant's own actions; or 
d.  the interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments thereto would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district that comply with the same provisions. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.3.5. - Administrative authority. 
A.  Authority Granted . The City Manager or his/her designees shall have such powers and authority as granted by State law, the City Charter, the Code of Ordinances, and this UDC to initiate, undertake, and decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and development of land as identified in this UDC and are authorized to take all actions necessary to carry out their responsibilities in accordance with the requirements and limitations prescribed therein. 
B.  Administrative Structure . The City Manager is designated as the chief administrative official of the City. The City Manager, at his/her discretion, may designate the director of any department or other employee as the administrative authority responsible for consideration of any item deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
C.  Duties and Approval Authority . 
1.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the appropriate approval body on the following applications: 
a.  amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan; 
b.  establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including creation or amendment of an overlay district; 
c.  rezoning requests including an applications for a Specific Use Permit; 
d.  amendment of this UDC; 
e.  annexation; 
f.  a Development Agreement within the City's corporate boundaries and in the City's ETJ; 
g.  Historic Landmark or District Designation; 
h.  an appeal of the decision of any City Board, Commission, Committee or staff as authorized by this UDC; 
i.  Subdivision Master Plan; 
j.  preliminary plat; 
k.  final plat; 
l.  replat; 
m.  a variance, appeal or other application to be considered by the BOA; 
n.  an interpretation, appeal or other application to be considered by the Building and Standards Commission; and 
o.  an interpretation, waiver, appeal or other application to be considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission. 
2.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall have final approval authority on the following applications: 
a.  a minor plat, as authorized by this UDC and LGC Section 212.0065. However, the City Manager or his/her designee may forward the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval; 
b.  an amending plat, as authorized by this UDC, and LGC Section 212.0065. However, the City Manager or his/her designee may forward the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval; 
c.  a Certificate of Determination, as authorized by this UDC and LGC Section 212.0115. However, the City Manager or his/her designee may forward the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for determination; 
d.  a site plan; and 
e.  other applications as authorized by this UDC. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.3.6. - Other boards, commissions and committees. 
A.  Parks and Recreation Advisory Board . 
1.  Structure of the Parks Board . The structure of the Parks Board shall be as set forth by the City Council in establishing the Parks Board. 
2.  Duties and Approval Authority . The Parks Board shall serve as an advisory board to the City Council and may review and make recommendations on the following matters: 
a.  parks and recreation improvements and amenities included with any parkland dedication; and 
b.  creation, amendment or updates to the Parks and Open Space Master Plan of the City. 
B.  Historic Preservation Committee . 
1.  Structure of the Historic Committee . The structure of the Historic Committee shall be as set forth by the City Council in establishing the Historic Committee. 
2.  Duties and Approval Authority . The Historic Committee shall have those duties and approval authority as set forth by the City Council in establishing the Historic Committee. 
C.  Transportation Safety Advisory Commission . 
1.  Structure of the Transportation Safety Advisory Commission (TSAC) . The structure of the TSAC shall be as set forth by the City Council in establishing the TSAC. 
2.  Duties and Approval Authority . The TSAC shall serve as an advisory commission to the City Council and is established to investigate safety issues and make recommendations with respect to City roadways and to improve the City's quality of life through a citizen/government partnership that promotes safe and secure roads, which provide convenience, recreational and leisure activities and continued beautification of the City. The duties of the TSAC may include, but are not limited to, the following duties: 
a.  coordinate and communicate with the various Boards, Commissions, Committees and the City Council on matters related to transportation safety; 
b.  develop safety materials to be used for promotional activities; 
c.  develop research materials needed for promotion of transportation safety; 
d.  develop a transportation safety plan for the City; 
e.  review proposed transportation and traffic ordinances and make recommendations to the City Council; and 
f.  participate in fact finding trips, conferences, and seminars related to transportation and traffic safety. 
D.  Buildings and Standards Commission . 
1.  Structure and Procedure of the Building and Standards Commission Composition and Procedures: 
a.  The Building and Standards Commission is established in accordance with the provision of Chapter 54 of the LGC. Each case before the Building and Standards Commission must be heard by a majority of the members. 
b.  The City Council will appoint a commission comprised of five (5) members and two (2) alternates who are residents of the City, one from each of the following professions or disciplines: 
i.  Registered design professional with architectural experience or a builder or superintendent of building construction; 
ii.  Registered design professional with structural engineering experiences; 
iii.  Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor or plumbing contractor; 
iv.  Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor; and 
v.  Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience or a fire protection contractor. 
c.  Registered Design Professional is defined as an individual who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state of Texas. 
d.  If a resident with the above criteria cannot be found then the City Council may appoint another resident of their choosing to the Commission. 
2.  Duties and Approval Authority . The Building and Standards Commission shall have the following duties: 
a.  The Building and Standards Commission has the authority to enforce the enumerated health and safety ordinances as authorized by Chapter 54 LGC, subchapter C, as amended. Specifically the Commission hears cases relative to ordinance violations: 
i.  for the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building of improvement, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances, or exits; 
ii.  relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location design, or width of entrances or exits; 
iii.  relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated building or improvements; 
iv.  relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents; and 
v.  relating to a building code or to the condition, use, or appearance of property in the City of Schertz. 
b.  The Building and Standards Commission shall have the authority to do the following items per LGC Sec. 54.036 
i.  order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings found to be in violation of an ordinance; 
ii.  require the demolition of a structure found to be a public nuisance; 
iii.  declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted by LGC Chapter 54 Subsection C; 
iv.  order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building found to exist; 
v.  issue orders or directives to any peace office or the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police in the City of Schertz, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the commission; and 
vi.  determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the municipality may recover as provided by LGC Section 54.017. 
c.  The Building and Standards Commission has the authority to hear appeals to a decision from the fire chief, fire marshal, or the building official related 
i.  the use of alternate materials and construction methods; or 
ii.  interpretations of the fire code or building codes as adopted by the City of Schertz, including but not limited to, granting exceptions to those codes in order to make a reasonable accommodation for a disabled person or group as defined by the Fair Housing Amendment Act. 
d.  The Building and Standards Commission has the authority to make a determination as to whether an alternative construction material or construction method equally meets the applicable code's standards, especially considering the alternative's adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation, and safety for the public's health and welfare. Any request to use an alternative construction material or construction method may be approved by the commission if and only if the commission determines that the alternative construction material or construction method equally meets the applicable codes and standards especially considering the alternative's adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety for the public's health and welfare. Façade materials are exempt from this section. 
e.  The Building and Standards Commission has the authority to reverse a decision of the fire chief, fire marshal or the building official only by concurring vote of at least four commission members. 
f.  The Building and Standards Commission also has the following responsibilities: 
i.  to evaluate proposed amendments to the fire and building codes, and make recommendations to the City Council regarding such amendments; 
ii.  to hear from any person requesting a change to the fire and building codes as adopted by the city; 
iii.  to act as an advisor to the Fire Chief, Building Official; and 
iv.  to manage any additional duties, powers, and responsibilities assigned by the City Council in compliance with the City Charter and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
ARTICLE 4. -  PROCEDURES AND APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 21.4.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish application procedures, internal review procedures, public notice and hearing procedures, and review criteria for the processing of applications and actions that affect the development and use of property subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Schertz. 
Sec. 21.4.2. - Initiation of Application. 
A.  Application Submittal. All development applications to be considered by any Board, Commission or Committee, or by the City Council shall be initiated by the filing of the application by the owner of the property on which the permit is applicable or by the owner's designated agent. In the event an application is submitted by a designated agent, the application must be accompanied by a written statement, signed by the owner, authorizing the agent to file the application on the owner's behalf. 
B.  Determination of Application Completeness. 
1.  All development applications shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the director of the appropriate City department. 
2.  No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this UDC. For a determination of completeness to be issued, an application must include the following: 
a.  Payment of the appropriate fee; 
b.  An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or other suitable legal description, identifying the property as a lot of record); 
c.  A survey exhibit and other appropriate exhibits as identified in this Article for the individual permit; and 
d.  Any additional documents, forms or other materials required by the City Manager or his/her designee or identified in this UDC for the processing of a specific Development Application. 
3.  The director of the appropriate City department may from time to time identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with the application contents and standards set forth in this UDC. 
4.  A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this UDC. 
5.  Not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date an application is submitted, the director of the appropriate City department shall make a written determination whether the application constitutes a complete application. This shall include a determination that all information and documents required by this UDC for the type of permit being requested or other requirements have been submitted. A determination that the application is incomplete shall be mailed to the applicant within such time period by United States mail at the address listed on the application. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state that the application will expire if the documents or other information are not submitted within forty-five (45) days after the date the application was submitted. 
6.  An application filed on or after the effective date of this amended and restated UDC shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have been notified if the City has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in subsection 5 above. 
7.  The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as the official acceptance of the application for filing. However, this application may be denied for incompleteness within the forty-five (45) day period. 
8.  A Development Application shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifty (45th) day after the application is submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee for processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to meet the requirements of this UDC or other requirements as specified in the determination provided to the applicant. Upon expiration, the application will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application must be submitted. 
9.  No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. 
C.  Application Withdrawal. Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted in writing to the director of the appropriate City department. If notification is required for the application and has been properly given via publication in the newspaper and/or written notification to surrounding property owners, such application must be placed on the agenda. The staff representative shall notify the Board, Commission, Committee or the City Council of the request for withdrawal. The Board, Commission, Committee or the City Council may, at its discretion, accept the request for withdrawal of the application by general consent of the members. Application fees are not refundable unless reimbursement is otherwise authorized by the director of the appropriate City department. 
Sec. 21.4.3. - Notice Requirements. 
A.  Published Notice . Whenever published notice of a public hearing before a Board, Commission, Committee or the City Council is required, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause notice to be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date set for the required hearing. Said notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing as required under LGC section 211.006(a). 
B.  Written Notice . Whenever written notice of a public hearing before a Board, Commission, Committee or the City Council is required, before the tenth (10th) day before the hearing date, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause written notice to be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within 200 feet of the exterior boundary of the property in question. Said notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing as required under LGC section 211.007(c). The notice may be served by its deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in the United States mail. If the property within 200 feet of the property in question is located in territory within the City and is not included on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given by one (1) publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing. Failure of owners to receive notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken. 
C.  Posted Notice . Whenever posted notice of a public hearing is required, notification signs shall be posted by the applicant a minimum of eleven (11) days prior to the scheduled public hearing and shall remain posted during the course of the public hearings, until such time that final action has been taken on the permit application. Signs shall be posted on the subject property and/or along public right-of-way in a format approved by the City Manager or his/her designee. The number of signs, size of signs and content to be placed on the signs shall be in accordance with the Development Manual. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to periodically check sign locations to verify that signs remain in place and have not been vandalized or removed. The applicant shall replace any missing or defective signs within one (1) business day from the time that a City official notifies the applicant that the signs are missing. It is unlawful for a person to alter any notification signs, or to remove it while the case is pending. Removal or alteration that is beyond the control of the applicant shall not constitute a failure to meet notification requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-42 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.4.4. - Public hearings. 
A.  Public Hearing Required. Whenever a public hearing is required, the City Manager or his/her designee shall establish the date, time and place of the public hearing and shall cause any notice required under section 21.4.3 of this Article to be prepared and made accordingly. 
B.  Conduct of Hearing. Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name, address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name and mailing address of the organization for the record. Subject to the chairperson's inherent authority to conduct meetings, public hearings shall generally be conducted as follows. 
1.  The City staff may present a description of the proposed project and a written or oral recommendation, if required. Any written recommendation shall be available to the public at the time that the agenda packet for the body conducting the hearing is compiled. 
2.  The applicant may present any information it deems appropriate. 
3.  Testimony in support of the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an interest in the proposed project. 
4.  Testimony in opposition to the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an interest in the proposed project. 
5.  At the discretion of the chairperson, the City staff and the applicant may respond to any statement by the public. 
6.  The body conducting the hearing may exclude testimony or evidence that it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious. 
7.  At the sole discretion of the chairperson of the body conducting the hearing, an individual may be permitted to pose relevant questions to staff, the applicant or the body conducting the hearing, as directed by the chairperson. 
8.  The public hearing shall be closed. 
9.  The advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission or Committee) shall make a recommendation. 
10.  The advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission or Committee) shall prepare a written report with its recommendations to the City Council. 
C.  Continuance of Hearing. The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, for good cause, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time and place. Except as required by the Texas Open Meetings Act or other applicable law, no notice shall be required if a hearing is continued. If a public hearing is closed, no further public testimony shall be taken. 
D.  Additional Rules. The body conducting the hearing may adopt additional rules of procedure and may apply such additional rules to govern the public hearing which are not inconsistent with this section. 
E.  Joint Public Hearing. Unless otherwise prescribed in this UDC, whenever an application must be preceded by a public hearing both before an advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission and/or Committee) and before the City Council, the advisory body and the Council may conduct a joint public hearing and take action on the application in the following manner. 
1.  The City Council shall establish the date of the joint public hearing by motion at a regular or special meeting. 
2.  The City Council shall cause notice of the joint public hearing to be provided as required by this UDC and the Texas Open Meetings Act and, by a vote of two-thirds of its members, may prescribe the type of notice for the joint public hearing. 
3.  The advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission and/or Committee) and the City Council shall be convened for the hearing and for any action to be taken on the petition or application. 
4.  The advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission and/or Committee) and the City Council may take action on the application at the same meeting, provided that the City Council shall not take action until the written report and recommendation of the advisory body (i.e. Board, Commission and/or Committee) has been received. 
Sec. 21.4.5. - Post-Decision Procedures. 
A.  Notification Required. Within ten (10) business days following final action on any Development Application, the appropriate City department shall provide written notification to the applicant of the decision of the Board, Commission, Committee or the City Council considering the request. If an application has been denied, the notification should include the reasons for denial as well as any information relating to reapplication procedures for the appropriate application. 
B.  Reapplication Following Denial. Whenever any Development Application, with the exception of any plat application, is denied, a Development Application for all or a part of the same property shall not be accepted for filing for a period of six (6) months after the date of denial unless the subsequent application involves a proposal that is substantially different from the previously denied proposal. For the purpose of this section, a request may be considered substantially different if the change is to a different zoning classification, there is a change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the property or surrounding properties or there is a change in the nature of the development of the property or surrounding properties. The City Manager or his/her designee shall resolve any questions concerning the similarity of the reapplication. The final decision-maker may, at its option, waive the six (6) month waiting period if, after due consideration of the matter at a scheduled and posted meeting, it is determined that denial of the request was based upon erroneous or omitted information, or if substantial new information pertaining to the request is discovered. 
C.  Amendments and Revisions to Approved Application. Unless otherwise expressly provided by this UDC, any request to amend or revise an approved Development Application shall be considered a new application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original application and the standards in effect at the time such new application is filed with the City. 
D.  Amendments Required. Whenever a subsequent Development Application differs substantially from a previously approved Development Application to which the subsequent application must conform, the applicant shall submit an amended Development Application for the initial Development Application, which shall be decided prior to the subsequent application. The applicant's failure to comply with this section shall result in denial of the subsequent application 
Sec. 21.4.6. - Comprehensive Land Plan Amendment. 
A.  Applicability. The Comprehensive Land Plan of the City reflects the long-term plan for growth and development of the City. The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, by request of the City Manager or his/her designee or by application from a property owner, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the text of the Comprehensive Land Plan or may amend the boundaries shown on the Future Land Use Map, Master Thoroughfare Plan or any other applicable maps contained in the Comprehensive Land Plan. Approved amendments to the Comprehensive Land Plan authorize a property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the amendment. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required. Any request for an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan shall be accompanied by a completed Planning Department Development Application. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. Any request for amendment of the Future Land Use Map submitted by a property owner may be accompanied by an application for a zoning change consistent with requested Future Land Use Map amendment for land within the City limits, or by a Subdivision Master Plan, for land within the ETJ. Approval of an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan shall require all subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved amendments. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2 of this Article. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other City department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification Requirements. An application for an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3 of this Article: 
a.  Written notice prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and 
b.  Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. 
3.  Commission recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 of this Article and make a written recommendation regarding a proposed amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a proposed amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 of this Article. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action on an amendment to the Comprehensive Land Plan, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
2.  An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of the Comprehensive Land Plan, taking into account the nature of any proposed map amendment associated with the text amendment; 
3.  An amendment to the Future Land Use Map, Master Thoroughfare Plan or any other applicable maps contained in the Comprehensive Land Plan is consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Land Plan that apply to the map being amended, taking into account the nature of any proposed land use associated with the map amendment; 
4.  Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Land Plan; 
5.  Any proposed amendment addresses circumstances that have changed since the last time the plan map or text was considered, implements plan policies better than the current plan map or text corrects a mapping error or addresses a deficiency in the plan; and 
6.  Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. 
Sec. 21.4.7. - Unified Development Code Amendment. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any request for an amendment to the text of this UDC. The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or at the request of the City Manager or his/her designee, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the text of any portion of this UDC in order to establish and maintain sound, stable and desirable development within the jurisdiction of the City. The provisions of this section shall exclude amendments to any appendix which may be amended by general consent of the City Council. 
B.  Application Requirements. Requests for amendments to the text of this UDC may be initiated by the request of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council or the City Manager on his/her own initiative. A request for an amendment to the text of this UDC shall be accompanied by a completed Development Application. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for an amendment to the text of this UDC shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application and may direct the proposed amendment to any other City departments or consultant for review and recommendation. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification Requirements. An application for an amendment to the text of this UDC requires published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. 
3.  Commission recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 of this Article and make a written recommendation regarding a proposed amendment to the text of this UDC to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a proposed amendment to the text of this UDC and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 of this Article. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment. Such amendment shall be by ordinance, and the identifying number of any such ordinance shall be noted on the cover of this UDC. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its written recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action on an amendment to the text of this UDC, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
2.  An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of this UDC and the City; 
3.  Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of this UDC and the City; and 
4.  Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. 
E.  Non-Substantive Amendments. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the City Council may by resolution correct spelling or punctuation errors, cross-reference errors, and other matters herein determined by the City Attorney to be non-substantive without complying with the foregoing provisions of this section. The number of any such resolution shall be noted on the cover of this UDC. 
Sec. 21.4.8. - Annexation. 
A.  Applicability. Annexation may be voluntary or involuntary and shall be required to meet all requirements of the LGC, Local Government Code for each type of annexation. 
    The provisions of this section apply to any request for voluntary annexation by a property owner wishing to extend the corporate limits of the City to incorporate property adjacent to the City's existing municipal boundaries. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . A request for annexation shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. Any request for annexation shall be accompanied by an application to establish the initial zoning on the property. An application to establish the zoning may be considered at the same meeting as the annexation request so long as the ordinance providing for annexation is acted on prior to any action on the zoning request. In the event that an application for annexation is considered concurrently with the application for zoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission may consider the zoning request and provide a written recommendation to the City Council so long as the City Council has adopted the annexation ordinance. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for annexation shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2 of this Article. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other City department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the City Council for consideration. 
2.  Development Agreement. The City Manager or his/her designee shall comply with the approval. The City Council shall comply with LGC, Local Government Code § 43.035. 
3.  Notification requirements. The City Manager or his/her designee shall provide notification in accordance with LGC, Local Government Code § 43.062. 
4.  Service plan required. The City Manager or his/her designee shall prepare an annexation service plan in accordance with LGC, Local Government Code § 43.056. 
5.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall hold two public hearings in accordance with LGC, Local Government Code § 43.063 and shall take final action as required in LGC, Local Government Code. 
6.  Other Procedures Applicable. A request for annexation is subject to all applicable rules and procedures required by State law. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this UDC and State law, the requirements of State law shall apply. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. When considering a request for voluntary annexation, the City Council should consider the following criteria: 
1.  The application is consistent with the requirements of State law and this UDC; 
2.  The annexation promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
3.  The property owners and residents of the area consent to the annexation; 
4.  The application includes a service plan as required by subsection 21.4.8.C.4 above; 
5.  The annexation is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Land Plan; and 
6.  Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.4.9. - Designation of landmark properties and heritage neighborhoods. 
A.  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to recognize and encourage the preservation of those areas or specific buildings or structures of significance to the City. More specifically, this Article is designed to achieve the following goals: 
1.  To preserve, protect and enhance significant sites and structures that represent unique elements of the City landscape either by their aesthetic, architectural, nostalgic, or symbolic attributes in relation to persons, place and/or time. 
2.  To strengthen civic pride through neighborhood preservation and recognition. 
3.  To provide application submission and review guidance relating to the designation of properties and/or sites. 
4.  The provision for designation of Landmark Properties shall also apply within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Schertz. 
B.  Application Requirements. Any request for the designation of a landmark property or heritage neighborhoods shall be initiated by completion of an application form as set forth in Appendix A of the Schertz Historical Preservation Committee's (SHPC) By-laws. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. All applications under this section shall be submitted to the SHPC. The SHPC shall review the application for completeness and notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a written recommendation on the application. Any interested citizen, to include SHPC members, may initiate an application. 
2.  Approval Procedures. Applications for landmark properties and heritage neighborhoods shall be considered and voted upon at the SHPC's next quarterly meeting following application submission. Approval will require a two-thirds positive vote by members present. The SHPC may disapprove the nomination for reasons of incomplete and/or unsupportable data. If disapproved, the nominator will be notified in writing by SHPC as to the reason(s) for disapproval and given thirty (30) days to resubmit the nomination form with corrected or supplemental data. If no reply is received by the thirty (30) day deadline the nomination is considered closed without further action required. The approved SHPC nominations will be forwarded to the City Manager for placement on a City Council agenda within thirty (30) days of receipt. Written notice shall be provided to the owner of the property before the tenth (10th) day before the hearing date of City Council. The City Council shall vote on all designation nominations and will require a majority of Council members to approve the nomination. The nominator will be notified in writing by the SHPC of City Council approval/disapproval. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-58, § 1, 12-10-2013 ) 
Sec. 21.4.10. - Development Agreements. 
A.  Applicability. The purpose of a Development Agreement is to determine whether the City wishes to authorize a plan of development for land located within its ETJ, to prescribe land uses, environmental standards, development standards and public facilities standards governing development of the land for the term of the agreement, to provide for the delivery of public facilities to the property and to provide for annexation of the property to the City. A Development Agreement may be approved for land located in the ETJ of the City in accordance with LGC, Local Government Code § 212.172. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any application for a Development Agreement shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. An application for a Development Agreement shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat prepared in accordance with section 21.12.7 of this UDC. Approval of a preliminary plat as part of a Development Agreement shall meet the requirements for preliminary plat approval under section 21.12.7. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a Development Agreement shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. 
2.  Preparation and Negotiation of Development Agreement. An application for a Development Agreement shall be prepared in accordance with LGC, Local Government Code § 212.172. After review by the City staff, the application and accompanying plans shall be transmitted to the office of the City Attorney for review. After appropriate review by all parties, a recommendation shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation. The City Council shall have the final authority for approval of a Development Agreement. 
3.  Commission Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 and make a written recommendation regarding a proposed Development Agreement to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the agreement. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a proposed Development Agreement and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Development Agreement. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision. If the City Council approves the Development Agreement, it shall approve the agreement by appropriate action that authorizes the City Manager to execute the agreement on behalf of the City following execution by the property owner. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council, the property owner shall accept the Development Agreement and accompanying preliminary plat within ten (10) working days after the date the City Council's action is adopted. If not executed by the property owner within such period, the Council's approval shall be deemed void. 
5.  Recording Development Agreement. The approved Development Agreement shall be recorded in the real property records of each county in which land subject to the agreement is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.4.11. - Utility service extension. 
A.  Applicability. A request for approval of a utility extension shall be required where a property owner seeks water or wastewater services from the City for a proposed project that will be located within the City's ETJ at the time of the proposed extension and subsequent development. Approval of a request for a utility extension authorizes the City to annex the property, and authorizes the property owner to submit development applications consistent with the capacity of the facilities to be extended, and upon approval of the applications, to construct extensions of the facilities in accordance with the terms of the approved utility service extension request. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required. Any application for Utility Service Extension shall be accompanied by a completed Development Application. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. 
a.  An application for Utility Service Extension shall be accompanied by a request for voluntary annexation. The City may, at its option, elect to annex the property upon request or may delay the annexation until such time the City deems necessary to promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City. 
b.  An application for Utility Service Extension may be accompanied by an application for a Subdivision Master Plan prepared in accordance with section 21.12.5. A Subdivision Master Plan may not be approved until final approval of the Utility Service Extension by the City Council. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. A request for Utility Service Extension shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. 
2.  Review and Processing of Request. The City Engineer shall circulate the application among applicable City departments for review and recommendation. The City Engineer shall evaluate the request for consistency with the approval criteria and shall prepare a written recommendation to be forwarded to the City Council. The recommendation should include any comments received from other departments including, but not limited to, an analysis of the financial feasibility of extending services and any fiscal impacts on existing utilities from the extension. 
3.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the City Engineer and shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request for Utility Service Extension. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The City Council, in considering final action on a request for Utility Service Extension, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the proposed development to be served by the extension is consistent with the Comprehensive Land Plan; 
2.  Whether the extension is proposed to be constructed in accordance with all applicable City ordinances, resolutions, regulations and standards; 
3.  Whether it is feasible to annex the property, and any intervening property which is needed for utility rights-of-way, into the City; 
4.  Whether the utility extension would compromise the City's ability to timely provide adequate water or wastewater facilities to property inside the City; 
5.  Whether the utility extension will lead to premature development that cannot be served efficiently and timely by roadway, drainage or park facilities; 
6.  Whether the utility extension is financially feasible given the proposed means of financing the extension; 
7.  Whether the utility extension will lead to significant degradation of water quality or other environmental resources, either from construction of the water or wastewater improvements, development of the property owner's land, or development of other land that may be served through the extended facilities; 
8.  Whether the property owner proposes to extend wastewater facilities without utilizing City water facilities; and 
9.  The extent to which the proposed agreement promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City. 
Sec. 21.4.12. - Variances. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The BOA shall have the ability to authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the zoning regulations of this UDC if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this UDC would result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this UDC is observed and substantial justice is done. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this UDC to other parcels of land in the district. 
2.  Approval of a variance authorizes a property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the approved variance. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for a variance shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a variance shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other appropriate City department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the BOA for consideration. 
2.  Notification requirements. An application for a variance requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3: 
a.  Written notice; and 
b.  Published notice. 
3.  Decision by the BOA. 
a.  The BOA shall receive the recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with section 21.4.4. The Board may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance. 
b.  The Board may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the variance to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision. 
c.  The approval shall be effective for a period of 180 days after the date of such approval. If no application for building permit is submitted within that time, the variance shall become null and void. 
d.  The disapproval of a variance shall require compliance by the applicant, if applicable, within fifteen (15) days after the date of disapproval and upon written notification by staff. 
D.  Criteria for approval. In order to make a finding of hardship and grant a variance from the zoning regulations of this UDC, the Board must determine the following: 
1.  The requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its amendments; 
2.  Special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features exist that are peculiar to the subject parcel of land and are not applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district; 
3.  The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant's own actions; and 
4.  The interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments thereto would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district that comply with the same provisions. 
E.  Appeals of BOA Decisions. Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the BOA, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board of the City may appeal a decision of the BOA regarding any variance request in accordance with section 21.3.4 of this UDC. 
F.  Finding of fact. The board shall complete a finding of fact for ariance or appeal to support its conclusion for each variance or appeal presented to it. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.4.13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21.4.14. - Appeals. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of an appeal is to contest an initial decision on a Development Application based upon alleged misapplication of the regulations contained within this UDC and the criteria for approval of the Development Application. An appeal may not be used to amend, vary or otherwise modify the standards of this UDC that apply to the Development Application. Any decision on a Development Application required by this UDC may be appealed to the Board, Commission or the City Council indicated within the procedures for each Development Application. The granting of an appeal supersedes the decision from which the appeal was taken and results in approval, conditional approval or denial of the Development Application for which the approval was sought. 
B.  Appeal Requirements. Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision on a Development Application, or any marshal, officer, department, or board of the City may appeal a decision on a Development Application to the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal as indicated in this UDC. An appeal shall contain a written statement of the reasons why the decision is erroneous, and shall be accompanied by a fee established by the City Council. An appeal by an applicant shall be accompanied by a copy of the Development Application on which the initial decision was rendered. An appeal may include any other documents that support the position of the appellant. A written appeal must be filed with the City Manager or his/her designee within ten (10) working days after the date of notification of the decision on the Development Application. 
C.  Processing of Appeal and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An appeal shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee for processing of the Development Application being appealed. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the City Manager or his/her designee shall compile all documents constituting the record of the decision subject to appeal and transmit the record to the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for considering the appeal. 
2.  Stay of Proceedings. Receipt of a written appeal of a decision on a Development Application stays all proceedings of the City in furtherance of the decision from which appeal is taken, including without limitation acceptance, processing or issuance of any subsequent development applications, and any development activities authorized by initial approval of the Development Application. The stay shall be lifted only if the City Manager or his/her designee certifies in writing to the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. Thereafter, the stay may be reinstated only by order of the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal or a court of record, on application, after notice to the City Manager or his/her designee, for due cause shown. 
3.  Notification Requirements. An appeal requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3: 
a.  Written notice; and 
b.  Published notice. 
4.  Decision on Appeal . The Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal shall hold a public hearing and decide the appeal within thirty (30) days after written receipt of the request for the appeal. The Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision from which the appeal was taken. 
5.  Notification of Decision on Appeal. The property owner and the applicant for the Development Application under appeal shall be notified of the decision on the appeal in accordance with section 21.4.5. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. In deciding the appeal, the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal shall apply the same criteria that govern the initial decision on the Development Application under the provisions of this Article. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. For purposes of determining expiration or extension periods under this UDC, the date the Board, Commission or the City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal grants relief on the appeal is the date on which the Development Application is deemed approved. 
1.  Once the Board, Commission or the City Council grants relief on the appeal, a new Development Application or permit application shall be submitted within 180 days after the date of such approval or the appeal shall become null and void. 
2.  The disapproval of an appeal shall require compliance by the applicant, if applicable, within fifteen (15) days after the date of disapproval and upon written notification by staff. 
Sec. 21.4.15. - Public infrastructure improvements, construction plans, and improvement agreements. 
A.  Applicability . The provisions of this section applies to the construction of any public infrastructure improvements. 
B.  Processing of Construction Plans and Decision . 
1.  Submittal . Construction plans shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee prior to construction of public infrastructure improvements. Submittal of construction plans shall be in accordance with the Engineering Department's permitting requirements. 
2.  Decision by the City Manager . The City Manager or his/her designee may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the construction plans. 
3.  Criteria for Approval . The City Manager or his/her designee, or the City Council on appeal, shall apply the following criteria in making a decision on the construction plans: 
a.  The construction plans are consistent with the approved preliminary plat or the proposed final plat in the event that the public infrastructure improvements are in relation to a plat; and 
b.  The construction plans conform to all applicable regulations pertaining to the construction and installation of public infrastructure improvements. 
4.  Expiration . The approval of construction plans shall remain in effect for two years after the date the construction plans were approved by the City Manager or his/her designee. If construction of the project has not commenced during the two year period, approval of the construction plans shall expire. For public infrastructure improvements that are associated with a final plat, approval of the construction plans shall remain in effect for the time that approval of the final plat is in effect and shall expire when approval of the final plat expires, unless an extension is granted, pursuant to Section 21.4.15.B.5, Extension. 
5.  Extension . At the written request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for the approval of construction plans may be extended by the City Manager or his/her designee for a period not to exceed six (6) months. 
C.  Timing of Public Infrastructure Improvements . 
1.  Completion Prior to Final Plat Recordation . For public infrastructure improvements associated with a proposed subdivision or development, except as provided below, completion of the improvements shall be in accordance with the approved construction plans and shall occur before an approved final plat is recorded, unless the obligation to construct public infrastructure improvements has been deferred and an improvement agreement is executed. 
2.  Installation after Final Plat Recordation . The property owner or applicant may request to defer the obligation to construct and install one (1) or more public improvements to serve the associated subdivision until after final plat recordation. The request shall be submitted in writing and specify what is being requested for deferral. Deferral of the obligation to install public improvements shall be conditioned on execution of an improvement agreement and provision of sufficient security. The City Manager or his/her designee may approve or deny the request to defer installation of public infrastructure improvements. 
3.  Off-Site Easements . All necessary off-site easements required for installation of off-site public improvements to serve the subdivision or development shall be acquired by the subdivider or developer and conveyed solely to the City by an instrument approved by the City. 
D.  Inspection and Acceptance of Public Infrastructure Improvements . 
1.  Inspections . Inspection of the public infrastructure improvements shall be conducted by the Engineering Department. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved construction plans. Any significant change in design required during construction shall be subject to approval by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
2.  Submission of As-Built Plans or Record Drawings . The City shall not accept dedication of required public improvements until the applicant has submitted detailed "as-built" record drawings in accordance with Engineering Department's requirements. 
3.  Acceptance of Improvements . When the City Manager or his/her designee has determined that the public infrastructure improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans, the City Manager or his/her designee shall accept such improvements on behalf of the City. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the property owner has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the City for use and maintenance. Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the City Manager or his/her designee shall have a certificate issued to the property owner stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
E.  Maintenance and Warranty of Improvements . 
1.  Maintenance During Construction . The developer shall maintain all required public improvements during construction of the development. 
2.  Bond . The developer or owner shall covenant to warranty the required public improvements for a period of two (2) years following acceptance by the City of all required public improvements or following the date of plat recordation, whichever occurs later. A warranty bond shall be provided in the amount of 20% of the costs of the improvements for such period. All public improvements shall be bonded. 
F.  Improvement Agreements . 
1.  Obligations Under Agreement . Whenever public improvements to serve development are deferred until after recordation of the final plat, the property owner shall enter into an Improvement Agreement and provide adequate security as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
The Improvement Agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the City Manager or his/her designee and the City Attorney. The agreement shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  covenants to complete the improvements be no later than two (2) years after approval of the final plat, unless otherwise stipulated in the terms and conditions of the Improvement Agreement; 
b.  covenants to warranty the required public improvements for a period of two (2) years following acceptance by the City of all required public improvements, unless stated otherwise in the Improvement Agreement; 
c.  covenants to provide a warranty bond in the amount of 20% of the costs of the improvements for such period, unless stated otherwise in the Improvement Agreement; 
d.  provisions for participation in the costs of the improvements by the City, if authorization has been obtained from the City Council, and a performance bond for such improvements from the contractor; 
e.  provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent with subsection G below; and 
f.  such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the City and the property owner, or as may be required by this UDC. 
2.  Covenants to Run with the Land . The Improvement Agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the Agreement run with the land and bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the property owner. All existing owners and lienholders shall be required to execute the Agreement or provide written consent to the covenants contained in the Agreement. 
G.  Security for Completion of Improvements . 
1.  Security . Whenever the property owner has entered into an Improvement Agreement to defer installation of public improvements, the property owner shall provide sufficient security for completion of the required public improvements. The security shall be in the form of a cash escrow, a performance bond or surety bond provided by a licensed surety company, or other security as approved by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
2.  Amount and Acceptability . The security shall be issued in the amount of 125% of the estimated cost of completion that is approved by the City Manager or his/her designee for the required public infrastructure improvements. The terms of the security agreement shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager or his/her designee and the City Attorney. 
3.  Remedies . Where an Improvement Agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed in accordance with the terms of the agreement, the City may: 
a.  declare the Agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the Agreement is declared to be in default; 
b.  obtain funds under the security and complete the improvements itself or through a third party; or 
c.  assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the development in exchange for the subsequent owner's agreement and posting of security to complete the public infrastructure improvements. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-S-41 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 24, 2017, amended § 21.4.15, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Public infrastructure improvement, construction plans and community facilities agreements" to "Public infrastructure improvements, construction plans, and improvement agreements," as set out herein. 
Sec. 21.4.16. - Building permits. 
A.  Applicability. An application for a building permit is required within the City corporate limits, or where provided for in a Development Agreement, in the City's ETJ, prior to the placement, construction or alteration of a building or structure. Approval of an application for a building permit authorizes the property owner to construct, alter or place a structure on the lot, tract or parcel. Approval of an application for a building permit also authorizes the property owner, upon completion of a structure intended for human occupancy, to make application for a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for a building permit shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with requirements of the building inspections division. The City Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for determining the form and content of the building permit application. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal . An application for a building permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspections Division. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the permit for compliance with all adopted building codes and regulations and shall provide written notification of any items requiring correction or attention within forty-five (45) days after submittal of a complete application. 
2.  Decision by the City Manager . The City Manager or his/her designee may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the building permit. 
3.  Appeals . Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager or his/her designee, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee to the Building and Standards Commission. 
D.  Criteria for Approval . The City Manager or his/her designee shall apply the following criteria in deciding the application for a building permit: 
1.  The application generally conforms to all prior approved development applications for the property and any variance petition authorizing variation from the standards otherwise applicable to the permit; 
2.  The location of the structure on the property is in accordance with all prior approved development applications; 
3.  The proposed plan for construction or alteration conforms to the Building Code and other applicable construction codes adopted by the City; 
4.  All applicable fees, including impact fees, have been paid; 
5.  A final plat of the property has been recorded in the appropriate County plat records; and 
6.  All public infrastructure required has been installed and accepted by the City and all electric, gas, telephone and cable utility services necessary to serve the development have been installed within the development. 
E.  Issuance. No building permit shall be issued on property that is not a lot of record with the following exceptions: 
1.  Additions to existing structures not exceeding twenty-five percent(25%) of the building at the time of the adoption of this UDC; and 
2.  Interior finish out or improvements to existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
ARTICLE 5. -  ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 21.5.1. - Purpose and Applicability. 
    The zoning regulations and districts contained in this Article are established in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Land Plan and as authorized by Local Government Code (LGC) Chapter 211, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical, cultural and/or architectural importance and significance within the City limits. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to ensure adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population, and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They are established with reasonable consideration for, among other things, the character of each zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified, conserving the value of buildings and environmentally sensitive features, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
Sec. 21.5.2. - Zoning Districts Established; Limitations on R-6 and R-7. 
    The City is hereby geographically divided into zoning districts and the boundaries of those districts herein are delineated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City. The use and dimensional regulations as set out in this Article are uniform in each district. Zoning districts are established in compliance with adopted Comprehensive Land Plan and Master Thoroughfare Plan. The districts established shall be known as follows: 
Table 21.5.2 Symbol Zoning District Name PRE Predevelopment District R-1 Single-Family Residential District R-2 Single-Family Residential District R-3 Two-Family Residential District R-4 Apartment/Multi-Family Residential District R-6 Single-Family Residential District (See Ordinance No. 10-S-29) R-7 Single-Family Residential District (See Ordinance No. 10-S-29) R-A Single-Family Residential/Agricultural District GH Garden Home Residential District TH Townhome District MHS Manufactured Home Subdivision District MHP Manufactured Home Park District OP Office and Professional District NS Neighborhood Services District GB General Business District GB-2 General Business District-2 M-1 Manufacturing District (Light) M-2 Manufacturing District (Heavy) GC Golf Course District PUB Public Use District PDD Planned Development District AD Agricultural District AC Agricultural Conservation District EN Estate Neighborhood PDD MU Mixed Use District HCOD Highway Commercial Design Overlay District CCOD Campus Commercial Overlay District IOD Industrial Overlay District DO Downtown Overlay Districts MSMU Main Street Mixed-Use District  
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 1, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-S-47 , § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 21.5.3. - Initial Zoning Upon Annexation. 
A.  As soon as practical following annexation, but in no event more than 183 calendar days thereafter, the City Council shall, on its own motion or by request of the property owners of the annexed area, initiate proceedings to establish the initial zoning on the newly annexed territory. Unless otherwise requested by application of the property owner, the initial zoning of newly annexed territory shall be Predevelopment (PRE). 
B.  The initial zoning of a land parcel, whether by motion of the City Council or by request of the property owner shall be processed in the same manner as a request for a zoning change in accordance with section 21.5.4. Notification requirements and the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall be in accordance with a request for a zoning change. 
C.  The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for zoning the property concurrently with submission of the request for annexation, but no such annexation application may be made conditioned upon the approval of any particular zoning classification. The Planning and Zoning Commission may consider the request for zoning and make a recommendation the City Council prior to final adoption of the annexation ordinance. Any recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be conditioned upon approval of the annexation of the property by the City Council. The City Council may act on an ordinance to establish the initial zoning of the property being annexed at the same meeting as the action on the annexation ordinance so long as final approval of the annexation ordinance occurs prior to final approval of the ordinance to establish the zoning. 
Sec. 21.5.4. - Zoning Change/Zoning Map Amendment. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, by request of the City Manager or his/her designee, or by application from a property owner, establish or amend the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City. A zoning change or zoning map amendment is required to establish the use of land and the development associated with the proposed zoning classification for the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the City. 
2.  Approval of a zoning change or zoning map amendment authorizes a property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the amendment. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a zoning change or zoning map amendment shall be accompanied by an application and zoning exhibit prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. A request for a zoning change or zoning map amendment may be accompanied by an application for amendment of the Future Land Use Map or by a Subdivision Master Plan. Approval of a zoning change or zoning map amendment shall require all subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved amendments. 
3.  Tax Certificate Required. All applications made as a request for a zoning change or zoning map amendment shall be accompanied by a copy of a Tax Certificate. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a zoning change or zoning map amendment shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other City Department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification Requirements . An application for a zoning change or zoning map amendment requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3: 
a.  written notice prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and 
b.  published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. 
c.  posted notice prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission and prior to consideration by the City Council. 
3.  Commission Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 and make a written recommendation regarding a proposed a zoning change or zoning map amendment to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision. 
5.  Consideration of Previously Denied Amendments. A request for a zoning change or zoning map amendment for a tract of land shall not be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council within six (6) months after the Council's decision to deny the request unless the request is to a different zoning classification or there has been a substantial change in the conditions surrounding the parcel since the initial request. For the purpose of this section, a request may be considered substantially different if the change is to a different zoning classification, there is a change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the property or surrounding properties or there is a change in the nature of the development of the property or surrounding properties. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to determine whether the request is substantially different from the initial request. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action on a zoning change or zoning map amendment, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment implements the policies of the adopted Comprehensive Land Plan, including the land use classification of the property on the Future Land Use Map; 
2.  Whether the proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
3.  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district classification and the standards applicable to such uses will be appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified; 
4.  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers or other public services and utilities to the area; 
5.  Whether there have been environmental and/or economical changes which warrant the requested change; 
6.  Whether there is an error in the original zoning of the property for which a change is requested; 
7.  Whether all of the applicant's back taxed owed to the City have been paid in full (no application will receive final approval until all back taxes are paid in full); and, 
8.  Whether other criteria are met, which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. 
E.  Protests. 
1.  If a proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment is protested in accordance with this section, the proposed change must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council according to LGC, Local Government Code § 211.006(d). The protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of either: 
a.  The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment; or 
b.  The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed zoning change or zoning map amendment and extending 200 feet from that area. 
2.  In computing the percentage of land area under section 21.5.4.E.1 above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-42 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.5.5. - Statement of Purpose and Intent for Residential Districts. 
A.  Predevelopment District (PRE). Intended for use for undeveloped land in the City or as a temporary designation for existing uses for newly annexed property. This zoning is also suitable for areas where development is premature due to lack of utilities, capacity or service and for areas that are unsuitable for development because of physical constraints or potential health or safety hazards. No improvements, construction or structures may be undertaken without obtaining a building permit and no occupancy of such improvements and structures without obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Single-Family Residential District (R-1). Comprised of single-family detached residential dwellings on a minimum lot size of 9,600 square feet, together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. 
C.  Single-Family Residential District (R-2). Comprised of single-family detached residential dwellings with a minimum lot size of 8,400 square feet, together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. 
D.  Two-Family Residential District (R-3). Comprised of two (2) single-family attached residential dwellings with a minimum lot size of 9,000 square feet, together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. 
E.  Apartment/Multi-Family Residential District (R-4). Intended for apartment and multi-family developments including, but not limited to apartment buildings, duplex, garden apartments, condominium units, assisted living centers, nursing homes and other similar uses. Due to the infrastructure requirements for such districts, the City may require the applicant seeking such zoning classification to establish (i) the adequacy of available access and utility facilities, (ii) sufficiency of drainage, and (iii) provision of sufficient open space. The minimum lot size in such district is 10,000 square feet for three (3) units and 1,800 square feet for each additional dwelling unit. The maximum density shall be twenty-four (24) units per acre. Apartment/Multi-Family Residential Districts should not be located in areas where they would increase traffic through single-family neighborhoods and should be located adjacent to arterial streets with sufficient capacity to carry the increased traffic generated. Multi-family developments are suitable buffers between single-family districts and commercial uses. Multi-family districts should be buffered from non-residential land uses and from pollution sources and environmental hazards. Twenty percent (20%) of the total platted area shall be provided as common, usable open space. 
F.  Single-Family Residential District (R-6). Comprised of single-family detached residential dwellings that are on a minimum lot size of 7,200 square feet, together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. This district is intended to be developed using the more contemporary building styles and allowing those dwellings to be constructed on relatively small lots. (See Ordinance No. 10-S-29) 
G.  Single-Family Residential District (R-7). Comprised of single-family detached residential dwellings on a minimum lot size of 6,600 square feet, together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. This district is intended to be developed using the more contemporary building styles and allowing those dwellings to be constructed on relatively small lots. (See Ordinance No. 10-S-29) 
H.  Single-Family Residential/Agricultural District (RA). Intended to provide for areas in which agricultural land may be held in such use for as long as is practical and reasonable. Residences in this District are intended to be on a minimum lot size of 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). This District is suitable for areas where development is premature due to lack of utilities, capacity or service, and for areas that are unsuitable for development because of physical restraints or potential health or safety hazards. 
I.  Garden Homes Residential District (GH). Comprised of single-family detached residential dwellings on a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet together with the schools, churches, and parks necessary to create basic neighborhood units. This District allows the main structure to be constructed coincident with one (1) of the side property lines, and requires only one (1) side yard setback in order to maximize lot usage and yet maintain a neighborhood character consistent with conventional single-family detached homes. 
    No area shall be designated GH that contains less than five (5) adjoining lots on a street. Zero lot line homes shall have no windows on the side of the house, which abuts the property line. Entire frontage of one (1) side of the street in the block must be included in the GH designation. Exception may be made where an alley breaks the block on that side of the street. Homes will be uniformly located on the same side of the lot within a street block. 
J.  Townhome District (TH). Comprised of an attached residential dwelling unit in structures built to accommodate three (3) to six (6) units per structure. Density shall not exceed twelve (12) units per gross acre. Townhome units shall be constructed on a single lot, or on adjacent individual lots. Individual ownership of the townhome units is encouraged. Minimum lot area shall not be less than 2,500 square feet per dwelling unit. Ten percent (10%) of the total platted area shall be provided as common, usable open space. This District should not be located in areas where it would increase traffic through single-family neighborhoods and should be adjacent to arterial streets with sufficient capacity to carry the increased traffic generated. 
K.  Manufactured Home Subdivision District (MHS). Intended to recognize that certain areas of the City are suitable for a mixture of single-family dwelling units and HUD-Code manufactured homes, to provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of manufactured homes, along with single-family residences, to promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, to promote stability of development, to protect the character of the district, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the City's tax base. This District provides for the creation and/or subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land used for the placement of manufactured homes. This District is not intended to prohibit or unduly restrict any type of housing but to ensure compatibility in housing types between manufactured home subdivisions and surrounding single family residential subdivisions and recognizing their inherent differences. 
L.  Manufactured Home Park District (MHP). Intended to provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of manufactured homes, to promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, to promote stability of development, to protect the character of the district, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the City's tax base. This District provides for the creation of tracts of land used for the placement of multiple manufactured homes on a single lot, tract or parcel of land and utilized for rent or lease. This District is not intended to prohibit or unduly restrict any type of housing but to ensure compatibility between manufactured home parks and surrounding properties and recognizing the inherent differences in housing types between manufactured home parks and other residential districts. 
M.  Agricultural District (AD). Intended to provide as a base zoning district in areas designated as agricultural conservation on the North and South Schertz Framework Plans. Residences in this District are intended to be on a minimum lot size of 217,800 square feet (five acres). Clustering of up to two homes may be allowed on the same lot subject to setback requirements. This District is suitable for areas where development is premature due to lack of utilities, capacity or service, and for areas that are unsuitable for development because of physical restraints or potential health or safety hazards. 
N.  Main Street Mixed-Use District (MSMU) . Intended to provide a base zoning district in the area along Main Street. In light of the history of the area and variety of land uses that exist, this zoning district allows for both single-family residential uses and low intensity commercial uses. Reduced setbacks and parking requirements are provided as part of this district due to physical restraints. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 2, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-S-47 , § 2, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 21.5.6. - Statement of Purpose and Intent for Nonresidential Districts. 
A.  Office and Professional District (OP). Intended to provide suitable areas for the development of office structures as well as office park developments on appropriately designed and attractively landscaped sites. It is also intended to provide ancillary retail service (restaurants, coffee shops, newsstands, etc.) for such office developments. Due to the intensity of these developments, this District should be generally located along major transportation corridors, and be properly buffered from less intensive residential uses. 
B.  Neighborhood Services District (NS). Intended to provide suitable areas for the development of certain limited service and retail uses in proximity to residential neighborhoods in order to more conveniently accommodate the basic everyday retail and service needs of nearby residents. Such uses occur most often on the periphery of established neighborhoods at the intersection of collectors and minor arterials, and are generally on sites of approximately one (1) to three (3) acres in size. These developments are to have generous landscaping and contain non-residential uses, which do not attract long distance traffic trips. This District should be properly buffered from residential uses and protected from pollution and/or environmental hazards. 
C.  General Business District (GB). Intended to provide suitable areas for the development of non-residential uses which offer a wide variety of retail and service establishments that are generally oriented toward serving the overall needs of the entire community. These businesses are usually located on appropriately designed and attractively landscaped sites and along principal transportation corridors. 
D.  General Business District-2 (GB-2). Intended to provide suitable areas for the development of non-residential and light industrial uses that offer a wide variety of retail and service establishments that are generally oriented toward serving the overall needs of the entire community. These businesses are usually located on appropriately designed and attractively landscaped sites and along principal transportation corridors. These facilities should not emit dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes, or any other hazardous elements, which are detectable beyond the boundary of the property. Due to the traffic generated by such uses, these districts should be located on arterial streets. In reviewing the proposed development, other infrastructure considerations such as water, electric, sewer, gas and fire line pressure should be taken into account. Where several lots are to be jointly developed as a light manufacturing area, restrictive covenants and development restrictions encouraging high-level design and maintenance are encouraged. 
E.  Manufacturing District-Light (M-1). Intended to provide a suitable area for the development of light industrial, assembly and manufacturing, warehouse and distribution facilities. These facilities should not emit dust, odor, smoke, gas or fumes, or any other hazardous elements, which are detectable beyond the boundary of the property. Due to the traffic generated by such uses, these districts should be located on arterial streets. In reviewing the proposed development, other infrastructure considerations such as water, electric, sewer, gas and fire line pressure should be taken into account. Where several lots are to be jointly developed as a light manufacturing area, restrictive covenants and development restrictions encouraging high-level design and maintenance are encouraged. 
F.  Manufacturing District-Heavy (M-2). Intended to provide a suitable park-like area for the development of intensive industrial/manufacturing activities, which tend to emit certain offensive features such as odor, noise, dust, smoke and/or vibrations, but under controlled conditions. Specific Use Permit will be required by all activities locating in this area. Uses shall also recognize the need for increased water pressure and capacity in order to provide adequate fire protection. 
G.  Public Use District (PUB). Intended to identify and provide a zoning classification for land that is owned or may be owned by the City, County, State, or Federal Government or the School District; land that has been dedicated to the City for public use such as parks and recreation, and land designated and dedicated to the City as a greenbelt. 
H.  Golf Course District (GC). Intended to identify and provide a zoning classification to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria for land that is publicly or privately owned for use as public or private golf courses and any supporting or related club houses, utility buildings and related amenities (including but not limited to pro shops, swimming pools, tennis courts, restaurants, and bars). 
Sec. 21.5.7. - Dimensional and Developmental Standards. 
A.  General. All projects or developments shall comply with all of the applicable dimensional and development standards of this Article. Additional requirements may also apply as required in other sections of this UDC. All area requirements and lot sizes shall be calculated based on gross acres. 
Table 21.5.7.A DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS Minimum Lot Size And Dimensions Minimum Yard Setback (Ft) Miscellaneous Lot Requirements Code Zoning District Area 
Sq. Ft. Width 
Ft. Depth 
Ft. Front 
Ft. Side 
Ft. Rear 
Ft. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Max Height 
Ft. Max Imperv Cover Key R-1 Single-Family Residential District-1 9,600 80 120 25 10 20 2 35 50% h,j,k,l, 
m,o R-2 Single-Family Residential District-2 8,400 70 120 25 10 20 2 35 50% h,j,k,l, 
m,o R-3 Two-Family Residential District 9,000 75 120 25 10 20 2 35 60% h,j,k,l, 
m,o R-4 Apartment/Multi-Family Residential District 10,000 100 100 25 10 20 2 35 75% a,b,j,k, 
l,m R-6 Single-Family Residential District-6 7,200 60 120 25 10 20 2 35 50% h,k,l, 
m,n,o R-7 Single-Family Residential District-7 6,600 60 110 25 10 20 2 35 50% h,k,l, 
m,n,o R-A Single-Family-Residential/Agriculture 21,780 - - 25 25 25 2 35 50% h,k,l, 
m,n GH Garden Home Residential District 5,000 50 100 10 10 10 2 35 75% c,d,e,f, 
g,k,l,m TH Townhome District 2,500 25 100 25 10 20 2 35 75% h,j,k,l, 
m MHS Manufactured Home Subdivision District 6,600 60 110 25 10 20 2 35 50% j,k,l, 
m,o MHP Manufactured Home Park District 43,560 - - 25 12.5 25 - 35 50% j,k,l,m AD Agricultural District 217,800 100 100 25 25 25 2 35 30% h,k,o MSMU Main Street Mixed Use 5,000 50 100 10 5 20 2 35 80% h,j,k,m, 
n Key: a. Add 1,800 square feet of area for each unit after the first 3 units. Maximum density shall not exceed 24 units per acre. b. 1.5 parking spaces per bedroom. c. Zero lot line Garden Homes. d. 20-foot paved alley for ingress/egress to all rear garages. e. 5-foot shall be designated maintenance easement. f. Corner lot shall have 10-foot side yard setback from street right-of-way. g. 25-foot set back to property line adjoining public street. h. Corner lot shall have minimum 15-foot side yard setback from street right-of-way. i. Minimum lot area for each unit. j. Site Plan approval required. k. Swimming pools count toward the maximum impervious cover limitations, unless the swimming pool is equipped with a water overflow device appropriate for such pool, and only if it drains into any pervious surface, in which case the water surface shall be excluded. l. No variances may be permitted to exceed the maximum impervious cover limitations m. Refer to Article 14, section 21.14.3 for additional design requirements n. All single family residential dwelling units constructed within this district shall be constructed with an enclosed garage. o. Side yard setback of 7.5 ft. for R-1, R-2, R-3, R-6, R-7, and MHS continues in effect for all subdivisions vested on the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 11-S-15.  
Table 21.5.7.B DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS (d) Minimum Lot Size 
And Dimensions Minimum Yard Setback (Ft) Miscellaneous 
Lot Requirements Code Zoning District Area 
Sq. Ft. Width 
Ft. Depth 
Ft. Front 
Ft. Rear Adj Non-Res Zone Rear Adj. Res Zone Side Adj Non-Res Zone Side Adj Res Zone Max Ht. 
Ft. Max Imperv Cover Key OP Office/ Professional 6,000 60 100 25 0 25 0 25 35 70% a, b, c, d NS Neighborhood Services 10,000 100 100 25a 0 25 0 25 35 80% a, b, c, d GB General Business 10,000 100 100 25 0 25 0 25 120 80% a, b, c, d GB-2 General Business-2 10,000 100 100 25 0 25 0 25 120 80% a, b, c, d M-1 Light Manufacturing 10,000 100 100 25 0 50c 0 25b 120 80% a, b, c, d M-2 Heavy Manufacturing 10,000 100 100 25 0 50c 0 25b 120 80% a, b, c, d PUB Public Use District 10,000 100 100 25 0 15 0 25 35 70% a, c, d Key: a. See Article 10 for parking requirements. b. Uses may require a Specific Use Permit. The City of Schertz will follow the guidelines outlined in the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) study for Randolph Air Force Base. c. No variances may be permitted to exceed the maximum impervious cover limitations. d. Refer to Article 14, Sec. 21.14.3 for additional design requirements.  
B.  Additional Dimensional and Development Standards. 
1.  All lots developed for residential purposes shall comply with the lot area, minimum setbacks and height requirements established in table 21.5.7A for the zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is/are located. All lots developed for allowed non-residential purposes, within residential zoning districts, shall comply with lot, area and height requirements established in table 21.5.7A for the zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is/are located. 
2.  All lots developed for non-residential purposes shall comply with lot, area, minimum setbacks, and maximum height requirements established for the zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is located, as established in table 21.5.7B. 
3.  All lots shall have at least the minimum area, width and depth as indicated in the tables 21.5.7A and 21.5.7B in this section. 
4.  Platted subdivisions established by a duly approved plat filed prior to adoption of this UDC shall be exempt from meeting any new lot width, depth, and/or square footage requirements. 
5.  No lot existing at the time of passage of this UDC shall be reduced in size below the minimum area requirements set forth in tables 21.5.7A and 21.5.7B. 
6.  Minimum lot size requirements shall not apply to previously platted lots that are annexed into the City, but shall apply in the event of a vacation and replat of such property. All other requirements of this UDC shall nevertheless apply. 
7.  No portion of any building on a residential lot may be located on any lot closer to any lot line or to the street right-of-way line than is authorized in table 21.5.7A set forth in this section unless otherwise listed below: 
a.  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard setback shall comply with the requirements of most restrictive district for the entire frontage between the nearest intersecting streets. 
b.  Where the building setback line has been established by plat and exceeds the requirements of this UDC, the more restrictive setback line shall apply. 
c.  The front yard setback shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace, or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard, not to exceed two (2) feet. 
d.  Side Yards: Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting not to exceed twelve (12) inches into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches into the required side yard. 
e.  Rear Yards: Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for accessory buildings, uses and structures as permitted and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches into the required rear yard. 
f.  Where lots have double frontage, running from one street to another, a required front yard setback shall be provided on both streets. 
g.  Mixed Use Building: In a building serving dwelling and other uses, in any district, the height and area regulations applicable to non-residential buildings shall apply. 
h.  There shall not be more than one (1) residential dwelling on a platted lot of a duly recorded plat of a single-family residential use. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 3, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-S-47 , § 3, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 21.5.8. - Permitted Use Table. 
A.  Use of Land and Buildings. Structures, land or premises shall be used only in accordance with the use permitted in the following use table subject to compliance with the dimensional and development standards for the applicable zoning district and all other applicable requirements of this UDC. 
B.  Permitted Principal Uses. No principal use shall be permitted in any district unless it appears in the following permitted use table. 
1.  Legend for the permitted use table: 
P Use is permitted in district indicated S Use is permitted in district indicated upon approval of Specific Use Permit Use is prohibited in district indicated  
Table 21.5.8 Permitted Uses-Uses by Alphabetical Order RESIDENTIAL USES COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES PRE AD RA R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-6 R-7 MHS MHP GH TH OP NS GB GB-2 M-1 M-2 PUB Predevelopment Agricultural 
District Residential/ 
Agricultural Single Family - 1 Single Family - 2 Two Family Apartment/ 
Multi-Family Single 
Family - 6 Single 
Family - 7 Manufactured 
Home Subdivision Manufactured 
Home Park Garden Home MSMU Townhome 
District PERMITTED USES Office & 
Professional Neighborhood 
Service General Business General Business - 2 Manufacturing - 
Light Manufacturing - 
Heavy Public Use District P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory Building, Residential P P Agricultural/Field Crops P P Airport, Heliport or Landing Field S P P Alcohol Package Sales P P P P Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial S S S S S P Antique Shop P P P P Appliances, Furniture and Home Furnishings Store P P P P P Art Gallery/Library/Museum P P P P P Assisted Care or Living Facility S P P Athletic Stadium, Private S S S S S Athletic Stadium, Public P Automobile Parking Structure/Garage S P P P S Automobile Parts Sales P P P P Automobile Repairs & Service, Major S P P Automobile Repairs & Service, Minor P P P Automobile Sales S P P P Bakery P P P P Bank, Saving and Loan, Credit Union P P P P P P Beauty Salon/Barber Shop P P P P P S S S S S S S S S S S P Bed and Breakfast Inn S P P P Book Store S P P P Bottling Works P P S Building Material and Hardware Sales P P P Cabinet or Upholstery Shop S P P Car Wash, Automated P P P P Car Wash, Self Serve S P P P S S Cemetery or Mausoleum P S S S S S S S S S S S S S S Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of Worship P P P P P P P Civic/Convention Center P P P P P College, University, Trade, or Private Boarding School P P P P Commercial Amusement, Indoor S P P P Commercial Amusement, Outdoor S P P Community Center P P P P Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant S S Convenience Store w/o Gas Pumps P P P P Convenience Store w/ Gas Pumps S S S Dance Hall/Night Club P P P P Day Care Center S P P Department Store P P P Dry Cleaning, Major S P P P Dry Cleaning, Minor P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Family or Group Home S P P P P Farmers Market P P P Flea Market, Inside P P P S Flea Market, Outside S P P P Florist S P P P Fraternity, Sorority, Civic Club or Lodge P P Furniture Sales S P P P Gasoline Station/Fuel Pumps S S S P P P P P P P P P P P Gated Community General Manufacturing/Industrial Use P P S P P P P P P P P P P P Golf Course and/or Country Club P P P P Governmental Facilities P P P P P P P P Gymnastics/Dance Studio P P P P P Hazardous Waste S P Health/Fitness Center P P P P P S Heavy Equipment Sales, Service or Rental P P P P Home Improvement Center P P P Hospital P P P Hotel/Motel P P P P Household Appliance Service and Repair P P P S S S S S S S S S S In-Home Day Care Landfill S Laundromat P P P P P Livestock P P P P Locksmith/Security System Company P P P P Medical, Dental or Professional Office/Clinic P P P P P Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage S P P S P P Manufactured/Mobile Homes Manufacturing P P Mortuary/Funeral Home P P P S P Multi-Family Apartment Dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P P P Municipal Uses Operated by the City of Schertz P P P P P P P P Museum S P P S Nursery, Major S P P P Nursery, Minor P P P Office Showroom P P P Office-Warehouse/Distribution Center P P P P P One-Family Dwelling Attached P P P P P P P P P P P P One-Family Dwelling Detached P Packaging/Mailing Store P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Park/Playground/Similar Public Site Pawn Shop P P P Pet Store P P P P Pharmacy S P P P Portable Building Sales S P P Post Office P P P P P P P Print Shop, Major P P P Print Shop, Minor P P P P P Private Club P P P P Railroad/Bus Passenger Station S P P S S P Recreational Vehicle Park Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service P Recycling Collection Center P P P Recycling Collection Point P P P P P P P Recycling Facility S S Rehabilitation Care Facility S P Restaurant, Drive-In P P P P S Restaurant or Cafeteria P P P P P P Retail Stores and Shops P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P School, Public or Private P P P P P P P Sexually Oriented Business (See Ordinance No. 02-L-16) S P P Stable, Commercial P P Storage or Wholesale Warehouse S P P Tattoo Parlors/Studios P Tavern S P P S Taxidermist P P P Theater, Outdoor P P P Theater, Indoor S P P P S Tool Rental S P P P Trailer/Manufactured Homes Sales P P P Truck Sales, Heavy Equipment P P Truck Terminal S P P P P Two-Family Dwelling P Veterinarian Clinic/Kennel, Indoor S P P P P P Veterinarian Clinic/Kennel, Outdoor S P P S Welding/Machine Shop P P P P Wrecking or Salvage Yard S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S New and Unlisted Uses S S S S S S S  
C.  New and Unlisted Uses. 
1.  It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in the City. In order to provide for such contingencies, a determination of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made in accordance with this section. 
2.  For uses in which an applicant requests a Specific Use Permit, the City Manager or his/her designee shall follow the procedures for granting an SUP in accordance with section 21.5.11 of this UDC. 
3.  It is recognized that the permitted use chart may require amendment, from time to time, to allow for uses that were otherwise not permitted. In the event an amendment to the permitted use chart is required, the procedure for the amendment shall be the same as required for an amendment to the text of the UDC in accordance with section 21.4.7 of this UDC. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 4, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-S-47 , § 4, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 21.5.9. - Special districts. 
A.  Air Installation Compatible Use Zone District (AICUZ). 
1.  Established to provide control on encroachment around a military airfield, encroachment that could destroy the harmonious relationship existing between the local community and a military airfield. This could eventually lead to the removal of the airfield, which would affect the economy of the area. Restrictions established in accordance with suggested guidelines and studies published by the military will control the development, construction and density of the area. The area is subject to high frequency of noise from aircraft and is at high risk to potential aircraft accidents. All uses and regulations contained within the AICUZ shall be in accordance with the AICUZ study and regulations published by Randolph Air Force Base. 
2.  A request for development that is not a permitted use by the AICUZ Study, as adopted by the City, or a request for zoning change for property located within the AICUZ requires written notification to Randolph Air Force Base (RAFB) of the proposed development, type occupancy, occupant load, hours of operation, and any special conditions of the project that may include noise, dust, smoke emissions, etc., and any proposed request for a zone change within the AICUZ, with applicable reference the Standard Land Use Code Manual (SLUCM) as adopted in the AICUZ Study. An acknowledgment from RAFB will be requested on the proposed development within 60 days. RAFB may conclude that the proposed development or zoning change should be permitted. Unless RAFB affirmatively recommends to the City that the proposed development or zoning change in the AICUZ be permitted, the development or zoning change will not be approved by the City. Failure on the part of RAFB to respond within 60 days will be deemed to be disapproval. 
B.  Planned Development District (PDD). A contiguous land area of a minimum size, as specified by this UDC and this Article, to be planned and developed using a common master zoning plan, and containing one or more uses and appurtenant common areas. 
C.  Agricultural Conservation Planned Development District (ACPDD). Intended to provide an alternative cluster neighborhood option in areas designated as agricultural conservation on the North and South Schertz Framework Plans. Residences in this district may be on lots smaller than five acres provided the district maintains an overall gross residential density of 0.2 DU/Acre and provide a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of gross area of the development in open space or conservation easement (public or private ownership). The open space may remain in a natural state or be used for agricultural purposes. The AGC shall be a contiguous land area of 40 acres in size, as specified by this UDC and this Article (section 21.5.12), to be planned and developed using a common master zoning plan, and containing single-family residential and/or agricultural uses and preserved open space. 
D.  Estate Neighborhood Planned Development District (ENPDD). Intended to provide for an alternative zoning option for areas in the South Schertz Framework Plan designated as Estate Neighborhood or zoned RA. Residences in this district may be on lots smaller than 0.5 acres provided the district maintains an overall gross residential density of two DU/Acre and provide a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of gross area of the development in open space or conservation easement (public or private ownership). The open space may remain in a natural state or be used for agricultural purposes. The EN shall be a contiguous land area of at least 20 acres in size, as specified by the UDC and this Article (section 21.5.13), to be planned and developed using a common master zoning plan, and containing single-family residential and/or agricultural uses and preserved open space. 
F.  Mixed Use Planned Development District (MUPDD). Intended to implement mixed use and traditional neighborhood development goals (i.e., mixed use core, neighborhood center, and neighborhood designations) of the North and South Schertz Framework Plans. The MU district shall be a contiguous land area of a minimum size, as specified by this UDC and this Article (section 21.5.14), to be planned and developed using a common master zoning plan, and containing a complementary mix of residential, office, retail, civic, and service uses, a network of pedestrian-oriented streets and open spaces. 
G.  Design Overlay Districts (DO). The purpose of this section is to provide a set of Design Overlay Districts that correspond with existing zoning and establish a coherent character and encourage enduring and attractive development that implement the North and South Schertz Framework Plans and the Schertz Downtown Plan. All development within the Design Overlay Districts shall meet the Dimensional and Development standards within section 21.5.15 in lieu of the standards in section 21.5.7 unless specified otherwise. The four (4) Design Overlay Districts are: Campus Commercial Overlay District, Highway Commercial Overlay District, Industrial Overlay District, and Downtown Overlay District. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 5, 7-16-2013 ) 
Sec. 21.5.10. - Planned development district. 
A.  Applicability. The purpose of the Planned Development District is to promote and encourage innovative development that is sensitive to surrounding land uses and to the natural environment. If this necessitates varying from available zoning districts, the proposed development should demonstrate community benefits. A PDD should not be used to deviate from the provisions of this UDC in a way that contradicts its intent. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a PDD shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. A request for a PDD may be accompanied by an application for amendment of the Future Land Use Map or by a Subdivision Master Plan. Approval of a PDD shall require all subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved development regulations. 
3.  Tax Certificate Required. All applications made as a request for a PDD shall be accompanied by a copy of a Tax Certificate. 
4.  Minimum Planned Development District Size. No PDD may be established on any area less than the following in size: 
a.  Single family residential: two (2) acres; 
b.  Multifamily residential: two (2) acres; 
c.  Nonresidential: two (2) acres; or 
d.  Mixed residential and nonresidential: five (5) acres. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a PDD shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other City department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification requirements. An application for a Planned Development District requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3: 
a.  Written notice prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and 
b.  Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. 
3.  Commission recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 and make a written recommendation regarding a PDD to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a PDD and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision. 
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  Development standards for each PDD shall be set forth in an ordinance granting the PDD and may include but shall not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate. 
2.  In the PDD, the particular district(s) to which uses specified in the PDD are most similar shall be stated in the granting ordinance. All PDD applications shall list all requested variances from the standard requirements set forth throughout this UDC (applications without this list will be considered incomplete). 
3.  The ordinance granting a PDD shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PDD granted therein. A specific list is required of variances in each district or districts and a general statement citing the reason for the PDD request. 
4.  The PDD shall conform to all other sections of the UDC unless specifically exempted in the granting ordinance. 
E.  Conceptual and Development Plan. In establishing a PDD, the City Council shall approve and file, as part of the granting ordinance, appropriate plans and standards for each PDD. During the review and public hearing process a development plan (or detailed master plan) shall be submitted. 
1.  Conceptual Plan. The applicant shall submit a conceptual plan. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed PDD in a graphic manner and shall be supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. 
a.  A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use, thoroughfares, and preliminary lot arrangements. For residential development which does not propose platted lots, the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type, and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and other pertinent development data. 
b.  A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the City Council, may include, but is not limited to, the types of use(s), topography, and boundary of the planned development area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements, location of future public facilities, building heights and locations, parking ratios, and other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is used in drafting the final development plan. 
c.  Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building height, or coverage of the site and which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site, or significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee. If an agreement can not be reached regarding whether or not a change of detail conforms to the original concept plan, the City Council shall determine the conformity. 
2.  Development Plan. This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the PDD and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit. The Development Plan shall be acted upon by the City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The development plan may be submitted for the total area or any section of the planned development. The development plan shall include: 
a.  A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing of existing vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development and including a delineation of any flood prone areas; 
b.  A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing and proposed streets; general location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains; the location and width for all curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract with the topographical contour interval of not more than five (5) feet; 
c.  A Site Plan in accordance with section 21.12.14 of this UDC; 
d.  A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental planting, wooded areas, and trees to be planted; and 
e.  An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development. Any or all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is clear and can be evaluated by the City Staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. 
F.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action on a PDD, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  Whether the proposed PDD implements the policies of the adopted Comprehensive Land Plan; 
2.  Whether the proposed PDD promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
3.  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district classification and the standards applicable to such uses will be appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified; 
4.  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers or other public services and utilities to the area; 
5.  The extent to which the proposed PDD will result in a superior development than could be achieved through conventional zoning; 
6.  Whether all of the applicant's back taxed owed to the City have been paid in full (no application will receive final approval until all back taxes are paid in full); and, 
7.  Whether other criteria are met which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. 
G.  Amendments. The City Manager or his/her designee may permit the applicant to make minor amendments to the Conceptual Plan without the necessity of amending the ordinance that established the PDD. If the proposed amendments change and/or impact the nature or purposes of the approved PDD, whether individually or cumulatively, the City Manager may deny the request for approval of the modifications and provide the applicant with the opportunity to revise the proposed amendments to bring them into compliance with the PDD. If an applicant wishes to make any amendments to an approved Concept Plan other than minor amendments approved by the City Manager, the City Manager will submit the amendments to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council for review and approval as a revised PDD. Minor amendments shall only be as follows: 
1.  Corrections in spelling, distances and other labeling that do not affect the overall development concept; 
2.  Changes in building position or layout that are less than ten feet or ten percent (10%) of the total building project or area; 
3.  Changes in proposed property lines as long as the original total project acreage is not exceeded, and the area of any base zoning district is not changed by more than five percent (5%); and 
4.  Changes in parking layouts as long as the number of required spaces and general original design are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.5.11. - Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
A.  Applicability. Specific Use Permits allow for discretionary City Council approval of uses with unique or widely varying operating characteristics or unusual site development features, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this UDC. These uses and the districts where they may be located are listed in Table 21.5.8. Certain uses located within the AICUZ zone require an SUP. Approval of a Specific Use Permit authorizes a property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the approved sup. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a Specific Use Permit (SUP) shall be accompanied by an application and SUP exhibit prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. An application for a Specific Use Permit shall be accompanied by a Site Plan prepared in accordance with section 21.12.14. Approval of a Site Plan as part of a Specific Use Permit shall meet the requirements for Site Plan approval under section 21.12.14. 
3.  Tax Certificate Required. All applications made as a request for a Specific Use Permit shall be accompanied by a copy of a Tax Certificate. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a Specific Use Permit shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at its option, request a recommendation from any other City Department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification requirements. An application for a Specific Use Permit requires the following notification in accordance with section 21.4.3: 
a.  Written notice prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and 
b.  Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. 
3.  Commission Recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4 and make a written recommendation regarding a proposed Specific Use Permit to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the SUP. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  Decision by City Council. The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a proposed Specific Use Permit and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and section 21.4.4. The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the SUP. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a certain date that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current consideration in order to review additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action on a Specific Use Permit, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the policies embodied in the adopted Comprehensive Land Plan; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; 
3.  The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent developments and neighborhoods, and includes improvements either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development related adverse impacts, such as safety, traffic, noise, odors, visual nuisances, drainage or other similar adverse effects to adjacent development and neighborhoods; 
4.  The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be hazardous or conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; 
5.  The proposed use incorporates roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development generated traffic on neighborhood streets; 
6.  The proposed use incorporates features to minimize adverse effects, including visual impacts, of the proposed use on adjacent properties; 
7.  The proposed use meets the standards for the zoning district, or to the extent variations from such standards have been requested, that such variations are necessary to render the use compatible with adjoining development and the neighborhood; 
8.  The proposed use and associated Site Plan promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; 
9.  No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until all back taxes owed to the City have been paid in full; and 
10.  Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the Specific Use Permit. 
E.  Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in considering final action, may require such modifications in the proposed use and attach such conditions to the Specific Use Permit as deemed necessary to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use and to carry out the spirit and intent of this section. Conditions and modifications may include but are not limited to limitation of building size or height, increased open space, limitations on impervious surfaces, enhanced loading and parking requirements, additional landscaping, curbing, sidewalk, vehicular access and parking improvements, placement or orientation of buildings and entryways, buffer yards, landscaping and screening, signage restrictions and design, maintenance of buildings and outdoor areas, duration of the permit and hours of operation. 
F.  Expiration of Specific Use Permit. A Specific Use Permit shall expire if any of the following occurs: 
1.  A building permit, if necessary, for the use has not been approved within one (1) year after the approval of the SUP; 
2.  A building permit approved as a result of the approval of the SUP expires within two (2) years after the approval of the SUP; 
3.  The use has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of time exceeding six (6) months; or 
4.  The SUP expires in accordance with its terms. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.5.12. - Agricultural Conservation Planned Development District (ACPDD). 
A.  Intent and Purpose. 
1.  The Agricultural Conservation (AC) District is intended to provide an alternative development option that supports the sustainable development goals of Schertz, protects open space and natural resources, and retains the predominantly rural character in the areas designated as agricultural conservation on the South and North Schertz Framework Plans. It is not the intent of Schertz to create a zone for future expansion of urban services through this ordinance. 
2.  The purposes of the AC District are: 
a.  To implement the goals of the Schertz Comprehensive Plan and Framework Plans for agricultural conservation; 
b.  To allow development that permanently preserves the open space, agricultural lands, woodlands, wetlands, critical views and other natural features of rural Schertz; 
c.  To allow limited development in rural areas that do not contain natural resources, such as agricultural and forest lands, and significant natural areas; 
d.  To connect open space, trails, and recreation sites within the conservation subdivision district and to the integrated open space and recreation system of Schertz per the Framework Plan and Parks and Open Space Plan; 
e.  To allow flexibility in the placement and type of dwelling units within the subdivision; 
f.  To promote the use of shared septic, drinking water and low-impact stormwater systems that prevent the degradation of water quality; 
g.  To reduce the amount of new roads and to allow flexibility in road specifications for roads serving residences in the district; and 
h.  To reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in subdivisions, including driveways. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this section of the UDC only. For terms not specifically defined under this subsection, article 16, definitions shall apply. 
    Active recreation uses: Shall include playgrounds, ball fields, indoor or outdoor pool/recreation facilities, any recreational area that includes significant infrastructure or physical improvements for the purposes of active sports or organized events (such as ball fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, golf courses, and similar facilities). 
    Agricultural conservation subdivision (ACS): Any subdivision of land per the standards in this section of the UDC. 
    Agricultural land: Land whose primary use is devoted to agriculture as defined in article 16. 
    Conservation easement: A conservation easement is a written agreement between a landowner and the "holder" of the conservation easement under which a landowner voluntarily restricts certain uses of the property to protect its natural, productive or cultural features. The holder of the conservation easement must be a governmental entity or a qualified conservation organization. With a conservation easement, the landowner retains legal title to the property and determines the types of land uses to continue and those to restrict. As part of the arrangement, the landowner grants the holder of the conservation easement the right to periodically assess the condition of the property to ensure that it is maintained according to the terms of the legal agreement. 
    Designated open space: Open space that is designated within an ACS to be placed under a conservation easement permanently restricting future development or other similar legal mechanism. 
    Developable area: All land in a proposed ACS that are not defined as undevelopable due to environmental conditions or in ordinances adopted by Schertz. 
    Gross density: A residential density standard establishing the maximum number of dwelling units allowed to be built in an ACS based on the gross acreage of the site that includes all areas designated for streets, infrastructure, and open space. 
    Undevelopable area: Those lands in a proposed ACS that are restricted from development due to environmental conditions such as steep slopes, the presence of wetlands or waterways, or are restricted from development under ordinances adopted by Schertz. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for an AC District shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying applications. A request for an AC District may be accompanied by an application for amendment of the future land use map or by a Subdivision Master Plan. Approval of an AC District shall require all subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved development regulations. 
3.  Tax Certificate Required. All applications made as a request for an AC District shall be accompanied by a copy of a tax certificate. 
4.  Minimum AC District Size. No AC District may be established on any area less than the following in size: 
a.  Forty (40) contiguous acres (under single or multiple ownership subject to joint submission); 
b.  Any area that is contiguous with an existing AC District that results in a total area of at least fifty (50) acres. 
D.  Processing of Application and Decision. All applications for an AC District shall meet the standards for the processing of application and decision of a PDD in subsection 21.5.10.C. as amended. 
E.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted by right and by Special Use Permit in the AC District shall be the same as the ones permitted by right and Special Use Permit in the Residential/Agricultural (RA) District. 
F.  Development Standards. Development in the AC District shall meet the standards in this section in addition to other standards set forth in an ordinance granting the AC District. Other development standards may include density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate. 
1.  Residential density. The maximum gross density established in AC District shall be 0.2 dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Open Space Requirement. 
a.  Conservation subdivisions shall identify a conservation theme. Conservation themes may include, but are not limited to: forest preservation, water quality preservation, creek preservation, farmland preservation, or view shed preservation. The conservation theme and the North and South Schertz Framework Plans should guide the location and use of the designated open space. 
b.  A minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the gross total acreage in the application, including developable and undevelopable land, shall be designated as open space for natural habitat, passive recreation, and/or conservation or preservation, including conservation for agricultural and forestry uses. Active recreation uses may be permitted, but the area designated for such active recreation uses shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total required open space. The design criteria for such open space shall be as follows: 
i.  Where possible, designated open space shall be contiguous with open space uses on adjacent parcels in order to provide large expanses of open space. 
ii.  Open space in AC Districts shall be physically connected, whenever possible, to the Schertz Open Space System outlined in the Schertz Parks Master Plan and North and South Schertz Framework Plans. Designated public trail systems which abut an AC District shall be connected through the subdivision. 
iii.  Access shall be provided to designated active or passive recreation areas or open space or natural areas from one or more streets in the subdivision. 
iv.  Access will not be required if the open space is to remain in active agriculture or forestry or if the natural areas contain habitat where public access should be limited. 
c.  Open Space Ownership and Management. All lands and improvements in designated open space shall be established, managed and maintained in accordance with the following guidelines: 
i.  Designated open space shall be surveyed and subdivided as a separate parcel or parcels. 
ii.  Designated open space must be restricted from further development by a permanent conservation easement running with the land or other similar legal instrument. The permanent conservation easement must be submitted with the application for an AC District and approved by City Council. 
iii.  The permanent conservation easement may be held by the following entities, but in no case may the holder of the conservation easement be the same as the owner of the underlying fee: 
(a)  A common ownership association which owns other land within the subdivision and in which membership in the association by all property owners in the subdivision shall be mandatory; 
(b)  An individual who will use the land in accordance with the permanent conservation easement; 
(c)  City of Schertz, or other governmental agency; 
(d)  A private, nonprofit organization that has been designated by the Internal Revenue Service as qualifying under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; or 
(e)  A combination of the entities in subsection (a)-(d) above. 
iv.  The permanent conservation easement must specify: 
(a)  what entity will maintain the designated open space; 
(b)  the purposes of the conservation easement and the conservation values of the property; 
(c)  the legal description of the land under the easement; 
(d)  the restrictions on the use of the land; 
(e)  the restriction from future development of the land; 
(f)  to what standards the open space will be maintained; and 
(g)  who will have access to the open space. 
v.  The owner of the underlying fee shall be responsible for the payment of taxes and assessments on any designated open space parcel. 
3.  Utilities. Individual well and septic systems are allowed in AC subdivisions, however, common utilities (shared water and/or sewer or septic systems) are encouraged. Common utilities shall meet the City's standards for sewage treatment systems. 
4.  Streets. Streets within the conservation subdivision shall be developed according to the following standards that promote road safety, minimize visual impacts, and minimize impervious surfaces: 
a.  Street design, widths and construction shall conform to the width and standards contained in the street cross section without curb and gutters (or low speed rural cross section) and as recommended in the North and South Schertz Sector Plans. 
b.  The number of local street intersections with collector and arterial roads should be minimized, however, the applicant must demonstrate that such intersections are adequate, have the capacity to handle traffic generated by the proposed project, and will not endanger the safety of the general public. 
c.  If AC subdivisions abut one another or existing development, direct links should be made to emphasize the connection between existing and new development. 
G.  Conceptual and Development Plan. All applications for an AC District shall meet the standards for conceptual and development plan established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(E) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the AC District. 
H.  Criteria for Approval. All applications for an AC District shall meet the criteria for approval established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(F) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the AC District. 
I.  Amendments. All applications for an AC District shall meet the standards for conceptual amendments established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(G) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the AC District. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 6, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.5.13. - Estate Neighborhood Planned Development District (ENPDD). 
A.  Intent and Purpose. 
1.  The Estate Neighborhood (EN) District is intended to provide an alternative development option that supports the sustainable development goals of Schertz, protects open space and natural resources, and retains the predominantly rural character in the areas designated as Estate Neighborhood on the South Schertz Framework Plan. It shall be the alternative option to the RA zoning district. 
2.  The purposes of the EN District are: 
a.  To implement the goals of the Schertz Comprehensive Plan and Framework Plans for areas already zoned for 1/2 acre residential lots; 
b.  To allow development that balances open space preservation with development opportunities by providing a more flexible residential cluster option; 
c.  To connect open space, trails, and recreation sites within the EN District and to the integrated open space and recreation system of Schertz per the Framework Plan and Parks and Open Space Plan. 
e.  To allow flexibility in the placement and type of dwelling units within the subdivision; 
f.  To promote the use of shared septic, drinking water and low-impact stormwater systems that prevent the degradation of water quality; 
g.  To reduce the amount of new roads and to allow flexibility in road specifications for roads serving residences in the District; and 
h.  To reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in subdivisions, including driveways. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this Section of the UDC only. For terms not specifically defined under this subsection, Article 16, Definitions shall apply. 
    Active Recreation Uses: shall include playgrounds, ball fields, indoor or outdoor pool/recreation facilities, any recreational area that includes significant infrastructure or physical improvements for the purposes of active sports or organized events (such as ball fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, golf courses, and similar facilities). 
    Agricultural Land: Land whose primary use is devoted to agriculture as defined in Article 16. 
    Conservation Easement: A conservation easement is a written agreement between a landowner and the "holder" of the conservation easement under which a landowner voluntarily restricts certain uses of the property to protect its natural, productive or cultural features. The holder of the conservation easement must be a governmental entity or a qualified conservation organization. With a conservation easement, the landowner retains legal title to the property and determines the types of land uses to continue and those to restrict. As part of the arrangement, the landowner grants the holder of the conservation easement the right to periodically assess the condition of the property to ensure that it is maintained according to the terms of the legal agreement. 
    Designated Open Space: Open space that is designated within an ENS to be placed under a conservation easement permanently restricting future development or other similar legal mechanism. 
    Developable Area: All land in a proposed ENS that are not defined as undevelopable due to environmental conditions or in ordinances adopted by Schertz. 
    Estate Neighborhood Subdivision (ENS): Any subdivision of land per the standards in this Section of the UDC. 
    Gross Density: A residential density standard establishing the maximum number of dwelling units allowed to be built in an ENS based on the gross acreage of the site that includes all areas designated for streets, infrastructure, and open space. 
    Undevelopable Area: Those lands in a proposed ENS that are restricted from development due to environmental conditions such as steep slopes, the presence of wetlands or waterways, or are restricted from development under ordinances adopted by Schertz. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for an EN District shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. A request for an EN District may be accompanied by an application for amendment of the Future Land Use Map or by a Subdivision Master Plan. Approval of an EN District shall require all subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved development regulations. 
3.  Tax Certificate Required. All applications made as a request for an EN District shall be accompanied by a copy of a Tax Certificate. 
4.  Minimum EN District Size. No EN District may be established on any area less than the following in size: 
a.  20 contiguous acres (under single or multiple ownership subject to joint submission); 
b.  Any area that is contiguous with an existing EN District that results in a total area of at least 25 acres. 
D.  Processing of Application and Decision. All applications for an EN District shall meet the standards for the Processing of Application and Decision of a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10.(C) as amended. 
E.  Permitted Uses. Uses permitted by right and by special use permit in the EN District shall be the same as the ones permitted by right and Special Use Permit in the Residential/Agricultural (RA) District. 
F.  Development Standards. Development in the EN District shall meet the standards in this section in addition to other standards set forth in an ordinance granting the EN District. Other development standards may include density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate. 
1.  Residential density. The maximum gross density established in EN District shall be 2 dwelling units per acre. 
2.  Open Space Requirement. 
a.  A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the gross total acreage in the application, including developable and undevelopable land, shall be designated as open space for natural habitat, passive recreation, and/or conservation or preservation, including conservation for agricultural and forestry uses. Active recreation uses may be permitted, but the area designated for such active recreation uses shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total required open space. The design criteria for such open space shall be as follows: 
i.  Where possible, priority shall be placed on preserving drainage corridors, creeks, steep slopes, wooded areas, view sheds, and other environmental elements that can be featured within the EN District. Where possible, designated open space shall be contiguous with existing open space uses on adjacent parcels in order to provide large expanses of open space. 
ii.  Open space in EN Districts shall be physically connected, whenever possible, to the Schertz Open Space System outlined in the Schertz Parks Master Plan and North and South Schertz Framework Plans. Designated public trail systems which abut an EN District shall be connected through the subdivision. 
iii.  Access shall be provided to designated active or passive recreation areas or open space or natural areas from one or more streets in the EN subdivision. 
iv.  Access will not be required if the open space is to remain in active agriculture or forestry or if the natural areas contain habitat where public access should be limited. 
c.  Open Space Ownership and Management. All lands and improvements in designated open space shall be established, managed and maintained in accordance with the following guidelines: 
i.  Designated open space shall be surveyed and subdivided as a separate parcel or parcels. 
ii.  Designated open space must be restricted from further development by a permanent conservation easement running with the land or other similar legal instrument. The permanent conservation easement must be submitted with the application for an EN District and approved by City Council. 
iii.  The permanent conservation easement may be held by the following entities, but in no case may the holder of the conservation easement be the same as the owner of the underlying fee: 
(a)  A common ownership association which owns other land within the subdivision and in which membership in the association by all property owners in the subdivision shall be mandatory; 
(b)  An individual who will use the land in accordance with the permanent conservation easement; 
(c)  City of Schertz, or other governmental agency; 
(d)  A private, nonprofit organization that has been designated by the Internal Revenue Service as qualifying under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; or 
(e)  A combination of the entities in subsection (a)-(d) above. 
iv.  The permanent conservation easement must specify: 
(a)  what entity will maintain the designated open space. 
(b)  the purposes of the conservation easement and the conservation values of the property; 
(c)  the legal description of the land under the easement; 
(d)  the restrictions on the use of the land; 
(e)  the restriction from future development of the land; 
(f)  to what standards the open space will be maintained; and 
(g)  who will have access to the open space. 
v.  The owner of the underlying fee shall be responsible for the payment of taxes and assessments on any designated open space parcel. 
3.  Streets. Streets within the EN subdivision shall be developed according to the following standards that promote road safety, minimize visual impacts, and minimize impervious surfaces: 
a.  Street design, widths and construction shall conform to the width and standards contained in the street cross section without curb and gutters (or low speed rural cross section) and or recommended in the North and South Schertz Sector Plans. 
b.  The number of local street intersections with collector and arterial roads should be minimized, however, the applicant must demonstrate that such intersections are adequate, have the capacity to handle traffic generated by the proposed project, and will not endanger the safety of the general public. 
c.  If EN subdivisions abut one another or existing development, direct links should be made to emphasize the connection between existing and new development. 
G.  Conceptual and Development Plan. All applications for an EN District shall meet the standards for Conceptual and Development Plan established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(E) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the EN District. 
H.  Criteria for Approval. All applications for an EN District shall meet the Criteria for Approval established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(F) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the EN District. 
I.  Amendments. All applications for an EN District shall meet the standards for Conceptual Amendments established for a PDD in Sec. 21.5.10(G) to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the EN District. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.5.14. - Mixed Use Planned Development District (MUPDD). 
A.  Purpose & Intent. The purpose and intent of the Mixed Use Zoning District (MU) is to implement the Mixed Use land use category guidelines established in the City's Sector Plan. The MU Zoning District is intended to: 
1.  allow a mixture of complementary land uses that include housing, retail, offices, commercial services, and civic uses to create economic vitality and a potential rail-ready development context; 
2.  emphasize vehicular and pedestrian connectivity to adjacent land uses that balance neighborhood integrity with the transportation benefits of connectivity; 
3.  establish a high level of development standards to create development of exemplary and enduring quality; 
4.  encourage the development of vertical and horizontal mixed-use areas that are safe, comfortable and attractive to pedestrians while protecting significant environmentally sensitive areas; 
5.  provide flexibility in the siting and design of new developments and redevelopment to anticipate changes in the marketplace while establishing human-scaled residential and non-residential buildings; 
6.  leverage any significant environmental features on the site and treat them as "features" and not constraints; 
7.  create of a variety of connected community gathering places and entertainment opportunities of differing scales and character to make walking easy from one place to another; 
8.  include a range of residential options that reflect changing lifestyles while balancing market demand and community preferences; 
9.  provide appropriate transitions to protect any existing adjacent neighborhoods and to promote sustained value; and 
10.  encourage efficient uses of land by facilitating compact development and minimizing the amount of land that is needed for surface parking. 
B.  Relationship to the City of Schertz Sector Plan and Comprehensive Plan. The MU Zoning District implements the following goals of the sector plan: 
1.  Encourage Mixed Use within a rail-ready development context at the potential Lone Star Rail Station North Schertz. 
2.  Support an orderly transition of development from IH-35 to rail-ready development. 
3.  Encourage Mixed Use in a Neighborhood Center setting at FM 1518 and Lower Seguin with a well designed neighborhood context around existing schools and amenities in South Schertz. 
C.  Applicability. The MU Zoning District shall be applicable to all properties that are designated as Mixed Use Core and Mixed Use Neighborhood in the City of Schertz's Framework and Sector Plan. 
D.  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to uses and category of uses listed in the MU schedule of uses and to other terms used in this section only. For terms not specifically defined under this subsection, Article 16 Definitions shall apply. 
    Buffer Areas Along Creeks and Flood Plains. These are areas of land parallel to each side of existing creeks and flood plains, set aside to protect riparian vegetation and filter waterborne pollutants. 
    Building Step-Back. Building step-back is the setting back of the front building façade away from the street at a specific floor or height in order to maintain a consistent street wall. 
    Civic Uses. These are uses that are related to non-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, and government functions. 
    Comprehensive Land Plan. The Comprehensive Land Plan, as amended, serves as the community's blueprint for future development by providing guidelines for the appropriate location, concentration, and intensity of future development by land use categories. 
    Conservation Easement. A conservation easement is a voluntary and permanent, legally binding, deed restriction that limits development of property for the purpose of protecting and preserving a portion of the City's environmentally sensitive and natural resources, including agricultural and ranching areas. The landowner retains title to the property and the easement applies to all subsequent owners. The easement must be held by a qualifying party approved by the City. 
    Continuous Planters. Continuous planters are tree wells between the vehicle lane/parking lane and the sidewalk. These planters run parallel along the sidewalk with a few breaks for pedestrian access from the parking lane to the sidewalk. The planters may be used for street trees and other landscaping including shrubs and ground cover to soften the edge of the pavement. 
    Environmental Preserve. An environmental preserve is natural open space reserved for land that is under permanent conservation. It consists of areas in the flood plain, woodlands to be preserved, creeks, water bodies, steep grades, and other environmentally sensitive lands. Activities in the environmental preserve shall be limited to natural trails, paths, and equestrian trails. If significant water access is available, canoe put-ins or other passive water recreation activities may be permitted. The size of an environmental preserve may vary depending upon the environmental element being preserved. Environmental preserves may also be in conservation easements. 
    Façade. Façade(s) is the front of the building facing or oriented toward a street or roadway, excluding alleyways. 
    Green. A green is an open space available for unstructured recreation. A green may be defined by landscaping rather than buildings. Its landscape consists of land and trees in a natural arrangement, requiring minimal maintenance. The size of a green shall range from 1 acre to 10 acres. 
    Horizontal Mixed Use. Horizontal mixed use is the location of different land uses, including commercial, retail, office, residential, public, and other uses in proximity to one another in separate buildings but in the same development or block. 
    Human Scale or Pedestrian Scale. Human scale is the proportional relationship of a particular building structure, or streetscape element to the human form and function. Human scale relates the size, design, orientation, and/or height of a structure to the height and mass of a pedestrian traveling along the sidewalk or street adjacent to that structure. Generally human scale buildings are oriented towards the street with appropriate design elements and amenities on the building façades fronting sidewalks to making it inviting for pedestrians. 
    Landscape Concept Plan. A landscape concept plan is a series of drawings that includes design direction and general schematics for all proposed public and private landscaping. Drawings do not have to detail every element but provide images that convey the important landscape design themes. 
    Live-work Unit. A live-work unit is a dwelling unit that is also used for work purposes, provided that the "work" component is restricted to the uses of professional office, artist's workshop, studio, or other similar uses and is located on the street level. The "live" component may be located on the street level (behind the work component) or any other level of the building. 
    Mixed Use Development. Mixed use development is any development that proposes either vertical mixed use or horizontal mixed use in the same development of one or multiple buildings. 
    Mixed Use Core. Mixed Use Core is a component area of a MU District and is intended to be the area of highest intensity of land uses and buildings within the overall Mixed Use Development. The Mixed Use Core may include retail, entertainment, office, institutional, arts, and other uses. Residential uses may be included if they are located in upper floors of mixed use buildings. 
    Mixed Use Transition. Mixed Use Transition is a component area of a MU and is intended to be an area of transition from the Mixed Use Core or Neighborhood to any adjoining land uses. Based on site-specific adjacency conditions, a Mixed Use Transition zone may be classified as one of the following: 
• Neighborhood Transition Zone-The area between an existing residential neighborhood and a Mixed Use Core or Neighborhood. 
• Major Roadway Transition zone-The area between the Mixed Use Core or Neighborhood and a major roadway corridor. 
• Environmental transition zone-The area between the Mixed Use Core or Neighborhood and a major environmental feature. 
    Mixed Use Neighborhood. A Mixed Use Neighborhood is a component area of a MU with predominantly residential uses and open spaces. A Mixed Use Neighborhood may also contain small-scaled civic uses at key locations. 
    Park. A park is a natural preserve available mainly for unstructured recreation. Any structured recreation shall be limited to less than ten percent (10%) of the park. A park is usually independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape consists of natural paths, trails, meadows, woodlands, and open shelters. Its size shall range from 5-10 acres. 
    Parks & Open Space Master Plan. The City's adopted Parks & Open Space Master Plan which establishes a comprehensive parks and trail system for the community. 
    Plaza. A plaza is an open space available for civic purposes and limited commercial activities. A plaza is spatially defined by buildings and its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement with trees being optional. Plazas are to be located in the Mixed Use Core or Transition areas and shall be under a 1/4 acre in size. Plazas can be extensions of sidewalks for the purpose of providing outdoor seating for restaurants and cafes. 
    Primary or Principal Building. The primary building on a lot is also known as the principal building and is the largest building on any lot that has more than one building. 
    Primary Entrance. The primary entrance is the main or principal pedestrian entrance of all buildings (except outbuildings). The primary entrance is the entrance designed for access by pedestrians from the sidewalk, or street if a sidewalk is not present. This is the principal architectural entrance even though day-to-day residential access may be via a secondary entrance associated with a garage, driveway or other vehicular use area. 
    Primary Street. A primary street(s) is a street that provides the main point(s) of access from an arterial or collector roadway to the Mixed Use District's interior street network. 
    Public Buildings. Public buildings are buildings used for government or related functions, including public administration, courts, libraries, community centers, and public safety functions. 
    Public Realm. The public realm is the area from building façade to building façade. This includes the street, sidewalks and pedestrian amenities, any landscaping strips or medians, parks, common yards, etc. 
    Public Street, Type A. Type A Public Streets are the primary pedestrian-oriented streets and require a higher quality design environment and minimal accommodation of auto-oriented ancillary uses (driveways and parking) with respect to streetscape and building design. 
    Public Street, Type B. Type B Public Streets form the secondary street network providing access to pedestrian oriented streets (Type A Streets) and may accommodate automobile access to properties and uses. 
    Residential Loft. Residential loft is typically a residential unit designed to commercial standards (with high ceilings, open plans, and large windows) located above street level commercial space. 
    Sector Plan. The City of Schertz Sector Plan, as amended, consisting of multiple elements, as adopted by the City Council. 
    Square. A square is generally a geometrically symmetrical open space of 1/2 to 2 acres, available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by streets and buildings, at least on three sides. Its landscape consists of paths, lawns, and trees, all formally arranged. 
    Street Tree. A street tree is a tree or group of trees that line the edge of a street or roadway and includes trees inside and outside the street right-of-way. 
    Streetscape Treatments. Streetscape treatments include all improvements in a right-of-way and adjacent to it that create an attractive and safe pedestrian environment. Treatments shall include street trees, street light standards, street furniture, and trash receptacles. Streetscape treatments may also include a range of features such as paving materials, street/pedestrian/wayfinding signs, media boxes, parking meters, utility boxes, seating, public art/water features, bike racks, bollards, information kiosks, and similar features. 
    Thoroughfare Plan. The Thoroughfare, as amended, serves as the community's blueprint for the City's future transportation network based on the future land use allocation and intensity. 
    Vertical Mixed Use. Vertical mixed use is a building or structure in which at least one of the upper floors of a commercial building has residential uses (live-work units or lofts) with retail or office uses at the other levels. 
E.  GENERAL DISTRICT STANDARDS. 
1.  Generally. A Mixed Use Zoning District shall consist of a minimum of two of the following three distinct components designated in the ordinance creating the district: a Mixed Use Core, Neighborhood, and Mixed Use Transition. Land uses in the district shall be established based upon the overall character and design of the district. All MU districts shall be a minimum of 40 acres in size or can be created by adding a minimum of 10 acres contiguous to an existing MU district. All MU districts shall contain appropriately designed and scaled open spaces to preserve existing wooded areas, stream corridors and views, and invite passive recreational activities. All MU districts shall contain appropriate transitions to adjacent land uses. These components shall be established through a Conceptual Plan and/or Development Plan at the time of rezoning. 
2.  Mixed Use Core Area. The Mixed Use Core Area shall be the primary location of the highest intensity of commercial, professional, retail and residential uses. 
3.  Neighborhood. The Neighborhood is a component area of any MU Zoning District that is predominantly residential in nature. Limited retail and civic uses may be located at key points within the neighborhood. The location of the neighborhood shall be determined based upon the overall character and design of the proposed MU district and the following criteria: 
a.  The neighborhood component is to be located adjacent to the Mixed Use Core and any Mixed Use Transitions; 
b.  The neighborhood shall be well integrated with proposed open space and other civic uses to create a sense of place; 
c.  The neighborhood shall also be integrated with proposed Mixed Use Core and/or Mixed Use Transitions in a manner that provides automobile and pedestrian access within the proposed MU Zoning District; and 
d.  Uses in the neighborhood shall be to the density and scale that is appropriate based on the context and character of the proposed district. 
4.  Mixed Use Transition. MU Zoning Districts may, at the election of the applicant and based on the development context, also include appropriate Mixed Use Transition components which are the areas between the Mixed Use Core and/or Neighborhood to adjoining conditions. 
5.  Open Space. The open space component shall be integrated into the overall design of the Mixed Use Zoning District. 
a.  The type, scale, location, and design of the open space component shall depend on the context and location of the other components of the MU district. 
b.  Square, parks, greens, and environmental preserves are encouraged in all components. Plazas may serve as open spaces and shall only be appropriate in the Mixed Use Core. 
F.  SCHEDULE OF USES. 
1.  Uses within the MU shall be in accordance with the following schedule of uses (Table 1). 
P Use is permitted in the district indicated S Use is permitted in the district indicated upon approval of Specific Use Permit P/D Use is permitted in the district indicated with additional Design Criteria Use is prohibited in the district indicated  
Table 1: Schedule of Uses MIXED USE MU-C MU-N MU-T PERMITTED USES Mixed Use-Core Mixed Use-Neighborhood Mixed Use-Transition Design Criteria for uses designated as P/D Accessory Building, Residential P P Agricultural/Field Crops Airport, Heliport or Landing Field Alcohol Package Sales S Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial Antique Shop P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Appliances, Furniture and Home Furnishings Store P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Art Gallery/Library/Museum P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Assisted Care or Living Facility P S Athletic Stadium, Private Athletic Stadium, Public Automobile Parking Structure/Garage P Automobile Parts Sales P Automobile Repairs & Service, Major Automobile Repairs & Service, Minor Automobile Sales Bakery P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Bank, Saving and Loan, Credit Union P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Beauty Salon/Barber Shop P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Bed and Breakfast Inn P S S Book Store P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Bottling Works Building Material and Hardware Sales P Cabinet or Upholstery Shop P Car Wash, Automated Car Wash, Self Serve Cemetery or Mausoleum Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of Worship P S Civic/Convention Center P College, University, Trade, or Private Boarding School P Commercial Amusement, Indoor S Commercial Amusement, Outdoor Community Center P S Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant Convenience Store w/o Gas Pumps P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Convenience Store w/ Gas Pumps P/D Gas pumps and canopy design per Section 8(g) Dance Hall/Night Club P Day Care Center P P Department Store P Drive-thru service (for any use) P/D Drive-thru service design per Section 8(g) Dry Cleaning, Major S Dry Cleaning, Minor P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Family or Group Home P S P Farmers Market P Flea Market, Inside Flea Market, Outside Florist P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Fraternity, Sorority, Civic Club or Lodge P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Furniture Sales P Gasoline Station/Fuel Pumps Gated Community General Manufacturing/Industrial Use Golf Course and/or Country Club S S S Governmental Facilities P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Gymnastics/Dance Studio P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Hazardous Waste Health/Fitness Center P Heavy Equipment Sales, Service or Rental Home Improvement Center P Hospital P Hotel/Motel P Household Appliance Service and Repair P In-Home Day Care P S S Landfill Laundromat P Livestock Locksmith/Security System Company P S Medical, Dental or Professional Office/Clinic P P Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage Manufactured/Mobile Homes Manufacturing Mortuary/Funeral Home Multi-Family Apartment Dwelling P P Municipal Uses Operated by the City P P P Museum P Neighborhood store/restaurant P P/D P/D In buildings 10,000 sq. ft. or less Nursery, Major Nursery, Minor P S Office Showroom P Office-Warehouse/Distribution Center One-Family Dwelling Attached P P One-Family Dwelling Detached P P Packaging/Mailing Store P Park/Playground/Similar Public Site P P P Pawn Shop Pet Store P Pharmacy P Portable Building Sales Post Office P Print Shop, Major Print Shop, Minor P Private Club P Railroad/Bus Passenger Station P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Recreational Vehicle Park Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Recycling Collection Center Recycling Collection Point P Recycling Facility Rehabilitation Care Facility Restaurant, Drive-In Restaurant or Cafeteria P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less Retail Stores and Shops P P/D In buildings 10,000 sq.ft. or less School, Public or Private P S S Sexually Oriented Business Stable, Commercial Storage or Wholesale Warehouse Tattoo Parlors/Studios Tavern P Taxidermist Theater, Outdoor S Theater, Indoor P Tool Rental Trailer/Manufactured Homes Sales Truck Sales, Heavy Equipment Truck Terminal Two-Family Dwelling S P Veterinarian Clin- 
ic/Kennel, 
Indoor P Veterinarian Clin- 
ic/Kennel, 
Outdoor Welding/Machine Shop Wrecking or Salvage Yard New and Unlisted Uses S S S  
2.  Table 2 shows the proportions of components required to create a MU district. A minimum of two out of three MU Zoning District components (in addition to the minimum required open space) must be combined for a total of one hundred percent (100%) within the MU district. The City Council may vary percentages within the limits indicated based upon site specific conditions in the ordinance establishing the district. The percentages shall be calculated based upon the gross area of the MU district being proposed. 
TABLE 2 - MU Component Proportion Required Core 20% + 30%; -20% Neighborhood 60% ± 30% Transition 5% + 20%; -5% Open space 10% (min.) +10%  
G.  Development standards. 
1.  Standards in the MU district are intended to facilitate the development of unique and pedestrian-friendly environments. To this end, design and development standards are intended to be tailored to create such an environment. In order to provide flexibility in use with prescription of the building form, all applicable development standards for each development project in the MU, including listing any applicable sections of the City of Schertz Unified Development Code that the particular development project may be exempt from, shall be established via the ordinance rezoning the property. If there are any conflicts between standards in Table 3 below and any other standards in the UDC, then standards in Table 3 below shall prevail. 
2.  Accessory Buildings, Uses, and Structures. Standards in Section 21.8.2. shall apply unless other standards are proposed by the applicant and approved by City Council. 
3.  The following standards shall apply to development in the Mixed Use Zoning District. Most standards have a numerical range and few have a specific numerical value. Due to the inapplicability of one development standard across all Mixed Use Districts and to encourage a diversity of development proposals, the developer shall propose the standards indicated as "Flexible" or "Permitted/Flexible" on the following table for the proposed development at the time of conceptual plan application submittal. However the proposed standards shall be based on the Purpose and Intent and Performance and Design Standards of the Mixed Use Zoning District. 
TABLE 3 Mixed Use Development Standard Core Neighborhood Transition 1.0 Street Design Standards (This standard applies only to new streets located in the Mixed Use District) Street design standards in the MU District shall be based upon creating a safe and inviting walking environment through an interconnected network of roads with sidewalks, street trees, street furniture, and amenities. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited unless natural features such as topography or stream corridors prevent a street connection. The right-of-way widths for streets in the MU shall depend on the street typology and streetscape standards proposed and approved in the ordinance creating the district. Applicant shall establish a network of both Type A and Type B Public Streets. The North and South Schertz Sector Plan shall be used as a guide for street design standards within the MU. The ITE Manual for Context Sensitive Solutions in Designing Major Thoroughfares (referenced as ITE Manual) may also be used in lieu of the Sector Plan to develop alternative street design standards within the MU, subject to the approval of the City. a. Design speed =25 mph (except new collector or arterial streets) <25 mph =25 mph (except new collector or arterial streets) b. Street types allowed (see Sector Plan for recommended R-O-W and cross sections or ITE Manual) Boulevards: 4-lane divided 
Avenues: 3-lane divided 
Main streets 
Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 
Commercial Alleys Avenues: 3-lane divided 
Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 
Residential Alleys Boulevards: 4-lane divided 
Avenues: 3-lane divided 
Main streets 
Residential streets: 2-lane undivided 
Commercial and/or Residential Alleys c. Travel lane widths ITE Manual standards shall apply d. Turning radii e. On-street Parking (along all streets except arterials and alleys)  • Parallel Permitted Permitted Permitted  • Angled (only if vehicles per day are projected to be less than 8,000) Permitted Not permitted Not permitted  • Head in Not permitted Not permitted Not permitted f. Parking lane width  • Parallel 8 feet 7-8 feet 8 feet  • Angled 18 feet N/A 18 feet g. Alleys [1] Permitted/Flexible Permitted/Flexible Permitted/Flexible 2.0 Streetscape Standards a. Sidewalks/Trails/ Walkways 6 feet (minimum) 5 feet (minimum) 5 feet (minimum) b. Planter/Planting Strip Type [2] Tree wells or Planters/Planting strips Planters/Planting strips Planters/Planting strips c. Planter/Planting Strip width 6' X 6' tree well or 6 feet-8 feet wide planting strip 6 feet-8 feet wide planting strip 6 feet-8 feet wide planting strip d. Street trees Required/Flexible Required/Flexible Required/Flexible The applicant shall submit a proposed street tree planting plan, including a tree palette and spacing as a part of the Landscape Concept Plan, which shall be reviewed by the City and must be approved by the City Council at the time of Concept Plan and zoning change. The requirements for the landscape concept plan are outlined in Section H (10). 3. Open/Civic Space Standards a. Open/Civic Space Required/Flexible 
Squares and plazas are appropriate Required/Flexible, Squares and greens are appropriate Required/Flexible, squares and greens are appropriate *Overall open/civic space allocations in the MU district shall be a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the entire site included in the MU concept plan and shall be distributed appropriately between the MU components. The location and design of appropriate open spaces shall be based on Section H (9) of this section. 4. Block and Lot Standards a. Block Type Regular (square or rectangular) 
Irregular blocks may be permitted only if natural topography and/or vegetation prevents a rectilinear grid Regular or irregular (square, rectangular, or curvilinear based on topography and vegetation) Regular or irregular (square, rectangular, or curvilinear based on topography and vegetation) b. Block Perimeter Max. block perimeter = 1,600' Max. block perimeter = 2,000' (unless limited by unique site conditions such as topography and vegetation) Max. block perimeter = 2,000' (unless limited by unique site conditions such as topography and vegetation) c. Lot Area Flexible Flexible Flexible d. Lot Width and Depth Flexible Flexible Flexible e. Maximum Lot Coverage Flexible Flexible Flexible f. Maximum Impervious Cover Flexible Flexible Flexible 5.0 Building Standards a. Principal Building Height* 1 story (minimum) 
8 stories (maximum) 1 story (minimum) 
3 stories (maximum) 1 story (minimum) 
4 stories (maximum) * Building height shall be measured in number of stories. Attics and mezzanines shall be excluded from the height calculation as long as they do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of a typical floor in the same building. b. Setbacks**  • Front 15 feet (maximum) Flexible Flexible  • Side Flexible Flexible Flexible  • Rear Flexible Flexible Flexible **Minimum and/or maximum setback standards are to be proposed by the applicant for each component area based on the Purpose and Intent of the MU district and Performance and Design Standards established in Section H of this Code. c. Accessory buildings Permitted/Flexible Permitted/Flexible Permitted/Flexible Standards for accessory uses and structures shall be provided by the applicant. The standards shall result in accessory buildings being subordinate in size and scale to the principal building. Standards in Sec. 21.8.2., Accessory Buildings shall apply if the applicant does not specifically provide regulations for accessory uses and structures. d. Principal building orientation Buildings shall be oriented to a Type A street or toward another focal point such as a park, plaza, square, other open space or environmental feature. See subsection I for additional requirements. e. Building façade & architectural design standards The applicant shall propose appropriate building façade and architectural design standards for all the MU components in the development with the application for zoning change/concept plan. They shall be based on the criteria established in subsections I of this ordinance. 6. Site Design Standards a. Off-street parking The applicant shall propose off-street parking standards appropriate to serve the proposed uses in the MU. Standards in Sec. 21.10.4 shall be used as a guide to establish parking standards but parking standards unique to the MU shall be established in the ordinance creating the MU. Section H (6) shall regulate the location and design of all proposed off-street parking including any structured parking proposed. Parking standards in the MU are intended to be flexible due to the mixed use nature, shared parking opportunities, and availability of on-street parking. b. Off-street loading Section 21.10.8 applies unless alternative standards are provided N/A Section 21.10.8 applies for non-residential uses only unless alternative standards are provided c. Screening    1. Trash/recycling receptacles Required/Flexible Required for non-residential uses 
Flexible for residential uses (along alleys if alleys are provided)    2. Other utility equipment See Sec. 21.9.9    3. Loading spaces Required for non-residential uses. Section 21.9.9 applies for non-residential uses only unless alternative standards are provided    4. Surface parking areas Required/Flexible (Standards in Article 9 of the UDC shall apply to any surface parking located along any public street with the exception of alleys unless the applicant proposes alternative screening standards at the time of concept plan/zoning change application.) d. Landscaping # 1. Landscape buffer between surface parking and sidewalks/trails and streets (except alleys) Required/Flexible N/A Required only for non-residential uses 2. Parking lot minimum interior landscaping Flexible N/A Flexible # The applicant shall provide a landscape concept plan per Section H (10) with the concept plan application that identifies landscape themes and general design approach addressing street tree planting, streetscape treatments, any required screening, parking lot landscaping, and landscaping proposed in all the identified open space areas. Information provided at the concept plan phase may be schematic meeting the design intent of the proposed development. Detailed landscaping plans shall be required at the Site Plan stage for all non-residential development. e. Lighting Required/Flexible (As a part of the concept plan application, the applicant shall propose lighting standards that includes street light standards and other amenities as a part of the streetscape treatment plan. The landscape concept plan may be combined with a concept plan for lighting.)   1. Building entrances    2. Parking areas, trails, and streets f. Signs Flexible (Flexible signage in the mixed use district may be proposed by the applicant to City Council. Signage in the MU shall integrate the streetscape and architectural design of the district through a palette of signs that enhance the pedestrian environment and create a unique identity.)  
H.  PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS. 
1.  General Layout Standards. 
a.  The proposed district shall contain a network of connected streets and walkways that provide a variety of transportation routes and disperse traffic. Streets shall be designed to create a pleasant walking environment with on-street parking and streetscape treatments. 
b.  The proposed district shall contain designated sites for civic, institutional, or religious buildings. Buildings such as schools, libraries, meeting halls, places of worship, and day care facilities shall occupy prominent places in the MU and be planned in coordination with open spaces. 
c.  The proposed district shall contain many separate and human-scaled buildings: 
i.  The lots and a variety of buildings shall generate a cohesive pattern that allows streets to be civic places. 
ii.  Building heights shall vary, with one to six story structures typical in the Core, one to four story structures in Transition area and one to three story structures in the Neighborhood area. Buildings shall help define the sidewalks and streets. 
iii.  Driveway sizes and locations shall minimize the impact of the automobile on the public realm and shall be located along Type "B" public streets or along alleys. 
2.  Building orientation. 
a.  Non-residential and mixed use buildings shall have a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of their building frontage oriented along a Type "B" public street, arterial, highway frontage, or collector streets and a minimum of 65% of their building frontage oriented along Type "A" public streets (with the exception of alleys which shall have no minimum building frontage requirement) (see illustration below applicability of minimum building frontage requirement along a block). 
b.  Residential buildings shall have a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of their building frontage oriented along a Type "B" Public street, arterial, highway frontage, or collector streets and a minimum of fifty (50%) of their building frontage oriented along Type "A" public streets (with the exception of alleys which shall have no minimum building frontage requirement). 

Minimum Building Frontage Required for Non-Residential and Mixed Use Buildings 
3.  Building Entrances. 
a.  Primary facades along Type "A" Public Streets shall contain the main entrance of any principal building. 
b.  All principal buildings in the MU located on a Type "A" Public Street serving the development shall also have doors, windows, and other architectural features facing that street. Non-residential or mixed use corner buildings shall have at least one customer entrance facing each street or a corner entrance instead of two entrances. 
4.  Building Façade Standards. 
a.  The minimum ground floor height as measured from the finished sidewalk to the second floor for all vertical mixed use, commercial, and live-work buildings shall be 12 feet. The minimum finished floor height for all upper floors of vertical mixed use, commercial, and live-work buildings shall be 9 feet. The minimum floor to floor height for all other buildings shall be 9 feet. 
b.  The ground floor elevation of all residential buildings (attached, detached, and stacked) shall be raised a minimum of two (2) feet above the finished level of the public sidewalk/trail in front of the residential structures unless the building is setback more than 10 feet from the public sidewalk. 
c.  All development shall provide ground floor windows on the building façade facing and adjacent to a street (with the exception of alleys) or facing onto a park, plaza, or other civic space. The required area of windows and doors on each street façade fronting a Type "A" street, park, square, green, plaza, or other civic space as a percentage of that façade shall be established in Table 4. The required minimum area of windows and doors on all other street facades (Type "B" public streets with the exception of alleys) may be reduced by twenty percent (20%) of the corresponding requirement along a Type "A" Public street façade. 
Table 4 Building and Façade Core Neighborhood Transition All principal building facades Ground floor facade Windows and doors Minimum 40% 30% 30% Maximum 90% 60% 60% Upper floor facade Windows and doors Minimum 25% 30% 30% Maximum 60% 60% 60%  
d.  Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows that block two-way visibility shall not be permitted along ground floor facades. 
e.  All vertical mixed use and non-residential buildings shall have door openings spaced at no greater than 60 feet on the ground floor along all Type "A" streets, plazas, squares, or other civic spaces within the Mixed Use Core zone. 
5.  Architectural Design Standards. 
a.  To ensure compatibility of building types and to relate new buildings to the building traditions of the region, architectural design shall be regulated, governed, and enforced through architectural design standards proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall submit the proposed standards as a part of the concept plan application for all development in the MU. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation and is subject to the approval of the City Council at the time of Concept Plan. 
b.  Architectural design standards for a proposed MU shall: 
i.  specify the materials and configurations permitted for walls, roofs, openings, street furniture, and other elements; 
ii.  be based on traditional building precedents from the region; 
iii.  include the following: 
• architectural compatibility among structures within the neighborhood; 
• human scale design; 
• pedestrian use of the entire district; 
• relationship to the street, to surrounding buildings, and to adjoining land uses; and 
• special architectural treatment of gateways/civic buildings. 
c.  All building frontages along public and private streets (with the exception of alleys) shall break any flat, monolithic facades by including architectural elements such as bay windows, recessed entrances, or other articulations (vertical and horizontal) so as to provide pedestrian interest along the street level façade including discernible and architecturally appropriate features such as, but not limited to, porches, cornices, bases, fenestration, fluted masonry, bays, recesses, arcades, display windows, unique entry areas, plazas, courts, or other treatments to create visual interest, community character, and promote a sense of pedestrian scale. Expanses of blank walls exceeding 30 continuous feet are prohibited along all Type "A" streets and 50 continuous feet along all other streets except alleys. 
d.  All buildings in the MU Zoning District shall be constructed with exterior building materials and finishes of a quality to convey an impression of permanence and durability. Materials such as masonry, stucco, stone, terra cotta, ceramic tiles, and similar durable architectural materials are allowed and shall be approved with the Concept Plan for the district. 
e.  Non-residential buildings and sites shall be organized to group the utilitarian functions away from the public view of any street (with the exception of alleys). Delivery and loading operations, HVAC equipment, trash compacting and collection, and other utility and service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the buildings and landscaping. The visual and acoustic impacts of all mechanical, electrical, and communications equipments (ground and roof-mounted) shall not be visible from adjacent properties and public streets, and screening materials and landscape screens shall be architecturally compatible with and similar to the building materials of the principal structures on the lot. 
6.  Location and Design of Off-Street Parking. 
a.  The applicant shall provide standards for the quantity of off-street parking proposed in the district based on an analysis of the parking demand for the mix of uses proposed and availability of on-street parking in the district. Section 21.10.4 shall be used as a guide to establish the amount of parking required for uses proposed in the MU if the applicant does not specifically provide alternative standards. The City Council may establish the alternative parking standards proposed by the applicant in the ordinance establishing the district. 
b.  Off-street parking (within surface parking lots) for all non-residential and mixed uses located along Type "A" streets shall be limited to thirty-five percent (35%) or less of the block frontage and seventy-five percent (75%) or less on Type B streets, arterial, collector, and highway frontage streets (see corresponding building frontage requirement). 
c.  Any off-street surface parking area located adjacent to a street or a residential use shall be screened in the form of a landscape fence which is at least four feet (4') in height. 
d.  A surface parking lot may not be adjacent to a street intersection or square, or occupy a lot that terminates a street vista. 
e.  Shared parking facilities are encouraged for non-residential uses in the MU. 
f.  Bicycle parking shall be provided for non-residential uses, especially for schools, parks, trails, and other recreational facilities. Bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of five percent (5%) of all off-street automobile parking spaces provided for non-residential and mixed uses in the district. Bicycle parking may be shared between uses and shall be centrally located, easily accessible, and visible from streets or parking lots. They may be located between the roadway and the building facades as long as their location does not impede pedestrian walkways. 
g.  Any off-street parking provided for residential uses shall be located in such a manner as to minimize the impact of garages and driveways along the residential street. All residential lots that are less than 60 feet in width shall have off-street parking and/or garages accessed from alleys. All lots 60 feet and wider may have front loaded garages (pull-through garages), but in no case shall the width of the garage exceed forty percent (40%) of the front façade width of the entire building. In addition, the garage shall be set back at least three feet (3') from the front façade of the home. 
7.  Design of automobile related site elements (Drive Throughs, Gas Canopies, etc.). 
a.  Drive-through lanes, drive up windows, service bays, and other auto-related site elements shall not be located along or be visible from any Type "A" Public Street. 
b.  Along Type "B" streets, no more than two drive-through lanes shall be permitted along that lot's street frontage. In addition, no more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot's frontage along a Type "B" street shall be dedicated to auto-related site elements (see illustration below). 
c.  Drive-through lanes shall be hidden behind a screening device (min. 4' in height) along the Type "B" street frontage. There shall be no limit to the number or frontage of drive-through lanes located along alleys. 

Image showing appropriate design of auto-related site elements 
d.  All off-street loading, unloading, and trash pick-up areas shall be located along alleys only. Such uses may be located along Type "B" streets only if the lot has no access to an alley. Any off-street loading, unloading, or trash pick-up areas shall be screened in accordance with Section 21.9.7. 
8.  Design of Parking Structures. 
a.  All frontages of parking structures located on Type "A" Streets shall be lined by active commercial uses on the ground floor to a minimum depth of 25'. 
b.  Parking structure facades on all public streets (except alleys) shall be designed with both vertical (façade rhythm of 20'-30') and horizontal (aligning with horizontal elements in the block) articulation. 

Images showing appropriate design of parking structures 
c.  Where above ground structured parking is located at the perimeter of a building, it shall be screened in such a way that cars on all parking levels are not visible from adjacent buildings or the street. Parking garage ramps shall not be visible from any public street. Ideally, ramps shall not be located along the perimeter of the parking structure. Architectural screens shall be used to articulate the façade, hide parked vehicles, and shield lighting. 
9.  Civic/Open Space Standards. 
a.  The provision of adequate and appropriate civic/open space areas shall be integral to all development in the district. The minimum requirement for civic/open space in the district is ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the property(ies) proposed for rezoning under a single Conceptual or Development Plan which shall be dedicated open space and shall be included in the zoning change/development plan application for a proposed MU zoning district. 
b.  The civic/open space provided shall be appropriately designed and scaled in each of the district components. 
c.  The following criteria shall be used to evaluate the merits of proposed civic/open spaces in the MU: 
i.  The extent to which environmental elements preserved are considered as "features" or "focal points" and integrated into and prominently located as "front yards" in the development; adding value to the development; 
ii.  The extent to which emphasis has been placed on preservation of existing wooded areas, view sheds, water bodies, topography, and stream corridors in a natural and contiguous state; 
iii.  The extent to which pedestrian connectivity in the form of sidewalks, natural walking paths along stream and creek corridors has been addressed; and 
iv.  The extent to which a range of open spaces have been provided to be contiguous with existing open spaces and to invite passive recreational uses from plazas and squares to playgrounds, parks and environmental preserves, appropriately organized within the respective MU component. 
d.  Open spaces may be in the form of pocket parks, children's play areas, squares, linear greens, and environmental preserves. Active sports fields and structured recreational activities shall be limited to less than ten percent (10%) of any parks located in the district. 
10.  Landscaping Standards. 
a.  The purpose of landscaping in the MU is to enhance pedestrian and open space areas, to help delineate active areas from passive areas, to provide a screening buffer between pedestrians and vehicular circulation, utility functions, and incompatible adjacent developments. 
b.  The applicant shall submit a landscape concept plan in conjunction with the zoning change and concept plan application. The landscape concept plan establishes the design direction and general schematics for all proposed landscaping including all aspects of the public realm such as street trees, plant/tree palette, streetscape treatments, pavement details, front yards, and medians; proposals for required parking lot landscaping, screening, design concepts for all open spaces, and lighting. 
c.  Proposed landscaping shall meet the following standards: 
i.  Be pedestrian oriented. 
ii.  Designed in such a way to not create a security or physical hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists. 
iii.  Enhance or complement the architectural design of the mixed-use development. 
iv.  Provide visual interest year-round. Utilize water conservation methods and drought tolerant planting where possible. 
v.  Shall be provided between parking lots and all adjacent sidewalks. 
vi.  Meet the standards for Installation and maintenance in section 21.9.7(C). 
vii.  Propose a plant/tree palette that mostly includes native species. 
I.  APPLICATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS. 
1.  An applicant requesting a rezoning to the MU shall submit an application that meets the requirements of this Section and Section 21.5.10(B). Application Requirements for a Planned Development District (PDD). 
2.  Processing of Application and Decision: shall meet the requirements of Section 21.5.10(C) for a Planned Development District (PDD). 
3.  The application shall submit a Conceptual and Development Plan that meets the requirements of Section 21.5.10(E) for a Planned Development District (PDD). In addition to the requirements of Section 21.5.10(E), the applicant shall also adequately demonstrate the compliance with the Development Standards within this Section. 
4.  The application for MU shall meet the standards in Section 21.5.10(F) Criteria for Approval and Section 21.5.10(G) Amendments for a Planned Development District (PDD). 
J.  MODIFICATIONS. The City Council may approve modifications to any established standards in the MU after a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission based on unique site conditions and development context at the time of the application. In granting a modification, the City Council may impose any conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to protect the public interest and implement the goals of the City's Sector Plan with respect to mixed use. 
Footnotes: 

Sec. 21.5.15. - Design Overlay Districts (DO). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a set of Design Overlay Districts that correspond with existing zoning and establish a coherent character and encourage enduring and attractive development. 
B.  Applicability. Standards in this section apply in addition to standards in Article 9 Site Design Standards to the extent that the standards in Article 9 are not in conflict with standards in this section. In case of any conflicts, the stricter of the 2 standards shall apply. 
C.  Overlay Districts Established. Four (4) Overlay Districts shall be established per this Section. 
1.  Purpose and Applicability. 
a.  Highway Commercial Overlay District (DOHC). The Highway Commercial Overlay District maintains land uses in the underlying current zoning. The Highway Commercial Overlay District is to be placed over I-10 and I-35 frontage where the underlying zoning is General Business (GB) zone. In addition, the Highway Commercial Overlay District shall apply to all properties with frontage on FM 78 as designated on Exhibit A. Development standards in this Overlay District are intended to take advantage of the visibility along the highway for more auto-oriented development while transitioning towards a more pedestrian oriented frontage along the interior roads. Generally, this frontage type may accommodate large-format retail or office sites with surface parking along the site's highway frontage. The goal is to minimize the impact of large, surface parking lots and discourage the "big-box" look. In addition, the site shall be planned in such a manner as to facilitate a more urban block infill development pattern with respect to building pads, parking, driveways and service areas. 
b.  Campus Commercial Overlay District (DOCC). The Campus Commercial Overlay District shall maintain the land uses in the current underlying zoning. However, the development standards for this Overlay District are intended to address development in areas marked as campus commercial in the North and South Schertz Framework Plans. Development standards in this district are intended to take advantage of the large and underutilized parcels with access to regional connectors. Generally, this district may accommodate large-format office sites with surface parking within the interior of the lot/block and screened from public view along internal streets. The goal is to minimize the impact of large, surface parking lots and encourage the "office park" look. In addition, the site shall be planned in such a manner as to facilitate a more urban block infill development pattern with respect to building pads, parking, driveways, and service areas, when the market can accommodate it. 
c.  Industrial Overlay District (DOI). The Industrial Overlay District maintains underlying uses from current zoning. The Industrial Overlay standards are intended to allow both small incremental redevelopment and large redevelopment of industrial uses. In addition, the site shall be planned in such a manner as to locate buildings at corners of intersections to anchor that intersection with mid-block screened surface parking along the corridor. 
d.  Downtown Overlay District (DOD). The Downtown Overlay District is intended to implement the recommendations of the Schertz Downtown Revitalization Plan by establishing alternative development standards to facilitate adaptive reuse of existing structures. 
D.  Standards in the Highway Commercial Overlay District. 
1.  Building Design Standards. 
a.  The Building Design Standards and Guidelines for the Overlay Districts in North and South Sectors shall establish a coherent urban character and encourage enduring and attractive development. Development plans shall be reviewed by the Planning and Development Director or designee for compliance with the standards below. Buildings shall be located and designed so that they provide visual interest and create enjoyable, human-scaled spaces. The following standards apply: 
i.  Buildings shall be oriented towards Primary Streets, where the lot has frontage along a Primary Street. All other buildings shall be oriented towards the Secondary streets or Civic Spaces. If the lot does not front a Secondary street or the Primary then it may front a Tertiary street. 
ii.  Primary entrance to buildings shall be located on the street along which the building is oriented. At intersections, corner buildings may have their primary entrances oriented at an angle to the intersection. 
iii.  All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access. Secondary and service entrances may be located from internal parking areas or alleys. 
iv.  Façade Composition. 
a)  Building facades with Highway and Primary street frontages shall be designed and built in tripartite architecture so that they have a distinct Base, Middle and Cap. 
b)  Storefronts on façades that span multiple tenants shall use architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, signage and lighting fixtures. 
c)  Building entrances shall be defined and articulated by using at least one of the following architectural elements: lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and others as appropriate. 
d)  At least one of the following shall be used on Primary and Highway frontage building facades: corner emphasizing architectural features, pedimented gabled parapets, cornices, awnings, blade signs, arcades, or colonnades and balconies. 
v.  Design of Automobile Related Building Site Elements. 
a)  Drive-through lanes for commercial uses shall not be located along any Primary street. Drive-through lanes shall be hidden behind a Street Screen along the Secondary Street Frontage. 
b)  No more than seventy-five (75%) of a lot's frontage along the Secondary Street frontage shall be occupied by gas pumps, canopies, and/or service bays. 
c)  Any buildings associated with any automobile related use shall also have a pedestrian entrance at a Primary Street and/or a Secondary Street. 
d)  Outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall not be permitted along Primary Streets. Along a Secondary Street, outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall not exceed seventy-five (75%) of a lot's frontage along that street. There shall be no such limitation along the Highway Frontage. However, any Highway Frontage with outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall be screened with a 3' min. high Street Screen. The Street Screen shall be made up of: 
(i)  the same material as the principal building or 
(ii)  a living screen or 
(iii)  a combination of the two. 
e)  All off-street loading, unloading, and trash pickup areas shall be located along Secondary Streets. Any off-street loading, unloading, or trash pickup areas shall be screened using a Street Screen that is at least as tall as the trash containers and/or service equipment it is screening at the property line. The Street Screen shall be made up of: 
(i)  the same material as the principal building or 
(ii)  a living screen or 
(iii)  a combination of the two. 

Illustration showing the application of standards for automobile-related site elements 
2.  Streetscape Standards. 
a.  A landscaped yard of a minimum width of 20' shall be required on all lots with frontage along I-35 and I-10. A landscaped yard of a minimum width of 15' shall be required on all lots with frontage along FM 78. 
b.  Landscaping required: Shade trees required per this section may be credited towards the shade trees required per Section 21.9.7(E)(2). The following plantings shall be required within the required yard per every 100' of linear frontage along the specific roadway: 
i.  3 shade trees, 
ii.  6 ornamental trees, 
iii.  8 shrubs (shrubs may be waived if Perimeter Landscaping is provided per Section 21.9.7(H)(2)), and 
iv.  Ground cover, ornamental grasses, or turf grasses for the remaining unpaved areas. 
c.  A six (6) foot sidewalk shall be required along the specified frontages unless a greater width facility (sidewalk or hike and bike trail) is required per Section 21.14.6. Such a facility may be placed within the required 20' yard. 
E.  Standards in the Campus Commercial and Industrial Overlay Districts. 
1.  Building Form, Orientation, and Massing. 
a.  Buildings shall be oriented towards Primary Streets with primary entrances along such streets if the building has frontage along a Primary Street. 
b.  Building entrances shall be defined and articulated by at least one of the following architectural elements: lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and others as appropriate. 
c.  Roof forms shall be simple, flat roofs with a continuous parapet. Roof mounted equipment shall be screened from view of any adjacent public street with an enclosure of the same material and color as the primary building material. 
2.  Design of automobile related building site elements. 
a.  Drive-through lanes for commercial uses shall not be located along any primary street. Drive-through lanes shall be hidden behind a Street Screen along the Secondary Street frontage. 
b.  No more than seventy-five (75%) of a lot's frontage along the Secondary Street frontage shall be occupied by gas pumps, canopies, and/or service bays. 
c.  Any buildings associated with any automobile related use shall also have a pedestrian entrance at a Primary Street and/or a Secondary Street. 
d.  Outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall not be permitted along Primary Streets. Along a Secondary Street, outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall not exceed seventy-five (75%) of a lot's frontage along that street. There shall be no such limitation along the Highway Frontage. However, any Highway Frontage with outdoor storage of vehicles or other products sold shall be screened with a 3' (min.) high Street Screen. The Street Screen shall be made up of: 
(i)  the same material as the principal building or 
(ii)  a living screen or 
(iii)  a combination of the two. 
e.  All off-street loading, unloading, and trash pickup areas shall be located along Secondary Streets. Any off-street loading, unloading, or trash pickup areas shall be screened using a Street Screen that is at least as tall as the trash containers and/or service equipment it is screening at the property line. The Street Screen shall be made up of: 
(a)  the same material as the principal building or 
(b)  a living screen or 
(c)  a combination of the two. 

Illustration showing the application of standards for automobile-related site elements 
4.  Streetscape Standards. 
a.  A landscaped yard of a minimum width of 20' shall be required on all lots with frontage along I-35 and I-10. 
b.  Landscaping required: Shade trees required per this section may be credited towards the shade trees required per Section 21.9.7(E)(2). The following plantings shall be required within the required yard per every 100' of linear frontage along the specific roadway: 
i.  3 shade trees, 
ii.  6 ornamental trees, 
iii.  8 shrubs (shrubs may be waived if Perimeter Landscaping is provided per Section 21.9.7(H)(2), and 
iv.  Ground cover, ornamental grasses, or turf grasses for the remaining unpaved areas. 
c.  A six (6) foot sidewalk shall be required along the specified frontages unless a greater width facility (sidewalk or hike and bike trail) is required per Section 21.14.6. Such a facility may be placed within the required 20' yard. 
F.  Downtown Overlay District. Downtown Schertz, specifically Main Street, has an existing character that should be preserved by rehabilitation of existing buildings. In addition, new and infill construction in the district shall reflect the character of the district during its period of significance. 
    The key design principles establish essential goals for development in the Downtown Schertz to ensure the preservation, sustainability, and visual quality of this special environment. Buildings shall be located and designed so that they provide visual interest and create enjoyable, human-scaled spaces. The key design principles are: 
• Building facades must include appropriate architectural details and ornament to create variety and interest. 
• Buildings shall be built to, or close to, the sidewalk to define and enhance the pedestrian environment of Main Street between Schertz Parkway and E. Aviation Blvd. 
• Open space(s) and civic spaces shall be incorporated to provide usable public areas integral to the downtown environment. 
1.  Applicability. The standards in this section (Downtown Overlay District) shall apply to properties zoned GB and R-2 as delineated in Exhibit A. The standards in Highway Commercial Overlay District shall apply to the properties located along FM 78 and as delineated in Exhibit A. For existing buildings, the following standards shall apply only to the extent that exterior modifications can be feasible made without triggering compliance with all City ordinances. Nothing in this section shall prevent existing residential structures from being adaptively reused to accommodate commercial uses provided the use is permitted in the underlying zoning district. 

Exhibit A: Downtown Overlay District Boundaries 
2.  Development standards. 
a.  Dimensional and Development Standards: The Dimensional and Development Standards in Table 21.9.15A shall apply in lieu of the Standards established in Sec. 21.5.7 for the GB and R-2 zones within the Downtown Overlay District: 
Table 21.9.15A DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS Mini- 
mum Lot Size Dimensions Yard Setback (ft) Misc. Lot Req's Zoning District Area, Lot Width, & Lot Depth Front Rear (NR) Rear (R) Side (NR) Side (R) P'king (min.) Max. Ht (ft.) Max. Imperv. Cover Key GB- General Business None 5 (min.) 
25 (max.) 0 (min.) 10 (min.) 10 (min.) 0 (min) 1 per 500 sq.ft. for all uses 120 80% b, c, d, e R-2 Single Family Residential -2 None 5 (min.) 
25 (max.) 10 (min.) 10 (min.) 10 (min.) 10 (min.) 35 80% b, c, d b. Uses may require a Specific Use Permit. The City of Schertz will follow the guidelines outlined in the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) study for Randolph Air Force Base. c. No variances may be permitted to exceed the maximum impervious cover limitations. d. Refer to Sec 21.9.15 for additional design requirements. e. Zero foot (0') minimum setbacks shall also meet fire separation requirements.  
3.  Design Standards. The following design standards shall provide property owners, developers, City staff, and decision makers adequate design guidance for retrofitting existing buildings and for new commercial and mixed use buildings. 

Existing residential buildings converted to accommodate commercial uses 
a.  Location and Orientation on the lot. 
i.  To the extent possible, buildings shall be oriented towards Main Street with the primary entrance located on that street. All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access. 

Image showing primary and secondary entrances to buildings on Main Street. 
b.  Façade Composition. 
i.  A building's massing shall serve to define entry points and help orient pedestrians. 
ii.  Non-residential and mixed use buildings, to the extent practicable, shall maintain twenty-five feet (25') to thirty-five feet (35') building facade widths or multiples thereof. 
iii.  Variations in the rhythms within individual building facades shall be achieved within any block of building facades with architectural elements such as bays, columns, doors, windows, etc. 
iv.  Breaks in the predominant rhythm may also be used to reinforce changes in massing and important elements such as building entrances, terminated vistas, or corner sites. 
v.  Porches, stoops, eaves, awnings, blade signs, arcades, colonnades and balconies should be used along buildings and they may protrude beyond the setback line provided that they do not inhibit pedestrian movement within the public right-of-way. Balconies shall have external bottom supports. 
Variations in building rhythm using architectural features Building massing used to emphasize entrances  

Allowed encroachments into the setback line 
c.  Architectural Elements and Storefronts. 
i.  An expression line or equivalent architectural element shall delineate divisions between floors of all buildings, and a cornice shall delineate the tops of facades that do not utilize a pitched roof. For retail storefronts, a transom, display window area and bulkhead at the base shall be utilized. 

ii.  Building entrances may be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and others as appropriate. All building elements should be compatible with the architectural style, materials, colors, and details of the building as a whole. Entrances to upper level uses may be defined and integrated into the design of the overall building facade. 
iii.  Roofs. Flat roofs enclosed by parapets or sloped roofs shall be used to screen rooftop mechanical equipment. Mansard roofs and flat membrane-type roofs that are visible are prohibited. 
iv.  Doors and Windows. Generally, windows shall be oriented vertically, and bay windows shall have external bottom supports. Dormer windows shall also be vertically proportioned and slightly shorter than the windows below. In order to provide clear views of merchandise and perceived connections. 
v.  Transparency Required. For all new buildings, the street-level floor along Main Street shall have transparent storefront windows covering no less than fifty percent (50%) of the façade area. Each floor of all building façades facing a street or plaza shall contain transparent windows covering at least fifteen percent (15%) of the façade area. 
vi.  Ground floor retail building plate heights shall be at least fifteen feet (15') in height. 
vii.  Storefronts. Retailers located at the street level shall primarily use storefronts to orient and advertise merchandise to customers. Retail buildings shall provide street-level pedestrian-oriented uses at the ground floor level. Storefronts on facade treatments that span multiple tenants shall use architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, and lighting fixtures. 
ARTICLE 6. -  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RV PARKS 

Sec. 21.6.1. - Manufactured Home Subdivisions. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are established to: 
1.  recognize that certain areas of the City are suitable for a mixture of single-family dwelling units and HUD-code manufactured homes; 
2.  provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of manufactured homes, along with single-family residences; 
3.  provide for adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
4.  promote housing densities appropriate to and compatible with existing and proposed public support facilities; 
5.  promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development; and 
6.  promote stability of development. 
B.  Plat Required. Prior to development of any Manufactured Home Subdivision, a final plat must be approved and filed for record in accordance with section 21.12.9. No permit shall be issued for the placement of any manufactured home on any property that is not located on a legally platted lot of record. 
C.  Minimum Site Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for any lot within a manufactured home subdivision shall be in accordance with Table 21.5.7A. 
2.  Open Space Requirements. 
a.  The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be in accordance with Table 21.5.7A. 
b.  Accessory structures on each lot shall have a minimum setback from any lot line of at least ten feet (10'). 
c.  The minimum distance between manufactured homes on separate lots at any point shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
a.  The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home subdivision shall be thirty-five feet (35'). 
b.  The average height of the manufactured home frame above the ground elevation, measured at ninety degrees (90°) to the frame, shall not exceed three feet (3'). 
4.  Soil and Ground Cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home subdivision shall be paved or protected with a vegetative ground cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust. 
5.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured home subdivision shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water away from the manufactured home spaces. 
D.  Street Lighting. Street lighting within a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision shall be provided by the developer or property owner along all internal streets. Street lights will be installed in accordance with UDC section 21.14.1.S. 
E.  Parking Requirements. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Each parking space will be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'). Each parking space shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other manufactured homes and for public parking. Required parking spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways. 
F.  Carports. See section 21.8.3 of this UDC. 
G.  Manufactured Home Installation. In addition to the requirements of any building code and fire code, manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement on the foundation. 
2.  Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry, pressure-treated wood, or other nondegradable, fire resistant material which is compatible with the design and exterior materials of the primary structure. 
H.  Fire Safety Standards. 
1.  Access for Fire Fighting. Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for fire fighting. 
2.  Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations. Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to an available City water supply. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by the City Engineer. The manufactured home subdivision shall provide standard hydrants acceptable to the City located within 500 feet of all manufactured home lots, measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the City. 
I.  Recreation Area. All manufactured home subdivisions shall be required to dedicate parkland in accordance with section 21.9.10 of this UDC. 
J.  Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, natural gas, telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be installed underground and shall be maintained in accordance with applicable City codes and regulations for such systems. 
K.  Miscellaneous Requirements. 
1.  Every lot owner within a manufactured home subdivision shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of this UDC including proper installation of the manufactured home, proper installation of all utility connections and proper tie-down of the manufactured home. 
2.  Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be required on all manufactured homes and shall be installed within thirty (30) days after the placement of the manufactured home. 
3.  Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
a.  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material. 
b.  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the manufactured home. 
c.  The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. 
Sec. 21.6.2. - Manufactured Home Parks. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section are established to: 
1.  provide adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of manufactured homes, along with single-family residences; 
2.  provide adequate provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
3.  promote housing densities appropriate to and compatible with existing and proposed public support facilities; 
4.  promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building development; and 
5.  promote stability of development. 
B.  Plat Required. Prior to development of any Manufactured Home Park, a final plat must be approved and filed for record in accordance with section 21.12.9. No permit shall be issued for the placement of any manufactured home on any property that is not located on a legally platted lot of record. 
C.  Minimum Site Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Space Area. Manufactured home parks shall have a minimum lot area meeting the requirements of Table 21.5.7A. Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum space size of sixty feet (60') by 110 feet for each manufactured home. 
2.  Open Space Requirements. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for each manufactured home space shall be twenty-five feet (25') from the nearest corner of the manufactured home to the front line of the manufactured home lot or space. 
b.  No manufactured home shall be closer than ten feet (10') from any side space line or twenty-five feet (25') to a space line adjoining a public street. 
c.  For other structures on each space, the minimum setback from any space line shall be at least ten feet (10'). 
d.  The minimum distance between manufactured homes at any point shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
3.  Height Regulations. The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home park shall be thirty-five feet (35'). 
4.  Soil and Ground Cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be paved or protected with a vegetative ground cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. 
5.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water away from the manufactured home spaces. 
6.  Storage Facilities. A maximum 120 square foot accessory building may be provided on every manufactured home space to be utilized solely for storage of personal items belonging to the owner or tenant of the space. In-lieu of individual accessory buildings on each lot or space, self storage facilities may be provided for adequate storage. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision and shall be one hundred percent (100%) masonry, excluding doors and windows. Storage outside of approved storage facilities shall be prohibited. 
D.  Access, Traffic Circulation and Parking. 
1.  Internal Streets and Signage. All infrastructure (streets, signs, and utilities) are required to be built to City standards. Internal streets, no-parking area signs and street name signs shall be privately owned, built and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any area of the manufactured home park. The police department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provision herein and to remove and impound offending vehicles. 
2.  Signs Prohibiting Parking Required. On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this UDC, the developer or its successors and/or assigns shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee prior to installation. 
3.  Internal Street Construction and Maintenance. All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established by this UDC and the Public Works Specifications Manual and shall be maintained by the developer or its successors and/or assigns and shall be free of any cracks, holes and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with good engineering designs and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for the manufactured home park. 
4.  Emergency Ingress and Egress. All residents shall be notified when and where emergency ingress/egress has been provided. Procedures shall be established to warn the residents of the opening of the emergency access in the event of an emergency. 
5.  Internal Street Dimensions. An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each manufactured home space. Each street shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30'). On-street parking shall be permitted on only one side of the street. The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of 150 feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
6.  Parking Requirements. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Each parking space will be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'). Each parking space shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other manufactured homes and for public parking. Required parking spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways. 
7.  Carports. See section 21.8.3. 
8.  Unobstructed Access. Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least one hundred feet (100') of any portion of each manufactured home. 
9.  Intersections with Public Streets. Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°) and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on these public streets. 
10.  Common Area Parking Area Required. To minimize on-street parking and to facilitate movement of emergency vehicles into and through a manufactured home park, a minimum parking area of 150 square feet per manufactured home space or lot shall be provided in a common area for storage of boats or other vehicles in excess of the minimum required parking and for visitors' vehicles. 
11.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall connect to every space within a manufactured home park. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with City standards. 
E.  Street Lighting. Street lighting within a manufactured home park shall be provided by the developer or property owner along all internal streets. Street lights will be installed in accordance with this UDC and shall have a height and spacing to ensure that an average illumination level of not less than two-tenths (2/10) footcandles shall be maintained. 
F.  Manufactured Home Installation. Manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement on the foundation. 
2.  Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry, pressure-treated wood, or other nondegradable, fire resistant material which is compatible with the design and exterior materials of the primary structure. 
G.  Access for Fire Fighting. 
1.  Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for fire fighting. 
2.  Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations. Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to an available City water supply. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by the City Engineer. The manufactured home park owner shall provide standard hydrants approved by the City located within 500 feet of all manufactured home spaces, measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the City. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park owner to immediately notify the City Fire Department of any fire hydrants in need of repair. 
H.  Recreation Area. 
1.  Recreation Area Required. In all manufactured home parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty or more manufactured homes, there shall be at least one (1) recreation area which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. 
2.  Size of Recreation Area. Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site area of the manufactured home park shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. In large parks, this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards, but not including vehicle parking areas. 
3.  Playground Location. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfare and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
I.  Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, natural gas, telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be installed underground and shall be maintained in accordance with applicable City codes and regulations for such systems. 
J.  Refuse and Garbage Handling. 
1.  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage or air pollution. One or both of the systems described in the paragraphs 2 and 3 below shall be used in every park. 
2.  If refuse is gathered at the individual spaces, it shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, and shall be located at each manufactured home space. Containers for this use shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
3.  Centrally located refuse containers having a capacity of three cubic yards or larger may be provided. If provided, such containers shall be so designed as to prevent spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
4.  The manufactured home park owner or agent shall ensure that refuse containers, if provided within the manufactured home park, are maintained in a sanitary and usable condition. 
K.  Miscellaneous Requirements. 
1.  The owner, developer or Manager of a manufactured home park shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of this UDC and shall maintain the manufactured home park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
2.  Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be required on all manufactured homes and shall be installed within thirty (30) days after the placement of the manufactured home. 
3.  Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions. 
a.  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material. 
b.  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the manufactured home. 
c.  The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. 
Sec. 21.6.3. - Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks. 
A.  Size and Marking of Units or Sites. Each unit or site reserved for the accommodation of any recreational vehicle shall have an area of not less than 576 square feet, exclusive of driveways, and shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide. It shall be defined clearly by proper markers at each corner, shall be level, paved, and well drained. Any area in the City limits proposed for use as a recreational vehicle park must be zoned for a district that permits the use of land for a recreation vehicle park. 
B.  Location. No recreational vehicle shall be placed or erected closer than five feet (5') from the property line separating the recreational vehicle park from adjoining property, measuring from the nearest point of the recreational vehicle. 
C.  Drainage. All land used as a recreational vehicle park shall be located on well-drained sites of ample size, free from heavy or dense growth or brush or weeds. The land shall be free from marsh and shall be graded or storm sewered to ensure rapid drainage during and following rain. 
D.  Water Supply. Each site used as a recreational vehicle park shall be provided with a connection and an adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality, approved by the City. Where water from other sources than that of the municipal supply is proposed to be used, the source of the supply shall first be approved by the City. 
E.  Collection and Removal of Waste and Garbage; Wastewater System. Each recreational vehicle park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the collection and removal of waste and garbage and shall provide a proper and acceptable wastewater system, either by connection to the City wastewater system where it is available or to a septic tank, all of which shall comply with all on-site sewage facility rules. If individual wastewater connections at each park space are not provided, then a centralized dump station for disposal of waste and garbage shall be provided. 
F.  Minimum Site Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Space Area. RV parks shall have a minimum lot area meeting the requirements of the Manufactured Home Park regulations as established in Table 21.5.7A. Each RV space shall have a minimum space size of sixty feet (60') by 110 feet for each RV. 
2.  Setback Requirements. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for each RV space shall be twenty-five feet (25') from the nearest corner of the RV to the front line of the RV lot or space. 
b.  No RV shall be closer than ten feet (10') from any side space line or twenty-five feet (25') to a space line adjoining a public street. 
c.  For other structures on each space, the minimum setback from any space line shall be at least ten feet (10'). 
d.  The minimum distance between RV at any point shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
3.  Height Regulations. The maximum height for any structure in the RV park shall be thirty-five feet (35'). 
4.  Soil and Ground Dover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every RV park shall be paved or protected with a vegetative ground cover that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust. 
5.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water away from the manufactured home spaces. 
6.  Storage Facilities. A maximum 120 square foot accessory building may be provided on every manufactured home space to be utilized solely for storage of personal items belonging to the owner or tenant of the space. In-lieu of individual accessory buildings on each lot or space, self storage facilities may be provided for adequate storage. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the RV park and shall be one hundred percent (100%) masonry, excluding doors and windows. Storage outside of approved storage facilities shall be prohibited. 
G.  Access, Traffic Circulation and Parking. 
1.  Internal Streets and Signage. Internal streets, no-parking area signs and street name signs shall be privately owned, built and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any area of the RV park. The police department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provision herein and to remove and impound offending vehicles. 
2.  Signs Prohibiting Parking Required. On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this UDC, the developer or its successors and/or assigns shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee Department prior to installation. 
3.  Internal Street Construction and Maintenance. All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established by this UDC and the Public Works Specifications Manual and shall be maintained by the developer or its successors and/or assigns and shall be free of any cracks, holes and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with good engineering designs and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for the manufactured home park. 
4.  Emergency Ingress and Egress. All residents shall be notified when and where emergency ingress/egress has been provided. Procedures shall be established to warn the residents of the opening of the emergency access in the event of an emergency. 
5.  Internal Street Dimensions and Parking. An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each RV space. Each street shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30') and off-street parking shall be in ratio of two (2) parking spaces for each RV space. On-street parking shall be permitted on only one side of the street. Each parking space will be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'). The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of 150 feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
6.  Parking Requirements. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each RV space. Each parking space shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other RVs and for public parking. Required parking spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways. 
7.  Unobstructed Access. Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least one hundred feet (100') of any portion of each RV. 
8.  Intersections with Public Streets. Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°) and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on these public streets. 
9.  Common Area Parking Area Required. To minimize on-street parking and to facilitate movement of emergency vehicles into and through a RV park, a minimum parking area of 150 square feet per RV space or lot shall be provided in a common area for storage of boats or other vehicles in excess of the minimum required parking and for visitors' vehicles. 
10.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall connect to every space within a RV park. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with City standards. 
H.  Street Lighting. Street lighting within a RV park shall be provided by the developer or property owner along all internal streets. Street lights will be installed in accordance with this UDC and shall have a height and spacing to ensure that an average illumination level of not less than two-tenths (2/10) footcandles shall be maintained. 
I.  Fire Code. 
1.  Access for Fire Fighting. Approaches to all RVs shall be kept clear for fire fighting. 
2.  Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations. Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to an available City water supply. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by the City Engineer. The RV park owner shall provide standard hydrants approved by the City located within 500 feet of all RV spaces, measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the City. It shall be the responsibility of the RV park owner to immediately notify the City Fire Department of any fire hydrants in need of repair. 
J.  Recreation Area. 
1.  Recreation Area Required. In all RV parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty (20) or more RVs, there shall be at least one (1) recreation area which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. 
2.  Size of Recreation Area. Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site area of the RV park shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. In large parks, this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards, but not including vehicle parking areas. 
3.  Playground Location. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfare and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
4.  Total Open Space Requirements. RV parks shall provide a minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space of the total gross site area of the park. The minimum required open space may be inclusive of the required recreational area calculation. 
K.  Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be installed underground and shall be maintained in accordance with applicable City codes and regulations for such systems. 
L.  Miscellaneous Requirement. The owner, developer or manager of a RV park shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of this UDC and shall maintain the RV park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
ARTICLE 7. -  NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 21.7.1. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Within the districts established by this UDC or amendments thereto, there may exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawfully in existence and operating before this UDC was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. It is the intent of this UDC to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as the conditions within this section and other applicable sections of this UDC are met. 
B.  It is further the intent of this UDC that nonconforming uses, lots and structures shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and shall not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
C.  Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved. 
Sec. 21.7.2. - Nonconforming status. 
A.  Except as provided in section 21.7.9 below, any use, platted lot or structure that does not conform with the regulations of this UDC on the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, platted lot or structure provided that: 
1.  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence under, and in compliance with, the provisions of the immediately prior UDC or code; 
2.  Such use, platted lot or structure was a lawful, nonconforming use, platted lot or structure under the immediately prior UDC or code; or 
3.  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence at the time of annexation into the City, was a legal use of the land at such time, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time. 
B.  Except as provided in section 21.7.9 below, any other use, platted lot or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located on the effective date of this UDC or any amendment hereto, shall be deemed to be in violation of this UDC, and the City shall be entitled to enforce fully the terms of this UDC with respect to such use, platted lot or structure. 
Sec. 21.7.3. - Continuing lawful use of land and structures. 
A.  A nonconforming use or structure may continue to be used, operated or occupied in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which it was established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the regulations under which it was created. 
B.  A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be re-occupied by a conforming use, following abandonment of the nonconforming use. 
Sec. 21.7.4. - Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures. 
A.  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the structure in which it is located, provided that: 
1.  The structure or its premises shall not be enlarged or increased in height, in floor area or in land area to accommodate extension of the nonconforming use; 
2.  No alteration shall be made to the structure occupied by the nonconforming use, except those alterations that are required by law to preserve the integrity of the structure and alterations that would upgrade the quality, safety or aesthetic appeal of the structure; and 
3.  The number of dwelling units occupying the structure shall not exceed the number of dwelling units existing at the time the use became nonconforming. 
B.  A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be extended to occupy land outside the structure. 
C.  A nonconforming use or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the use or structure became nonconforming, except to provide additional off-street parking or loading areas required by this UDC. 
Sec. 21.7.5. - Abandonment of nonconforming uses and structures, and cessation of use of structures or land. 
A.  If a nonconforming use or structure is abandoned, any future use of the premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this UDC, as amended, and with any other applicable City codes, ordinances or regulations that are in effect at the time the use is resumed or the structure is re-occupied. 
B.  A nonconforming use or structure shall be deemed "abandoned" in the following circumstances: 
1.  The use ceases to operate for a continuous period of 180 calendar days; 
2.  The structure remains vacant for a continuous period of 180 calendar days; or 
3.  In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises for any length of time. 
C.  If the use of any lot, tract or property that does not have a building on it and that is used for open/outside storage as of the effective date of this UDC is made nonconforming by this UDC, as amended on the effective date, then such storage use shall cease within 180 calendar days following the effective date of this UDC. The lot, tract or property shall be cleaned up and all trash, debris, stored items and vehicles, and other materials shall be removed from the premises such that the property is not a physical or visual nuisance to the public or to surrounding property owners. 
Sec. 21.7.6. - Substitution of nonconforming uses. 
A.  A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
B.  A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use provided that, once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
C.  A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to another conforming use, but shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
D.  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, a nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home may be exchanged or replaced by another HUD-Code manufactured home, provided the newly located residential unit is owner-occupied. 
Sec. 21.7.7. - Reconstruction or repair of nonconforming structure. 
A.  If more than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a nonconforming structure, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district, is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be rebuilt only in conformity with the standards of this UDC. 
B.  If less than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a nonconforming structure, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district, is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be reconstructed as it was before the partial destruction but only to its original dimensions and floor area, and provided that such reconstruction is completed within 365 calendar days following the event that caused the partial destruction. If reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause, then the 365 calendar day reconstruction period may be extended by the City Manager or his/her designee, at his/her sole discretion. 
C.  If a nonconforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed was occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of such destruction, then the nonconforming use may be re-established subject to the limitations on expansion set forth in section 21.7.4 above. 
D.  Any conforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the standards of this UDC. 
E.  Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the upgrading, strengthening, repair or maintenance of any part of any structure, conforming or nonconforming, that is declared unsafe or uninhabitable by the proper authority, unless such repairs or maintenance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's appraised value, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district. 
Sec. 21.7.8. - Relocation of nonconforming structure. 
    No nonconforming structure or building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or to any other location or lot, unless every portion of such structure is in compliance with all the regulations of the zoning district in which the structure is to be relocated. Such building relocation shall also require a structure relocation permit from the City, and may also require platting of the intended building site as well as Site Plan approval pursuant to this UDC. 
Sec. 21.7.9. - Nonconforming lots. 
A.  The following types of platted lots shall be deemed in conformance with the provisions of this UDC, notwithstanding the fact that such lot does not meet the standards of this UDC in the zoning district in which it is located: 
1.  Any vacant lot that conformed to the City's zoning district regulations at the time that it was platted; or 
2.  Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning district regulations in which the lot is located. 
B.  Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the use of a lot that does not meet the minimum lot standards of the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the lot is zoned for the land use(s) intended and the lot was platted as a lot of record prior to the effective date of this UDC. 
C.  A lot of record located within the RA zoning district that is nonconforming may be occupied by a single-family dwelling provided that all applicable zoning standards with regard to building setbacks, building size and design criteria are met. 
Sec. 21.7.10. - Validation. 
A.  Within the City, there exist on the following subdivisions: Belmont Park; Kramer Farm; Whisper Meadows; Northcliffe II; Tanglewood; Wynn Brook; Jonas Woods Unit 1 Lots 1-18, Block 3; Jonas Woods Unit 1 Lots 1-29, Block 2; Jonas Woods Unit 1 Lots 1-18 and 51-65, Block 1; Jonas Woods Unit 4; The Ridge at Scenic Hills; Fairhaven; The Links at Scenic Hills; and The Fairways at Scenic Hills (the "Subdivisions"), which include structural encroachments onto platted setbacks; plats with improperly designated setbacks or improper lot sizes; and improper master plans. It is the intent of this section to validate such improper encroachments, plats, and master plans in the subdivisions and to determine that such improper encroachments, plats, and master plans are deemed not to be in violation of this UDC, but only so long as the conditions within this section 21.7.10 of this UDC are met. The provisions of this section shall be limited to validate only the improper encroachments, plats, and master plans on February 24, 2009 in the subdivisions. 
B.  The portions of existing structures encroaching onto platted setbacks in any of the subdivisions on the effective date of this UDC (validated encroaching structures) shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended into the platted setback area. 
C.  If more than fifty percent (50%) of (i) the total square footage of a validated encroaching structure or (ii) the total appraised value of the validated encroaching structure, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district, is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, the validated encroaching structure may not be rebuilt within the platted setback, except as may otherwise be permitted by this UDC (other than this section). If fifty percent (50%) or less of (i) the total square footage of a validated encroaching structure or (ii) the total appraised value of the validated encroaching structure, as determined by the applicable county appraisal district, is destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, the validated encroaching structure may be reconstructed as it was before the partial destruction but only to its original dimensions and footprint area within the platted setback, and provided that such reconstruction is completed within 365 calendar days following the event that caused the partial destruction. If reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause, the three hundred sixty-five calendar day reconstruction period may be extended by the City Manager or his/her designee, at his/her sole discretion. 
D.  No validated encroaching structure encroaching onto a platted setback shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, unless every portion of such structure after such relocation is out of the platted setback and is in compliance with all the requirements of the zoning district for such lot and all other applicable requirements of this UDC and other applicable codes, ordinances or regulations of the City in effect at such time. 
E.  If application is made to have plats with improper setbacks, plats with improper lot sizes, and/or existing master plans for any of the subdivisions replatted or amended, any such replats or amendments shall be required to be in conformity with the provisions of this UDC (other than this section) and with all other applicable City codes, ordinances or regulations that are in effect at the time application for amendment or replatting is made. 
F.  This section is subject in all events to the property owner's rights set forth in Local Government Code Chapter 245. 
ARTICLE 8. -  SPECIAL USES AND GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 21.8.1. - Secured (Gated Communities). 
A.  Purpose. To achieve orderly development of secured (gated) communities, to promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment in accordance with the Comprehensive Land Plan and to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the City. 
B.  Establishment of a Secured (Gated) Community. 
1.  Minimum Size. The minimum acreage requirement for a secured (gated) community shall be seventy-five (75) acres. 
2.  Master Plan Required. A master plan shall be required for all proposed secured (gated) communities and shall be submitted in accordance with section 21.12.5 and shall illustrate the security system to be used, the type of fence, and the type of gate (electric/manual/etc.) to be used. All secured (gated) communities shall be surrounded by a masonry or wrought iron fence with at least two (2) entrances, electronically or manually controlled gates and shall be administered by a Homeowner's Association. Entry and exit ways to secured (gated) communities shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') when the gate is fully opened and shall be equipped with a Knox key entry system as approved by the Fire Department. 
3.  Conflict with Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
a.  A secured (gated) community shall not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  A secured (gated) community shall not disrupt or cross an existing or proposed public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail, park or other public facility as shown on the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan or Parks and Open Space Master Plan. 
C.  Homeowners Association (HOA). 
1.  A HOA shall be established for a secured (gated) community and creation shall be so noted on the plat. The following "Maintenance Agreement" statement shall appear on the final plat: 
"Streets within this subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Schertz public streets standards. The upkeep and maintenance to include the mowing of shoulders and right-of-way, removal of weeds and unclogging of culverts shall be the responsibility of the Homeowners Association. The City of Schertz is released from any liability of these streets. Periodic inspection by a public official who is authorized to enforce complaints about poor maintenance is permitted." 
2.  Subject to the following sentence, the HOA shall provide for operation, repair and maintenance of all common areas, fences, walls and all common facilities including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks or other infrastructure that are part of the common facilities. If the HOA's rules and regulations or long-standing policy and practice provide that maintenance or repair of fences or walls adjoining a property owner's property shall be the responsibility of the property owner, such rules or practice shall apply. 
3.  The City shall be granted permission for and practical access at any time without liability when on official business and further, to permit the City to remove any obstructions including, but not limited to, any gate and guard house, upon noncompliance by the HOA or if necessary for emergency vehicle access. The cost of removal of any obstruction shall be assessed to the owner or if a common facility, to the HOA. 
4.  The HOA shall provide access for fire, ambulance, and police services, mail deliveries, school buses, garbage pickup, and utilities. Access must not require drivers to exit their vehicles. 
5.  Repair and maintenance of common facilities shall be conducted on a schedule acceptable to the City and shall be undertaken promptly by the HOA. This schedule shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review at the same time as the financials required by subsection 6. below. 
6.  Annually, the HOA shall submit to the City Engineer a copy of that year's certified financial statements which shall include a balance sheet showing amounts in maintenance reserve accounts, if any, at the end of the period, income statement showing expenditures during the reporting period and a budget showing projected allocations to the maintenance reserve accounts and projected expenditures for the coming year. 
D.  Controlled Access. When there is a controlled access to a subdivision, whether it is a mechanical device or a security guard, the maintenance and upkeep will be the responsibility of the Homeowners Association. Access at all times by public safety personnel must be guaranteed. 
E.  Private Streets. 
1.  All streets and sidewalks within a secured (gated) community shall be private streets, shall be maintained by the HOA, and shall be constructed in accordance with City standards. 
2.  If repairs and maintenance are not performed by the HOA, the City shall have the authority to undertake any necessary repairs or maintenance and shall be reimbursed by the HOA. A statement shall be added to the plat which provides for maintenance of streets by the HOA and authorizes the City to perform such repairs or maintenance at the expense of the HOA. 
F.  Converting Private Streets to Public Streets. 
1.  Upon a written request signed by HOA officers and submitted to the City Council, dedication of private streets to the public may be accomplished providing that private streets are brought up to the standards for public streets in the City and upon approval by the City Council. 
2.  The written request shall be accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of the owners of one hundred percent (100%) of the existing lots in the subdivision. 
3.  All repairs, maintenance, or reconstruction of private streets shall be approved and accepted by the City prior to conversion. All conversion dedication costs shall be paid by the HOA. 
Sec. 21.8.2. - Accessory Buildings, Uses and Structures. 
A.  No accessory building, use or structure shall be permitted without a primary use or structure. 
B.  Accessory buildings, uses and structures as permitted herein shall comply with the maximum impervious coverage restrictions contained in zoning regulations, and the number of accessory uses/structures on lots of less than 1/2 acre is limited to a maximum of three (3). 
C.  Accessory buildings, uses or structures shall be set back three feet (3') from common property lines and may not be located within an easement. 
D.  No accessory building, use or structure may be closer than ten feet (10') to the main building. 
E.  No detached accessory building, use or structure shall be allowed in the front yard. 
F.  Attached accessory buildings, uses or structures shall comply with the front, side and rear setbacks and height restrictions established for the primary structure and/or this section. 
G.  The wall height of the accessory building, use or structure shall be limited to not more than eight feet (8') and total accessory building, use or structure height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15'). This is only applicable to platted subdivisions with a specific lot size e.g. eighty feet (80') by one hundred feet (100') and is not intended to be applicable for one-owner multiple acre residence. In this instance, a variance is not required and the total accessory building, use or structure height cannot exceed thirty-five feet (35'). 
H.  Accessory buildings, uses or structures that are accessory to a principal residential use on the same lot shall require administrative Site Plan approval prior to building permit issuance. 
I.  The minimum separation between a main structure and detached accessory building, use or structure other than a carport shall be ten feet. 
J.  The minimum separation between the main building and an in-ground or above-ground pool, spa, hot tub, playhouse, sauna or gazebo which does not exceed one story in height may be less than ten feet (10') if the accessory building, use or structure is contiguous with or an integral part of the main building, and/or the accessory building, use or structure is engineered by a professional engineer to ensure the integrity of the existing (main building) foundation. 
1.  Such plans indicating the design for any such structure shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for review in connection with the issuance of a building permit; and 
2.  Setback distances for in-ground or aboveground pools, spas, hot tubs and saunas shall be measured to the outside edge of the beam (structural edge) of the pool, spa, etc. 
K.  Detached equipment and appliances in commercial and manufacturing districts shall be located immediately adjacent to the principal building. 
L.  Detached accessory buildings, uses or structures in commercial and manufacturing districts shall be constructed of the same exterior materials as required in Article 9, Site Design Standards, and shall not be located in a manner that decreases the minimum number of parking spaces required. 
M.  Accessory buildings, uses or structures located in commercial and manufacturing districts shall be located at the rear of the principal building and property and shall not occupy designated parking spaces. 
N.  Automatic teller machine (ATM) drive-thru structures are not authorized unless the associated bank occupies a space on the same property and has a valid Certificate of Occupancy. 
Sec. 21.8.3. - Carports, Porte-Cocheres. 
A.  Multifamily/Non-residential Districts. 
1.  Carports shall be allowed in multifamily and non-residential districts. 
2.  Carports shall be located within all building setbacks. 
3.  Carports shall not be located within required landscaping areas. 
4.  The minimum height of the carport entry shall be fourteen feet (14'). 
5.  All parking spaces located under the carport shall be of asphalt or concrete. 
6.  Carports shall be structurally sound, as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
B.  Manufactured Home Subdivisions and Parks. 
1.  A carport may not be constructed in such a way that any part of the structure encroaches into a required setback as set by the underlying zoning district. 
2.  The maximum height of the carport entry shall be ten feet (10'). 
3.  Driveways to the carport and parking spaces under the carport shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete. 
4.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'). 
5.  The carport shall be structurally sound as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
6.  The carport must not drain directly or indirectly onto neighboring properties. 
C.  Single Family and Duplex Districts. 
1.  Shall be attached to a residence and shall be an integral part of the primary structure; 
2.  Shall not encroach into a required setback as set by the underlying zoning district; 
3.  Shall be erected over a driveway constructed of asphalt or concrete; 
4.  Shall not exceed one (1) story in height; 
5.  Shall be open on two (2) or more sides; and 
6.  Shall be constructed of the same material as the primary structure. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.8.4. - Home Occupations. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. 
1.  Protect residential areas from adverse impact of activities associated with home occupations. 
2.  Permit residents of the community a reasonable choice in the use of their homes as a place of livelihood and the production or supplementing of personal and family income. 
3.  Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units. 
B.  Home Occupations-Required Conditions. 
1.  The area set aside for home occupations shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of such residence. 
2.  No interior or exterior business sign shall be permitted. 
3.  No mechanical equipment shall be used except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or household mechanical equipment as for hobby purposes in conjunction with the home occupation. 
4.  Retail sales shall be prohibited on the premises. 
5.  No more than one person other than the immediate family permanently residing on the premises shall be employed in the home occupation. 
6.  No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single dwelling unit. 
7.  A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. No home occupation or any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages, attached or detached, excluding paints and chemicals that may be used in the home occupation. 
8.  There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building. 
9.  There shall be no exterior storage of materials to be used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
10.  A home occupation shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interferences, dust, odors, or heat detectable beyond the property limits or beyond the walls of the dwelling unit. The judgment of the City's Code Enforcement Officer pertaining to a violation under this section shall be considered decisive and final unless formally appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days after the Code Enforcement Officer's written determination. 
11.  All home occupations may be subject to periodic inspections by the City. 
C.  Home Occupation Permit. 
1.  Purpose. To establish a method to allow the City to regulate and control nonresidential activities and maintain a record of the types and numbers of home occupations in the City. 
2.  Permit Required. Each resident within the City who has, or desires to establish an authorized home occupation, is required to have a home occupation permit. 
3.  Application for Home Occupation Permit. 
a.  Applicant shall apply to the City Manager or his/her designee for a home occupation permit. 
b.  The City Manager or his/her designee may issue the permit if the home occupation meets all the requirements established in Paragraph B. 
c.  The decision of the City Manager or his/her designee may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with section 21.4.14. 
d.  The Planning and Zoning Commission will be the final judgment on appeals which must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission within thirty (30) days after disapproval by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
e.  Supporting Documents. 
i.  Signed statement . One type of supporting evidence that may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their consideration of an appeal is a signed statement by each property owner up to 200 feet of the property on which the home occupation is to occur, stating that the property owner has no objection to the existence of the proposed home occupation. An example of such a statement is as follows: 
"I (name) the property owner at (address) have been advised by (name of home occupation applicant) of the request to the City for a Home Occupation Permit for the purpose of conducting (type of home occupation) and I have no objection to the home occupation permit being granted for the purpose reflected in this statement. 
Signature of neighboring property owner and date" 
ii.  Statement from property owner. An applicant who is renting the property on which a home occupation permit is requested shall obtain a written statement from the owner of the property. The owner will state that he/she has no objection to the home occupation on the property. 
iii.  Persons with demonstrated physical handicaps. Persons with physical handicaps may be permitted special consideration. The applicant may request a waiver of a portion or all of one or more of the requirements for a home occupation. 
iv.  Granting of exception. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit sufficient evidence to justify the granting of an exception to any of the requirements in Paragraph B. 
f.  Conditions Applicable to Home Occupation Permits. 
i.  Validation. A home occupation permit expires every December 31. 
ii.  Renewal. Permits shall be renewed annually. 
iii.  Inspection . The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to periodically enter the premises to ensure full compliance with these requirements. 
iv.  Termination. When a home occupation is found in noncompliance with the requirements outlined in Paragraph B, the permit will be terminated immediately. 
v.  Renewal of terminated permits. The procedure for renewal of a terminated permit shall be the same as required for the issuance of a new permit under this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.8.5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21.8.6. - Telecommunications Antennas. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to further an overall plan for the enhancement of public safety, consistent community development, preservation of property values and the general welfare of the City while providing for the communication needs of the residents and businesses in the City. Additional purposes of this section are to: 
1.  ensure that their location and use do not compromise the aesthetic quality of the community; 
2.  facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City; 
3.  encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate them in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
4.  encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities; 
5.  encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design, landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques; and 
6.  enhance the ability of wireless telecommunication providers to provide services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
B.  Applicability. Except as specifically provided, all new Telecommunications Towers or Antennas in the City shall be subject to the regulations contained in this section. Preexisting Towers or Antennas lawfully in existence on the effective date of this UDC shall not be required to meet the requirements of this UDC, other than those contained in sections 21.8.6.C.9. and 21.8.6.C.11. below. 
C.  General Regulations. The following regulations apply to all antenna facilities and antennas located within any district: 
1.  Telecommunications Antennas. Subject to the second sentence of this paragraph, telecommunications antennas shall be placed on City towers or other City facilities designated from time to time by the City if the City determines that an appropriate City tower or other City facility is in the required signal area and that there is available antenna space on such City tower or other City facility. If the City makes such determinations but the applicant prefers to locate its telecommunications antenna(s) on another tower or facility, the applicant must provide an engineering study reasonably acceptable to the City Manager or his/her designee that the City-designated location is not in the appropriate signal location or that there is insufficient antenna space at the City-designated location The City Manager may, in his/her sole discretion, waive the requirements of this section, and this section shall not prohibit an applicant from placing its telecommunications antenna(s) on its own commercial facilities or offices in the City. Telecommunications antenna(s) placed on the applicant's own commercial facilities or offices must be affixed to the building's exterior and may not extend more than six feet (6') above the top roof line of the building, unless the City Manager, in her/her sole discretion, authorizes a higher location. The applicant shall contact the City Manager or his/her designee regarding City leasing requirements. 
2.  Equipment Storage Building. An Equipment Storage Building associated with an Antenna Facility or an Antenna shall be screened and landscaped as described in other sections of this UDC, or be incorporated into the stealth treatment so that it is consistent and complementary with the existing structures and uses on the premises. All Equipment Storage Buildings must be constructed of a masonry material or enameled metal. Alternative materials may be permitted upon approval by the City Council and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The base of all tower facilities must be screened with a masonry wall that will completely screen the Equipment Storage Building. 
3.  Driveway Surfaces. All Telecommunication Tower Facilities must have an access drive that is constructed of asphalt or concrete. At least one (1) off-street parking space must be provided at each telecommunication tower facility. 
4.  Lights. No outdoor lighting shall be allowed on any Antenna Facility except lights or lighting that is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
5.  Antenna Facility Capacity. All new antenna facilities must be structurally designed to allow for at least two (2) carriers. 
6.  Tower Types. Only monopole, alternative mounting structures or stealth towers are permitted in the City. 
7.  Prohibited in Easements. Antenna facilities shall not be placed in easements unless authorized by the easement holder. 
8.  Construction Standards. A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction, installation, modification or material alteration of any Antenna Facility. 
9.  Building Codes, Zoning and Safety Standards . To ensure the structural integrity of Antenna Facilities, the owner of an Antenna Facility must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all provisions of the City's building code and zoning regulations. If, upon inspection by the City Engineer or his designee, the City concludes that an Antenna Facility fails to comply with such codes and regulations and/or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the Antenna Facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with applicable standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance shall constitute grounds for the removal of the Antenna Facility by the owner and at the owner's expense. This notice requirement shall not preclude immediate action by the City Manager or his/her designee as allowed by law if public safety requires such action. 
10.  Contained on Property. No part of an Antenna Facility, antennas, or other attachment may extend beyond the property lines or required building lines of the lot on which the antenna or Antenna Facility is located. 
11.  State or Federal Requirements. All Antenna Facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. A copy of an approval letter from any state or federal controlling agency shall be provided with every application for a telecommunications tower. 
12.  Variance Requirement. A variance granted by the BOA, pursuant to section 21.4.12 of this UDC, is required for an Antenna or Antenna Facility which will not comply with the requirements of this section unless otherwise specified herein. 
D.  Amateur Radio Antenna and TV Antennas. Amateur Radio Antenna and TV Antennas are allowed as accessory uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, GH, R-6, R-7, R-A, MHS, MHP, or any residentially zoned PDD. Amateur Radio Antennas and TV Antennas must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Antenna Location. Amateur Radio Antennas and TV Antennas can only be located on a roof or in the back yard of a residence. 
2.  Number of Facilities per Lot. No more than one (1) TV Antenna and one (1) Amateur Radio Antenna are permitted on each lot. Amateur Radio Antennas are only permitted for operators that have an amateur radio operator license from the FCC and the operator must provide the City proof of a current FCC license before an Amateur Radio Antenna is installed or maintained on a lot. 
3.  Height Limitations. An Amateur Radio Antenna or TV Antenna can not extend more than eight feet (8') above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning district. 
4.  Setbacks. Amateur Radio Antennas or TV Antennas are not permitted within any required setback area. 
E.  Satellite Receive Only Antennas, Less Than One (1) Meter in Diameter. Satellite dish receiving antennas, one (1) meter or less in diameter shall be permitted as an accessory use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, GH, R-6, R-7, R-A, MHS, MHP, or any residentially zoned PDD. A Satellite Receive Only Antenna must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Antenna Location. Satellite Receive Only Antenna less than one (1) meter in diameter can only be located on a roof or in the back yard of a residence. 
2.  Number of Facilities Per Lot. No more than one (1) Satellite Receive Only Antenna less than one (1) meter in diameter is permitted on each lot. 
3.  Height Limitations. A Satellite Receive Only Antenna less than one (1) meter in diameter can not extend more than eight (8) feet above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning district. 
4.  Setbacks. Satellite Receive Only Antennas less than one (1) meter in diameter are not permitted within any required setback area. 
F.  Satellite Antennas Greater Than One Meter in Diameter. A Satellite Antenna greater than one (1) meter in diameter is permitted as an accessory use under the following conditions: 
1.  Nonresidential Zoning Districts. Satellite Antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter is an accessory use permitted by right in nonresidential zoning districts. 
2.  Residential Zoning Districts. Satellite Antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter are only allowed in residential zoning districts upon the approval of an SUP granted by the BOA. 
3.  Height. Satellite Antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter shall not exceed ten feet in height above the base of their mount. 
4.  Location. Satellite Antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter can not be erected in any required setback or in the front of residential structures. 
5.  Screening. Satellite Antennas greater than one (1) meter in diameter that are mounted on the ground shall be screened from view from adjoining properties by solid fencing or evergreen plants to a height of a least six feet (6'). 
G.  Placement of Antenna Facilities. This section does not apply to amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only antennas. For the purpose of determining the appropriate locations for the placement of antenna facilities, the City is divided into land use threshold areas that establish different regulations pertaining to height, location, and type of Antenna Facility. These land use thresholds are defined as follows: 
1.  Full Commercial ("FC"). Property within the OP, NS, GB, GB-2, M-1, M-2, or non-residential Planned Development zoning districts. 
2.  Undeveloped Residential ("UR"). Property within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, GH, R-6, R-7, R-A, MHS, MHP or any residentially zoned PDD, that: 
a.  is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or 
b.  is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building permit issued for a residential structure and is not located within the calculated limits of the Developed Residential ("DR") threshold. 
3.  Wireless Corridors ("WC"). Property within, and 150 feet either side of, the right-of-way of a freeway or a principal arterial roadway, as indicated on the Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
4.  Developed Residential ("DR"). Property within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, GH, R-6, R-7, R-A, MHS, MHP, or any residentially zoned PDD, which: 
a.  Is a recorded subdivision that has had at least one building permit for a residential structure; or 
b.  Is within 600 feet of areas described in Paragraph 4.a. 
H.  Antenna Facility Impact Levels. For the purpose of determining appropriate locations for Antenna Facilities, the City recognizes differing levels of impact for antenna facilities depending upon physical location, aesthetics, and land use compatibility. These Antenna Facility Impact Levels are described as follows: 
1.  Monopole. A monopole tower requires an SUP. The antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet (5') above the highest point on the monopole. 
2.  Level 4 Stealth Facility. The antenna on a Level 4 Stealth Facility is located on an existing structure (other than a telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna is neither screened nor hidden. For the purpose of this level, a pole or tower may be reconstructed to structurally hold the antenna but the height of the structure can not be increased. 
3.  Level 3 Stealth Facility. The antenna on a Level 3 Stealth Facility is located on an existing structure (other than a telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna shall be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied with material so that it is incorporated into the pattern, style, and material of the structure to effectively render the antenna unnoticeable. A new structure may be constructed to hold or house the antenna or equipment; however, the structure must be consistent with the overall architectural features of the primary buildings 
4.  Level 2 Stealth Facility. The antenna on a Level 2 Stealth Facility is attached to the structure in such a manner that if it is seen it appears unrecognizable as an antenna, and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development. 
5.  Level 1 Stealth Facility. The antenna on a Level 1 Stealth Facility is attached to the structure in such a manner that the antenna is completely unseen and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development. 
I.  Antenna Facility Siting Matrix. Antenna facilities shall be located in accordance with the following siting matrix. This matrix provides for areas where antenna facilities may be located as permitted uses, areas where they may be located with an SUP, and areas where they are prohibited. 
Table 21.8.6 
Antenna Facility Siting Matrix  

J.  SUP. When an SUP is required by this section for the location of an Antenna Facility or an antenna, the applicant must submit an application in accordance with the procedure established in this UDC. SUPs to this section are granted by the City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with section 21.5.11 of this UDC. 
1.  Application. In order to properly evaluate an application to locate an Antenna Facility or an antenna that requires an SUP, the applicant must provide the following information: 
a.  an SUP application and appropriate application fee; 
b.  a narrative detailing the proposed Antenna Facility. The narrative must indicate the following: 
i.  whether the proposed structure is a co-location, a new monopole tower or a new alternate mounting structure; 
ii.  the height of the proposed tower; 
iii.  why the Antenna Facility is necessary at the proposed location; 
iv.  the name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other users of the antenna or tower and describe the use to be made by each user; 
v.  whether the applicant has made an effort to co-locate the facilities proposed for this Antenna Facility on existing antenna facilities in the same general area, identifying the location of these existing sites, and describe in detail these efforts and explain in detail why these existing sites were not feasible; 
vi.  all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage; 
vii.  written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators which confirm the statements provided; 
viii.  whether the existing sites allow/ promote co-location and, if not, describe why not; 
ix.  whether co-location will be allowed to other telecommunications providers at the requested site. If they are not allowed, state every reason and the basis of each reason; and 
x.  all state or federal agency approval letters. 
c.  Provide a Site Plan of the proposed Antenna Facility at a scale of 1" = 30'. The Site Plan should be on a single 24" x 36" sheet and include: 
i.  a survey and legal description of the proposed Antenna Facility; 
ii.  a detail on how access to the site is to be achieved; 
iii.  a plan view layout of the proposed Antenna Facility clearly showing: 
(a)  the location of the facility; 
(b)  all equipment and structures in the proposed Antenna Facility; 
(c)  the required off street parking space; 
(d)  distances to property lines; 
(e)  required setbacks; 
(f)  adjacent land uses and zoning designations; 
(g)  existing structures on the site; 
(h)  required landscaping or screening of the base of the tower; 
(i)  all recorded and proposed easements; and 
(j)  natural features, such as water courses and trees. 
d.  Elevation drawings showing: 
i.  the design and height of the proposed Antenna Facility; 
ii.  detailed drawings of all structures and equipment; and 
iii.  screening requirements. 
e.  If the requested location is in a residential district the applicant must provide evidence that they have made an effort to locate the facility in a nonresidential district, identify the location of these nonresidential district sites, describe in detail these efforts, and explain in detail why these nonresidential sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the nonresidential sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. 
f.  The applicant must provide a map showing the proposed provider's current coverage area for the City. The map must show the roadway network and be labeled. The applicant must also provide propagation analysis showing the areas the proposed provider's existing antenna currently covers, the areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would cover. The propagation analysis must be labeled and have a legend. 
g.  The applicant must describe the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the City. Attach maps and other related documentation. Provide information indicating each phase of the plan. 
2.  Consideration of Application. In considering whether to grant an SUP, the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following: 
a.  the appropriateness of the location and design of the Antenna Facility; 
b.  the potential for interference with the enjoyment of the use surrounding properties; 
c.  aesthetics; 
d.  impact, including but not limited to, the surrounding topography, surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
e.  proposed buffering; 
f.  the design of the Antenna Facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  the proposed height of the Antenna Facility relative to surrounding structures; 
h.  the zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the SUP is sought; 
i.  the compliance with the City's regulations; and 
j.  the availability of suitable alternative sites. Suitable alternative site(s) shall mean a location or locations that would provide the same or better signal coverage than the proposed site for which an SUP is requested. The applicant shall provide documentation supporting his/her contention that alternative site(s) are not suitable and/or available. 
3.  Procedures for Consideration of an SUP. The procedures for consideration of an application for an SUP requested under this section shall be in accordance with section 21.5.11 of this UDC. 
K.  Written Report. Denial of an application for an SUP under this section must be documented in writing in accordance with the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.8.7. - Temporary Structures. 
A.  A temporary structure may not be brought on-site until a building permit for the construction or refurbishing of the permanent structure has been issued by the City Manager or his/her designee. All temporary manufactured structures shall be required to comply with the following. 
1.  Time Limit. Permits issued for temporary manufactured structures shall be valid for two (2) years or when the permanent structure is completed and occupied, whichever is sooner. Any further extension shall require City Council approval. 
2.  Dimensions. Minimum dimensional requirements for temporary uses or structures shall be those established in the district in which the temporary use or structure is located. 
3.  Parking. Minimum parking requirements for temporary manufactured structures shall be the number according to the proposed use for the building. 
4.  Temporary trailers located in non-residential districts are prohibited in designated parking spaces. 
B.  Temporary Construction Buildings : Temporary building and material storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the City Manager or his/her designee for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the City Manager or his/her designee. 
C.  Temporary portable storage facilities/containers are permitted in residential districts not to exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year. Such storage facilities/containers located in the front yard of residentially zoned property shall be placed on a permanent surface of concrete such as the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.8.8. - Decks-Attached to Principal Building. 
A.  Decks constructed of wood or composite (faux) wood and that are uncovered and open to the sky may extend into the rear yard with a minimum setback from the property line of ten feet (10') and shall comply with the minimum side yard setback established by the zoning district. Decks shall not encroach an easement. Decks that are covered shall be attached to the principal structure and shall comply with the rear and side yard setbacks established by the zoning districts. 
Sec. 21.8.9. - Outdoor Display and Storage. 
A.  Outdoor display and temporary outdoor storage shall be allowed in Non-residential Districts in accordance with this section. Any merchandise, material or equipment situated outdoors in Non-residential Districts shall be subject to the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this section, outdoor storage and display shall be classified into two (2) categories enumerated as shown below. 
Table 21.8.9 Permitted Outdoor Display and Storage Category OP NS GB and PUB GB-2, M-1 and M-2 Outdoor Display and Tempo- 
rary Outdoor Storage - P P P General Outdoor Storage - - - P  
(P) = Use is permitted in district indicated 
(-) = Use is prohibited in district indicated 
B.  Categories of outdoor storage and display. 
1.  Outdoor Display and Temporary Outdoor Storage. Outdoor display and temporary outdoor storage are displays of items actively for sale or lease that are lightweight and that individually can be easily moved without a mechanical lifting device. 
a.  Outdoor display and temporary outdoor storage of goods in individual packaging and not in storage containers which are associated with the primary business on the site may be allowed adjacent to a front principal building wall and may not extend into the public right-of-way. Such storage shall not be permitted to block windows, entrances or exits, and shall not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the building. 
b.  Areas intended for outdoor display must be paved and painted to distinguish them from required off-street parking areas. No outdoor displays shall be allowed in off-street parking areas or fire lanes. 
2.  General Outdoor Storage. 
a.  General outdoor storage consists of all remaining forms of outdoor storage not classified as outdoor display including items of a large size, mass or volume and that are not easily moved or carried such as used tires, railroad ties, discarded inventory, storage pallets, shipping containers, temporary portable storage facilities/containers and semi trailers not attached to a truck. 
b.  General outdoor storage is prohibited within the public right-of-way or fire lane. 
c.  General outdoor storage shall not be allowed in off-street parking spaces. 
d.  General outdoor storage items shall not exceed a maximum of 20 feet (20') in height. 
e.  General outdoor storage items shall be completely enclosed or shall be moved to the rear of the structure, but in no event shall general outdoor storage items be visible from public right-of-way. 
3.  Outdoor Display and Storage Requirements. 
a.  All outdoor display and storage areas must be clearly shown on the Site Plan submitted for the property. 
b.  Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in the City's ordinances, all outdoor display and storage areas shall be located outside the public right-of-way. 
4.  Exceptions. 
a.  Vehicles for sale as part of a properly permitted vehicle sales use (including boats and manufactured housing) shall not be considered merchandise, material or equipment subject to the restrictions of this section. 
b.  Such vehicles must be located and displayed on a paved vehicle use area and clearly indicated on the Site Plan. 
c.  Flea markets, open air markets, farmer's markets with a permanent Certificate of Occupancy for such use are not subject to the restrictions of this section. 
C.  Effective Dates. 
1.  Temporary Limited Non-Conforming Use. Outdoor displays or outdoor storage (temporary or general) described in subsection 21.8.9.B. located on a site on April 30, 2010; in compliance with the provisions of this UDC as in effect on April 12, 2010; and in good working order and actively being used for its intended display or storage purpose on April 30, 2010 may remain in the same location on such site, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 21.8.9.B. until the earliest to occur of the following: 
a.  the removal of such display or storage from its precise location on April 30, 2010; or 
b.  the failure of the property owner or lessee or the owner of such display or storage to operate or use such display or storage in the manner intended and in effect on April 30, 2010 for a period of three (3) consecutive business days; or 
c.  the reduction in height of any such display or storage that would be governed by subsection 21.8.9.B.2.d. to less than 20 feet (20'); or 
d.  the destruction or damage of such display or storage to the extent of twenty-five (25%) or more of its area or value; or 
e.  December 31, 2013. During such period, the property owner or lessee or the owner of such display or storage may perform minor repair or maintenance of such display or storage and may replace any unit of such display offered for sale or lease that is sold or leased with a like unit offered for sale or lease but shall not substitute other types of items for sale or lease in such display, and shall not replace, enlarge or substitute storage facilities or storage areas that do not comply with subsection 21.8.9.B. In all events, none of such displays or storage shall be in a condition of disrepair or non-operation. 
2.  Other Outdoor Displays or Outdoor Storage. Outdoor displays and outdoor storage not described in subsection 21.8.9.C.1. shall be in compliance with the provisions of subsection 21.8.9.B. on and after May 1, 2010. Outdoor displays and outdoor storage described in subsection 21.8.9.C.1. shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days after the earliest to occur of the condition described in subsections 21.8.9.C.1.a.-e. 
ARTICLE 9. -  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 21.9.1. - General design standards. 
A.  Conformity with Comprehensive Land Plan. All subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Land Plan for orderly and unified development of streets, utilities, neighborhood design, and public land and facilities, as well as other provisions of this UDC and other applicable ordinances, codes and regulations. Standards and design criteria contained herein and in the Public Works Specifications Manual represent minimum values considered necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community. The design engineer and developer are required to meet or exceed the requirements of these standards by providing a more conservative design criteria. However, they shall not permit their design to fall below the standards of this UDC. Where there is a conflict between the regulations contained within this Article and regulations or standards contained within any other ordinance, code or regulation of the City, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. Approval of plans and specifications by the City shall not be construed as relieving the design engineer/developer of responsibility for compliance with this UDC, nor with any other local, county or state authority having jurisdiction. 
B.  Achieving desirable neighborhood development. Residential subdivisions shall be designed to take advantage of the principles and general designs for neighborhood development as established by the Comprehensive Land Plan and the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to achieve the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood unit in which the subdivision is located. 
C.  Provision for future subdivision. All subdivisions shall be so arranged as to allow logical further subdivision and opening of future streets and shall coordinate with adjoining existing and/or future subdivisions. 
D.  Standards for site improvements. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, utility installations and other site improvements required to be installed by the subdivider under the provisions of these regulations shall conform to the requirements of this Article and to the Public Works Specifications Manual or other approved agencies responsible for design, construction methods and standards, payments, refunds, credits and other financial arrangements. 
Sec. 21.9.2. - Blocks. 
A.  The length, width and shape of blocks will be determined with due regard to: 
1.  provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated (note that the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that the block and lot size bear reasonable relation to the planned use of the land); 
2.  zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; and 
3.  need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
B.  In general, intersecting streets shall be used to determine the block lengths and widths, and shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. 
C.  A waiver to the standards of this section may be allowed in cases where physical barriers, property ownership or adjacent existing subdivisions create conditions where it is appropriate. The length may be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
D.  In general, block lengths along minor or secondary streets shall not exceed 1,400 feet or be less than 500 feet, and along major streets shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 900 feet. 
Sec. 21.9.3. - Lots. 
A.  Lot sizes and dimensions shall conform to the minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning district. The lot area shall be computed including all easements. Changes in the required lot sizes and dimensions may only be allowed through rezoning or through the granting of a variance by the BOA. No lot shall be approved which does not meet the minimum requirements of the appropriate zoning district. 
B.  In residential subdivisions not served by public sewer, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require the developer to cause a percolation test to be made. In no case will the lot size in such subdivision be less than one-half acre (21,780 square feet). This is the responsibility of the County Health Inspector. 
C.  Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
D.  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback and proper orientation to both streets. Lots abutting crosswalks shall be treated as corner lots. 
E.  Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high pressure gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a dangerous effect on residential property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, an additional depth of 25 feet shall be required. Where a lot sides to any of the above, an additional width of 15 feet shall be required. A planting screen or non-access easement of at least ten feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting a railroad right-of-way, high pressure gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a dangerous effect on residential property. 
F.  Residential lots located on a cul-de-sac shall be at least fifty feet (50') wide at the building line. 
G.  Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography; the best relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood; and to minimize the effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses. 
H.  There shall be no residential lots facing directly upon a major street. 
I.  All side lines of lots shall be perpendicular to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines except where a waiver to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. 
J.  Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street, either by direct frontage on such street, or by public access easement approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Rear and/or side driveway access to major streets shall be prohibited. 
K.  Minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on the subdivision by the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less than those required by the applicable zoning district. The front line setback shall be measured from the point where the public right-of-way ends to the front face to the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. 
Sec. 21.9.4. - Monuments and lot markers. 
A.  Permanent survey reference monuments. Concrete monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curve, and all corners of boundary lines of the subdivision. A monument shall be made of an iron stake one-half (1/2") in diameter and twenty-four inches (24") long centered in concrete a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter and twelve inches (12") long. The iron stake should be left one-half inch above the concrete with a surveyors' aluminum or plastic cap, stamped with the surveyors' registered number or firm. Monuments shall be identified on the plat with elevation and the elevation shall be stamped on top of the monument. 
B.  Other markers. All other survey markers, such as lot corners, shall have an iron stake one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty-four inches (24") long and shall be placed flush with the ground, or below ground, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed. 
C.  Benchmarks. A minimum of two (2) benchmarks shall be established in each subdivision. Benchmarks shall be established on iron rods embedded in concrete monuments six inches (6") in diameter and set in the ground to a depth of three feet (3') and set to U.S. National Geodetic Survey datum. Using tops of manholes as a benchmark is not acceptable. 
D.  Monument placement and verification. Monuments and lot markers shall be set immediately after completion of utility installations and street construction. Prior to acceptance of subdivision improvements by the City, the developer's surveyor or engineer shall certify that all monuments, benchmarks and markers are in place and correctly positioned. 
Sec. 21.9.5. - Exterior construction and design standards. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of these design criteria to provide guidelines for new construction in order to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance as well as ensure sound construction quality. 
B.  Applicability . The provisions of this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall be applicable to the following: 
1.  All new buildings within the corporate limits of the City except public schools; and 
2.  Building expansions which cumulatively increase the gross floor area more than 25% of the original building area except public schools. 
C.  Industrial Buildings . 
1.  Applicability . This section shall apply to buildings with an industrial use. 
2.  Exterior Building Materials . Buildings must comply with one of the following: 
a.  At least 80% of each wall (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Concrete tiltwall 
• Split face CMU 
• Stucco 
• Tile, or 
b.  100% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street) and a total of 75% of the entire building (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Concrete tiltwall 
• Split face CMU 
• Stucco 
• Tile 
3.  Glazing . All buildings must comply with one of the following: 
a.  At least 15% of the front facade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street) shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are adjacent to or face two more public streets at least 15% of each façade adjacent to or facing a public street shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are not adjacent to or face a public street, but instead face or front a private drive, the facade that faces or fronts on the private drive that provides for primary access shall be considered as the front facade; or 
b.  Windows and doors may be spread around the building, the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 30% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street). For buildings that are adjacent to or facing two or more public streets the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 20% of the total area of the façades adjacent to or facing public streets. 
4.  Articulation and architectural features . 
a.  Horizontal articulations or offsets are required on any wall greater in length than 100 linear feet, which is adjacent to or facing a public street. 
(1)  The depth of the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or offsets can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
b.  Vertical articulations or elevation changes are required on all walls and should be designed to screen rooftop equipment. 
(1)  The height of the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or elevation changes can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
5.  Roof Treatments . Façade articulations shall provide for vertical and horizontal screening of air conditioning units and all mechanical equipment located on rooftops. The minimum height of the screening shall be equal to the height of the tallest rooftop equipment. 
D.  Commercial Buildings . 
1.  Applicability . This section shall apply to buildings with a commercial use. 
2.  Exterior Building Materials . Buildings must comply with the following: 
a.  At least 80% of each wall (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following primary materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Tile 
• Stucco b 
• Concrete tiltwall c 
• Split face CMU c . 
b.  Stucco may be used in conjunction with one of the other approved primary materials. Stucco cannot be used for more than 50% of each façade. 
c.  Concrete tiltwall and split face CMU may be used in conjunction with one of the other approved primary materials. Concrete tiltwall and split face CMU cannot be used for more than 30% of each façade. 
3.  Glazing . All buildings must comply with one of the following: 
a.  At least 30% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street) shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are adjacent to or face two or more public streets at least 30% of each façade adjacent to or facing a public street shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are not adjacent to or face a public street, but instead face or front a private drive, the facade that faces or fronts on the private drive that provides for primary access shall be considered as the front facade; or 
b.  Windows and doors may be spread around the building, the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 60% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street). For buildings that are adjacent to or facing two or more public streets the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 50% of the total area of the façades adjacent to or facing public streets. 
4.  Articulation and architectural features . 
a.  Horizontal articulations or offsets are required on any wall greater in length than 30 linear feet, which is adjacent to or facing a public street, or adjacent to or facing a side lot line of the property. 
(1)  The depth of the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or offsets can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
b.  Vertical articulations or elevation changes are required on all walls and should be designed to screen rooftop equipment. 
(1)  The height of the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or elevation changes can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
5.  Roof Treatments . Façade articulations shall provide for vertical and horizontal screening of air conditioning units and all mechanical equipment located on rooftops. The minimum height of the screening shall be equal to the height of the tallest rooftop equipment. 
E.  Office/Public Buildings . 
1.  Applicability . This section shall apply to buildings with a professional office or public use. 
2.  Exterior Building Materials . Buildings must comply with the following: 
a.  At least 75% of each wall (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Tile 
• Stucco 
• Concrete tiltwall b 
• Split face CMU b 
b.  Concrete tiltwall and split face CMU may be used in conjunction with one of the other approved primary materials. Concrete tiltwall and split face CMU cannot be used for more than 30% of each façade. 
3.  Glazing . All buildings must comply with one of the following: 
a.  At least 25% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street) shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are adjacent to or face two or more public streets at least 20% of each façade adjacent to or facing a public street shall be comprised of windows or glass doors. For buildings that are not adjacent to or face a public street, but instead face or front a private drive, the facade that faces or fronts on the private drive that provides for primary access shall be considered as the front facade; or 
b.  Windows and doors may be spread around the building, the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 50% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street). For buildings that are adjacent to or facing two or more public streets the minimum amount of required windows or glass doors is calculated as 40% of the total area of the façades adjacent to or facing public streets. 
4.  Articulation and architectural features . 
a.  Horizontal articulations or offsets are required on any wall greater in length than 50 linear feet. 
(1)  The depth of the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or offsets can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
b.  Vertical articulations or elevation changes are required on all walls and should be designed to screen rooftop equipment. 
(1)  The height of the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or elevation changes can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
5.  Roof Treatments . Façade articulations shall provide for vertical and horizontal screening of air conditioning units and all mechanical equipment located on rooftops. The minimum height of the screening shall be equal to the height of the tallest rooftop equipment. 
F.  Multi-Family Buildings . 
1.  Applicability . This section shall apply to buildings with a Multifamily Use. 
2.  Exterior Building Materials . Buildings must comply with one of the following: 
a.  At least 80% of each wall (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Tile; or 
b.  100% of the front façade (façade adjacent to or facing a public street) and a total of 80% of the entire building (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Tile 
3.  Articulation and architectural features . 
a.  Horizontal articulations or offsets are required on any wall greater in length than 10 linear feet. 
(1)  The depth of the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or offsets can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or offset shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
b.  Vertical articulations or elevation changes are required on all walls and should be designed to screen rooftop equipment. 
(1)  The height of the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of two feet (2'). Articulations or elevation changes can be of varying depth as long as the minimum two feet (2') is met. 
(2)  The length of the new plane created by the articulation or elevation change shall be a minimum of 20% of the total length of the entire wall. 
4.  Roof Treatments . Façade articulations shall provide for vertical and horizontal screening of air conditioning units and all mechanical equipment located on rooftops. The minimum height of the screening shall be equal to the height of the tallest rooftop equipment. 
G.  Single- Family Residential . 
1.  Exterior Building Materials . Buildings must comply with the following: 
a.  At least 80% of the entire building façade (excluding windows and doors) shall be finished in one or more of the following materials: 
• Brick 
• Stone 
• Faux brick or stone 
• Tile 
• Concrete tiltwall 
• Stucco 
• Fiber cement siding 
(Ord. No. 15-S-24 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 21.9.6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21.9.7. - Landscaping. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish landscaping requirements to enhance the community's ecological, environmental, and beautification efforts as well as its aesthetic qualities. It is the intent of this section to reduce the negative effects of glare, noise, erosion, and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious and un-vegetated surfaces within the urban environment. It is the intent of this section to preserve and improve the natural and urban environment by recognizing that the use of landscaping elements can contribute to the processes of air purification, oxygen, regeneration, groundwater recharge, noise abatement, glare and heat, provision of habitats for wildlife, and enhance the overall beauty of the City. 
B.  Enforcement. If at any time after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the approved landscaping is found to be in nonconformance with standards and criteria of this section, notice by the City may be issued to the owner, citing the violation and describing what action is required to comply with this section. The owner, tenant or agent shall have forty-five (45) days after the date of said notice to restore landscaping as required. The City may extend the time of compliance based on weather conditions. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of this UDC. 
C.  Installation and Maintenance. 
1.  Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan approved as part of the Site Plan which shall include sod in full front and rear yards, except for landscape beds and gardens. On property containing a minimum of one-half (1/2) acre or greater, sod in front and rear yards shall be planted adjacent to the slab for a distance of fifty feet (50') and for a distance of twenty feet (20') in side yards. 
2.  The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas. The areas shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times. 
3.  Should any of the plant material used in any landscaping required under this section die, the owner of the property shall have ninety (90) days after notification from the City to obtain and install suitable replacement plant material. Synthetic or artificial lawn or plant material shall not be used to satisfy the requirements of this UDC. 
4.  In any case in which a Certificate of Occupancy is sought at a season of the year in which the City determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf, a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued notwithstanding the fact that the landscaping required by the Landscape Plan has not been completed provided the applicant posts fiscal surety in a form acceptable to the City in the amount of the estimated cost of such landscaping. Such surety shall be conditioned upon the installation of all landscaping required by the Landscape Plan within six (6) months of the date of the application and shall give the City the right to draw upon the surety to complete the said landscaping if the applicant fails to do so. 
5.  Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other material or plants not a part of the landscaping. 
6.  All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. 
7.  All landscape materials shall be installed according to American Nursery and Landscape Association (AN&LA) standards. 
8.  All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an approved automatic underground irrigation system unless the landscaped area has been designed utilizing xeriscaping methods. All irrigation systems shall be designed and sealed in accordance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and shall be professionally installed. No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees. 
9.  Vegetation other than approved grasses or ground cover under six inches (6") in height is prohibited in any City right-of-way unless specifically authorized in writing by the City Manager or his/her designee, after consultation with the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
D.  General Landscaping Requirements. 
1.  Trees planted shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches (2.5") caliper measured at four feet (4') above ground level at the time of planting. 
2.  All trees planted to meet the minimum landscaping, mitigation or preservations requirements of this section shall be planted so as to provide for no impervious material within the drip line of the tree. For the purposes of determining the drip line to meet the requirements of this section, the drip line radius shall be measured as being ten (10) times the caliper of the tree. For example, a six inch (6") tree will have a sixty inch (60") or five foot (5') radius or a ten foot (10') diameter. Tree wells or tree grates may be utilized to meet the requirements of this section. The City may, at its option, require certification by a registered arborist that adequate space has been provided for pervious cover beneath the drip line of a tree. 
3.  Shrubs, vines and ground cover planted pursuant to this section should be good, healthy nursery stock. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one-gallon container size at the time of planting. 
4.  Grass areas are encouraged to be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the City, including Bermuda, Buffalo Grass, Zoysia, or other drought-tolerant grass. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except in swales or other areas subject to erosion which shall require installation of solid sod. 
5.  New landscaped areas shall be prepared so as to achieve a soil depth of at least six inches (6"). 
6.  The use of architectural planters in nonresidential districts may be permitted in fulfillment of landscape requirements subject to approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission at the time of Site Plan approval. 
7.  Developers and homebuilders are encouraged to use xeriscape plant materials on model homes to promote use of water-wise landscaping. 
8.  Landscape planting shall not be erected or installed in such a manner as to interfere with traffic view or impose a safety hazard. 
9.  Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total required landscaping shall be located in the designated front yard. 
E.  Landscape Installation Required . 
1.  A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total land area of any proposed multifamily or nonresidential development shall be landscaped and shall be comprised of trees, shrubs, sod or other ground cover. In the event of the construction of a phased development, the minimum twenty percent (20%) requirement shall apply to each phase as it is developed. 
2.  All properties shall provide shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre (43,560 square feet) of gross lot area. Industrial property shall provide shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre, calculated at sixty percent (60%) of the gross lot area or by exclusion of the main enclosure structure ground floor area from the gross lot area, whichever is less. Public schools shall provide shade trees at a ratio of at least four (4) trees per acre. Existing trees may be counted toward meeting the requirements of this section. 
a.  Every single family residential lot shall provide a minimum of three (3) shade trees which shall include a minimum of one (1) tree in the front yard and one (1) tree in the rear yard. 
b.  Any property that is unable to satisfy the tree requirements of this section shall be required to pay tree mitigation fees in accordance with section 21.9.9 of this UDC. 
3.  The use of native and adapted, drought tolerant plants is encouraged to meet the requirements of this section. 
4.  Artificial plants or turf shall not be counted towards meeting the requirements of this section. 
F.  Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan shall be submitted to the City for approval. The landscape plan may be submitted as a part of the Site Plan. The landscape plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  location of all existing trees with indication as to those to be preserved; 
2.  location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, or other landscaping features; 
3.  species of all plant material to be used; 
4.  size of all plant material to be used; 
5.  spacing of plant material where appropriate; 
6.  type of watering system and location of watering source, irrigation, sprinkler, or water system, including placement of water sources; 
7.  description of maintenance provisions of the landscaping plan; and 
8.  persons responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. 
G.  Nonresidential and Multifamily Landscape Buffer Requirements. In addition to any screening requirements of section 21.9.8, a nonresidential or multifamily use adjacent to a residential use or residentially zoned property shall provide a minimum twenty foot (20') landscape buffer adjacent to the property line of the residential use or residentially zoned property. A minimum of one (1) shade tree shall be planted for each thirty linear feet (30') of landscape buffer. A minimum of ten (10) shrubs shall be planted for each fifty linear feet (50') of landscape buffer. All other areas within the landscape buffer shall be covered with grass or another solid vegetative cover approved at the time of Site Plan approval. 
H.  Parking Area Landscaping . Parking lots, vehicular use areas and parked vehicles are to be effectively screened from the public view and adjacent property. Both the interior and perimeter of such areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the following criteria. Areas used for parking or vehicle storage that are under, on or within buildings are exempt from these standards. Section H does not apply to public schools. 
1.  Interior Landscaping . A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross parking areas shall be devoted to living landscaping which includes grass, ground covers, plants, shrubs and trees. Gross parking area is to be measured from the edge of the parking and/or driveway and sidewalks. The following additional criteria shall apply to the interior of parking lots. 
a.  Interior landscape areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment of overhang through appropriate wheel stops or curbs. 
b.  There shall be a minimum of one (1) shade tree planted for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area. 
c.  Interior areas of parking lots shall contain planting islands located so as to best relieve the expanse of paving. Planter islands must be located no further apart than every twelve (12) parking spaces and at the terminus of all rows of parking. Such islands shall be a minimum of 200 square feet or ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20') in size. 
d.  Planter islands shall contain a combination of trees, shrubs, lawn, ground cover and other appropriate materials provided such landscaping does not cause visual interference within the parking area. 
2.  Perimeter Landscaping . All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be screened from all abutting properties with a wall, fence, hedge, berm or other durable landscape barrier. All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be screened from all abutting public rights-of-way with a wall, berm or combination of hedge and berm. Any living barrier shall be established in a minimum five foot (5') planting strip. Plants and materials used in living barriers shall be at least thirty inches (30") high at the time of planting and shall be of a type and species that will attain a minimum height of three feet (3') one (1) year after planting. Any landscape barrier not containing live plants or trees shall be a minimum of three feet (3') high at time of installation. Perimeter landscaping shall be designed to screen off-street parking lots and other vehicular use areas from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential properties. 
a.  Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts a public right-of-way, except a public alley, a perimeter landscape area of at least fifteen feet (15') in depth shall be maintained between the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking or vehicular area. An appropriate landscape screen or barrier shall be installed in this area and the remaining area shall be landscaped with at least grass or other ground cover. Necessary access ways from the public right-of-way shall be permitted through all such landscaping. 
b.  Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts an adjacent residential property line, a perimeter landscape area of at least ten feet (10') in width shall be maintained between the edge of the parking area and the adjacent property line. Access ways between lots may be permitted through all perimeter landscape areas. Landscaping shall be designed to visually screen the parking area. Whenever such property is zoned or used for single family residential purposes, a landscape buffer shall include a masonry wall and hedge, or berm which shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and a maximum of eight feet (8') in height. 
c.  Perimeter landscape areas shall contain at least one (1) shade tree for each fifty linear feet (50'), or fraction thereof, of perimeter area. 
I.  Approved Landscaping Plant List. 
1.  Approved Trees. 
Table 21.9.7A Approved Shade Trees Common Name Scientific Name American elm Ulmus Americana Anaqua Ehretia anacua Arizona cypress Cupressus arizonica Bald cypress Taxodium distichum Bigtooth maple Acer grandidentatum Black walnut Juglans nigra Bur oak Quercus macrocarpa Canby's oak Quercus canbyi Carolina basswood Tilia caroliana Cedar elm Ulmus crassifolia Chinkapin or Chinquapin oak Quercus muhlenbergii Chisos red, Graves Quercus gravesii Durand oak Quercus durandii Fragrant ash Fraxinus cuspidate Green ash Fraxinus Pennsylvania Lacey oak Quercus glaucoides Little, Texas walnut Juglans microcarpa Mexican live or Monterrey oak Quercus polymorpha Mexican sycamore Platanus mexicana Nuttall Oak Quercus nuttallii Pecan Carya illinoensis Red oak Quercus texana Shin oak Quercus mohriana Southern live oak Quercus virginiana Texas ash Fraxinus texansis Texas red oak Quercus buckleyi (texana) Texas sycamore Platanus occidentalis Vasey oak Quercus pungens var.vaseyana  
Table 21.9.7B Approved Ornamental, Evergreen and Palm Trees Common Name Scientific Name Aleppo pine Pinus halepensis Anacacho orchid tree Bauhinia congesta Bradford Pear Pyrus calleryana California fan (exotic) Washingtonia filifera Carolina buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana Condalia, brazil Condalia hookeri Crepe myrtle, etc. (exotic) Lagerstroemia indica, fauriei, and X's Desert willow Chilopsis linearis Dwarf Palmetto Sabel minor Eastern red cedar Juniperus virginiana Escarpment live oak Quercus fusiformis Evergreen Sumac Rhus virens Flameleaf sumac Rhus lanceolata Goldenball leadtree Leaucaena retusa Lavender tree Vitex agnus-castus Mediterranean fan palm (exotic) Chamaerops humilius Mexican buckeye Ungnadia speciosa Mexican Palmetto, sable Sabal mexicana Mexican pinyon pine, Remote pine Pinus cembroides Mexican redbud Cercis reniformis Mountain laurel or mescal bean Sophora secundiflora Possum-haw holly Ilex deciduas Rusty blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum Texas Crabapple Mollis texana Texas or Oklahoma redbud Cercis canadensis var. texensis Texas Palmetto, sable Sabal texana Texas persimmon Diospyrus texana Texas Pistache Pistacia texana Texas sophora or Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis Wild olive, Mexican wild olive Cordia boissieri Yaupon holly Ilex vomitoria  
2.  Approved shrubs, vines, perennials and ground cover. 
Table 21.9.7C Approved Shrubs, Vines, Perennials and Ground Cover Common Name Scientific Name Agarita, Agarito Berberis (Mahonia) trifoliata Agarita, Tx. Barberry Berberis spp. Althea, Rose-of-Sharon Hibiscus syriacus American Beauty Callicarpu americana Artemesia Artemesia spp. Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum Asparagus Fern Asparagus sprengeri Aster Aster spp. Autumn Sage Salvia greggii Bird of Paradise Caesalpinia gilliesi Blue Sage, Mealy Sage Salvia farenaceae Blue Shrub Sage Salvia ballotaeflora Bottlebrush Callistemon spp Bougainvilla Bougainvillea Brazilian Sky Flower Duranta repens Buckley Yucca Yucca constricta Bush Morning-Glory Ipomea fitulosa Butterfly Bush Buddleia spp. Butterfly Vine Mascagnia spp. Orchid Vine Stigmaphyllon littorale Cape Honeysuckle Tecoma capensis Caroline Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens Cat Claw Mimosa, Fragrant Mimosa Mimosa bluncifera Century Plant Agave americans Cigar Plants Cuphea spp. Columbine Aquilegia spp. Confederate Jasmine, Star Jasmine Trachelospermum jasminoides Coppertone Loquat Eriobotrya x "Coppertone" Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens Coral Vine, Rosa-De-Montana, Queens Wreath Antigonon leptopus Coralberry Symphoricapus orbiculatus Dwarf Nandina Nandina domestics "nana" etc. Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria nana Elderberry Sambucus Canadensis Evening Primrose Oenothera speciosa Fern Acacia Acacia hirta Firecracker Plant Russelia equisetiformis Fireman's Cap, Coral Tree Erythina crista-galli Four-nerve Daisy Hymenoxys scaposa Frogfruit Phyla humilis Gayfeather Liatris spp. Giant Liriope Liriope gigantea Golden Shrub Daisy Euryops pecinatus African Bush Daisy Gamolepis chrysanthemoides Guara Gaura spp Hawthorn Crataegus spp. Heartleaf Hibiscus Hibiscus cardiophyllus Hibiscus, Texas Star Hibiscus coccineus Hummingbird Bush Anisacanthus spp. Illinois Bundleflower Desmanthus illinoensis Iris Iris spp Italian Jasmine Jasminium floridum Juniper Juniper spp Lady Banksia Rose Rosa Banksiae Lantana Lantana spp. Lily Turf, Liriope (Std., "Big Blue") Liriope muscari vars Lindheimer Senna Cassia lindheimeriana Mexican Bird of Paradise Caesalpinia mexicana Mexican Butterfly Weed Asclepias tuberosa Mexican Flame Vine/Love Vine Senecio confuses Mexican Marigold Tagetes llucida Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora Mexican Shrimp Plant Justicia suberecta Mist Flower Eupatroium spp. Mondo Grass, Monkey Grass Ophiopogon japonica Mountain Sage Salvia regla Nandina Nandina domestics spp. Narrow-leaf Yucca Yucca agustifolia Passion Vine Passiflora allatocaerrulea (P. pfordtii) Passionflower Passifloria incarnate Pigeonberry Rivina humilis Pink Skullcap Scutelleria spp. Pomegranate (Regular and Dwarf) Puncia granatum Prairie Phlox Phlox spp. Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi Primrose Primrose spp. Prostrate Rosemary Rosemarinus officinales vars. Purple Coneflower Echinacea purpurea Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora Rock Rose Pavonia lasiopetala Rosemary Rosemarinus spp. Salvia Salvia spp. Santolina Santolina spp. Shrimp Plant Justicia spp. Silk Tassel Garrya ovata lindheimer Softleaf Yucca Yucca pendula Sotol Dasylirion spp. Spanish Dagger Yucca treculeana St. John's Wort Hypericum spp Texas Clematis, Scarlet Leatherflower Clematis texensis Texas Elbow Bush Foresteriera pubeseebs Texas Silverleaf, Sage, Cenizo Leucophyllum frutescens Texas Wisteria Wisteria macrostachya Thompson Yucca Yucca thompsonia Trumpet Vine,Trumpet Creeper Campsis radicans x "Madame Galen" Turk's Cap Malvaviscus drummondii Twisted-leaf Yucca Yucca rupicola Verbena Verbena spp. Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus quinquefolia Wax Myrtle - Dwarf, Standard Myrica cerifera White Bush Honeysuckle Lonicera albiflora Winecup Callirhoe involuerata Wisteria, evergreen Wisteria millettia veticulata Witchhazel Hamamelis virginiana Yarrow Achillea millefolium Yew Podocarpus macrophyllus Yucca Yucca spp.  
3.  Approved ornamental grasses. 
Table 21.9.7D Approved Ornamental Grasses Common Name Scientific Name Bamboo Muhly Muhlenbergia dumosa Big Bluestern Andropogon gerardii Deer Muhly Muhlenbergia rigens Eastern Gama grass Tripsacum dactyloides Gulf Muhly Muhlenbergia capillaris Indian Grass Sorghastrum natums Inland Sea Oats Chasmanthium latifolium Lindheimer Muhly Muhlenbergia lindheimer Little Bluestem Schizaachyrium scoparium Mexican Feathergrass Stipa tenuissima Pine Muhly Muhlenbergia dubia Seep Muhly Muhlenbergia reverehonii Sideoats grama Bouteloua curtipendula Switch Grass Panicum virgatum Weeping Muhly Muhlenbergia dubioides Western Wheatgrass Agropyron smithii  
4.  Approved turf grasses. 
Table 21.9.7E Approved Turf Grasses Common Name Scientific Name Bermuda grass Cynodon dactylon var. dactylon Buffalograss Buchloe dactyloides Blue Grama Bouteloua gracilis Zoysia Grass Varieties Zoysia sp.  
5.  Undesirable trees. 
Table 21.9.7F Undesirable Trees Common Name Scientific Name Arizona Ash Fraxinus velut Ashe-Juniper or Mountain Cedar Juniperus ashei Box Elder Acer negundo Chinaberry tree Melia azedarach L. Chinese Loquat or Loquat Eriobotrya japonica Chinese Parasol/Varnish Tree Firmiana simplex Chinese Tallow Sapium sebiferum Golden-Rain Tree Koelrenteria paniculata Huisache or Sweet Acacia Acacia farnesiana Japanese Plum Prunus salicina Ligustrum or Privet Ligustrum japonicum Lombardy Popular Populus nigra "italica" Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa Mimosa Albizia julibrissin Mexican Fan Palm Washingtonia Robusta Paper Mulberry Broussonetia papyrifera (L.) 
L=(Her. ex. Vent.) Saltcedar Tamarix ramosissima Ledeb. Sugarberry or Hackberry Celtis laevigata Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima  
(Ord. No. 16-S-27 , §§ 3, 4, 8-30-2016; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.9.8. - Screening and Fencing. 
A.  Fences and Screening in Residential Areas. 
1.  Height. 
a.  No fence, screen, or wall shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. No fence, screen, or wall within a required front yard shall exceed four feet (4') in height. Fences constructed in the front yard shall be non-opaque, decorative fences and shall not interfere with the sight visibility triangle as required by this UDC or any other applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations. 
b.  Exceptions: 
i.  A fence not to exceed six feet (6') in height may be installed in the front yard of property located in a Residential Agricultural (RA) District which is not in a mandatory homeowners' association or within the jurisdiction of a mandatory architectural review committee and which contains a minimum of two (2) acres. 
ii.  A fence not to exceed six feet (6') in height may be installed in the front yard of property located in a Residential Agricultural (RA) District which is in a mandatory homeowners' association or within the jurisdiction of a mandatory architectural review committee with the written approval of the homeowners' association or the architectural review committee, which approval must accompany the application for fence permit. 
iii.  Any such fence under this paragraph (b) shall be a non-opaque decorative fence which shall not interfere with the sight visibility triangle as required by this UDC or any other applicable City ordinances. 
2.  Fence Materials. 
a.  Materials Permitted. 
i.  Fences may be constructed of pressure treated wood, decorative metal, chain link or similar woven wire mesh, stone, brick, or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction. 
ii.  Decorative fences shall be constructed of pressure treated wood picket, decorative metal, stone or brick, or a combination thereof. Solid surface area of any decorative fence shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total surface area. 
b.  Prohibited Materials. Above-ground electrical fencing, wire mesh (such as hog wire or chicken wire), and barbed wire are prohibited except on parcels or lots one acre or greater in size in conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm animals. 
3.  Fences within Easements. Fences within a public easement shall have a gate or removable panel to allow for maintenance access to such easement. The City shall not be responsible for damage to any fence that may occur as a result of maintenance within the easement. Fences located within drainage easements shall be equipped with a bar screen at the bottom to allow for proper drainage flow. 
B.  Fences in Nonresidential and Multifamily Areas. 
1.  Height. No fence, screen, or wall shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. No fence, screen, or wall within a required front yard shall exceed eight feet (8') in height. Fences constructed in the front yard shall be non-opaque and shall not interfere with the sight visibility triangle as required by this UDC or any other applicable City ordinances, codes and regulations. 
2.  Fence Materials. 
a.  Materials Permitted. Fences may be constructed of pressure treated wood, decorative metal, chain link or similar woven wire mesh, stone, brick, or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction. 
b.  Prohibited Materials. Above-ground electrical fencing, wire mesh (such as hog wire or chicken wire), screening slats within chain link fences and barbed wire are prohibited except on parcels or lots one (1) acre or greater in size in conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm animals. 
3.  Fences Adjacent to Residential Property . Where any nonresidential or multifamily use, lot or parcel except public schools is adjacent to or separated by only a local street or alley from a lot or parcel that is zoned for single family residential use, the nonresidential or multifamily use shall construct a masonry screening wall a minimum of eight feet (8') in height. The screen shall be located no closer to the street than the property line. Such screening wall shall be maintained in good condition. Any sections of this UDC or any other City ordinances, codes or regulations concerning sight obstructions of intersections shall be applicable to the screen where it is intersected by a right-of-way. Where any nonresidential or multifamily use, lot or parcel is located in such a manner so as to be at a higher elevation than an adjacent lot or parcel that is zoned for single family residential use, the required masonry screening wall shall be constructed on the higher elevation so as to mitigate the adjacent residential property from the impacts of the adjacent use. 
4.  Screening of Trash Receptacles. All trash receptacles shall be screened from public view by a solid screening wall a minimum of eight feet (8') in height and constructed of a masonry material. Gates shall be of solid metal and shall be closed at all times except when loading and unloading. 
5.  Fences within Public Easements. Fences within a public easement shall have a gate or removable panel to allow for maintenance access to such easement. The City shall not be responsible for damage to any fence that may occur as a result of maintenance of any utility within the easement. 
6.  Gates for Vehicular Access. Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the property line a minimum of twenty-four feet (24'). 
C.  Screening Along Arterial Roadways. 
1.  Requirement Criteria. 
a.  Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear or side yards of single-family residential lots are adjacent to a principal or secondary arterial roadway as described in section 21.14.1, or are separated from a principal or secondary arterial roadway by an alley, the developer shall provide, at its sole expense, a minimum eight foot (8') tall masonry screening wall. All screening shall be adjacent to the right-of-way or property line and fully located on the private lot(s), including columns and decorative features. Any sections of this UDC or any other City ordinances, codes or regulations concerning sight obstructions of intersections shall be applicable to the screen where it is intersected by a right-of-way. 
b.  Parcels or lots one (1) acre or greater in size located in the RA zoning district and used in conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm animals are exempt from the screening wall requirements of this section. 
2.  Screening Alternatives. An alternative form of screening, in-lieu of the masonry wall, may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission with the Preliminary Plat application. Alternatives that may be considered include: 
a.  a living/landscaped screen in conjunction with decorative metal (e.g., wrought iron) fence sections with masonry columns; 
b.  a combination of berms and living/landscaped screening; 
c.  a combination of berms, decorative masonry walls and living/landscaped screening, either with or without a decorative metal or "FenceCrete" type of fence with masonry columns; or 
d.  some other creative screening alternative may be approved if it meets the spirit and intent of this section, if it is demonstrated to be long-lasting and generally maintenance-free, and if the Planning and Zoning Commission find it to be in the public interest to approve the alternative screening device. 
3.  Time required for opacity. Any required screening device shall be, or shall achieve, at least six feet (6') in height and at least ninety percent (90%) opacity within three (3) years of initial installation/planting. 
4.  Maintenance Easement. A wall/screening maintenance easement at least five feet in width shall be dedicated to the home owners association on the private lot side and adjacent to the entire length of the screening wall or device for maintenance and repair of the screening wall. 
5.  Installation. The screening/wall/device shall be installed prior to final acceptance of the subdivision public improvements. All landscape materials, if utilized, shall be installed in accordance with section 21.9.7. Failure to properly install all components of a required screening wall or device within the prescribed time frame shall constitute a violation of this UDC, and shall authorize the Public Works Director to refuse acceptance of the subdivision public improvements. 
6.  Design of Walls. All masonry, wrought iron, steel or aluminum screening wall plans and details must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, and must be approved by the City. Use of chain-link, chicken-wire, hog-wire fencing, and any other material similar in appearance and quality is expressly prohibited for meeting the requirements of this section. 
7.  Height of Screening. The height of required screening devices, including spans between columns, shall be a minimum of six feet (6') and shall be no more than eight feet (8'). Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural elements, and other similar features may exceed the maximum height by up to two feet (2') for a total maximum height of ten feet (10') for these features. 
8.  Other Easements. Screening fences, walls and devices shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility or drainage easement unless specifically authorized by the City and by any other applicable utility provider(s). 
(Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 5, 8-30-2016) 
Sec. 21.9.9. - Tree Preservation and Mitigation. 
A.  Purpose and Intent . 
1.  The purpose of this section is to conserve, protect and enhance existing healthy trees and natural landscape. It is recognized that the preservation of existing trees contributes to the overall quality and environment of the City. Trees can and do contribute to the processes of purification, oxygenation, regeneration, groundwater recharge, reduction of pollution and contaminants in aquifers, erosion and dust control, abatement of noise, provision of wildlife habitat and enhancement property values. Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of natural vegetation on any parcel is prohibited. 
2.  It is hereby declared the intent of the City to encourage the preservation of all trees within the City limits. While the layout of a property with respect to the placement of buildings, parking facilities and other site requirements is at the discretion of the developer of the property, it is the policy of the City to promote site layout and design in a manner which preserves the maximum amount of Protected Class and Heritage Class trees possible. 
B.  Applicability and Exemptions . 
1.  The provisions of this section are applicable to the following: 
a.  all new residential and nonresidential development within the City except public schools; 
b.  redevelopment of any residential or nonresidential property within the City that results in an increase in the building footprint or the total destruction and reconstruction except public schools; 
c.  any grading, filling or clearing of land in the City limits; and 
d.  any selective or individual removal of any Protected Class or Heritage Class Tree in the City limits. 
2.  The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this section: 
a.  Protected Class Trees . Trees having a DBH (diameter at breast height measured four and one half feet above existing ground level) between eight inches (8") and less than twenty-four inches (24") are designated as "Protected Class Trees". 
b.  Heritage Class Trees . Trees having a DBH greater than or equal to twenty-four inches (24") are designated as "Heritage Class Trees". 
c.  Damage . Damage shall be considered any injury to a tree including, but not limited to: 
i.  uprooting; 
ii.  severance of the root system or main trunk; 
iii.  storage of topsoil, construction materials, debris or chemicals within the drip line area; 
iv.  compaction of soil within the drip line area; 
v.  a substantial change in the natural grade above a root system or within the drip line area; 
vi.  pruning or removal of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the living tissue; or 
vii.  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within the drip line area. Tree grates or tree wells may be provided to preserve pervious surface within the drip line area. 
3.  The following are exempt from the preservation, mitigation and permitting requirements of this section: 
a.  Protected Class Trees located within the area of a proposed on-site sewage facility (OSSF) (A waiver to mitigation for Heritage Class trees may be requested) ; 
b.  Protected Class and Heritage Class Trees located within a right-of-way to be dedicated to and maintained by the City and shown on the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan; 
c.  Protected Class Trees located within any utility easement, Heritage Class Trees located within any utility easement are exempt from preservation requirements only (A waiver to mitigation for Heritage Class trees may be requested); 
d.  Protected Class and Heritage Class trees damaged or destroyed by floods, fire, wind or other natural causes; 
e.  Dangerous, diseased, damaged, dead or dying Protected Class or Heritage Class trees as determined by a tree survey and a letter from a certified Texas Arborist; provided, notwithstanding the title of this section; and 
f.  Protected Class trees from the Undesirable Trees list in UDC Table 21.9.7F. (A waiver to mitigation for Heritage Class trees may be requested) 
g.  Protected Class and Heritage Class trees located on property that has an existing one family or two-family dwelling that is occupied. 
h.  Protected Class and Heritage Class trees of the following exempted tree species: 
Table 21.9.9 Exempted Trees Common Name Scientific Name Hackberry Celtis occidentalis Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana Common Ashe Juniper Juniperis ashei Chinaberry Melia azedarach Mesquite Prosopis spp. Ligustrum Ligustrum spp.  
C.  Tree Preservation . The existing natural landscape character, especially native oaks, elms, and pecan trees, shall be preserved to the maximum extent reasonable and feasible. Except as otherwise exempted in section 21.9.9.B.3. above, a tree removal permit is required for the removal of any tree with a DBH greater than eight inches. 
1.  Protected Class Trees . Any Protected Class Trees not exempt from preservation in section B.3. above may be removed upon approval of a Tree Removal Permit by the City Manager or his/her designee. Any decision of the City Manager or his/her designee regarding a tree removal permit may be appealed to the BOA in accordance with section 21.4.14 of this UDC. 
2.  Heritage Class Trees . Any Heritage Class Trees to be removed may be removed upon approval of a Tree Removal Permit by the City Manager or his/her designee. Any decision by the City Manager or his/her designee regarding a tree removal permit may be appealed to the BOA in accordance with section 21.4.14 of this UDC. 
3.  Minimum Preservation . In the development of any site, at least twenty-five percent (25%) of all mitigatable Protected Class and Heritage Class trees must be preserved. (A waiver to the 25% preservation requirement may be requested) 
D.  Tree Mitigation . Any trees that are removed or damaged as a result of the approval of a Tree Removal Permit shall be mitigated for on the same site as the proposed development. The species of trees planted for mitigation purposes may not include those listed as exempt in subsection 21.9.9.B.3. above nor any of the undesirable trees identified in table 21.9.7F. All trees planted for mitigation purposes must be a species of shade tree identified in table 21.9.7.A. In the event that mitigation is not feasible on the same site as the proposed development, an applicant may request to donate trees, meeting the mitigation requirements of this section, to be planted at public parks, schools, or other approved public facilities throughout the City or provide a fee-in-lieu of payment which will be used to place trees at public parks, schools, or other approved public facilities throughout the City. Tree mitigation funds may also be utilized to install irrigation, to repair or remove damaged or destroyed trees, to preserve and protect existing Protected Class and Heritage Class trees and to purchase equipment for the preservation or protection of existing trees. Mitigation requirements are: 
1.  Protected Class Trees . Protected trees shall be mitigated at a one-to-one (1:1) DBH inch ratio for every tree removed. Replacement trees shall have a minimum DBH of two and one half inches (2.5"). 
2.  Heritage Class Trees . Heritage Class trees shall be mitigated at a three-to-one (3:1) DBH inch ratio for every tree removed. Replacement trees shall have a minimum DBH of two and one half inches (2.5"). 
3.  Damaged Trees . Any trees that are designated for preservation and are damaged during the construction process or that die within two (2) years of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be mitigated for in accordance with subsection 21.9.9.D.1. and D.2. above. 
4.  Mitigated Trees . Trees planted and counted towards the necessary mitigation requirements that are damaged after planting or that die within two (2) years of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be mitigated for at a one-to-one (1:1) DBH inch ratio for every tree damaged or that dies. 
E.  Tree Protection Standards . 
1.  All trees to be preserved on site shall be protected from damage caused by site excavation or construction in accordance with the following: 
a.  All trees shall be protected by a fence, frame or box constructed around the drip line of the preserved tree. Protection measures may not be removed until construction is complete. 
b.  A minimum of three inches (3") of mulch or compost shall be spread beneath the drip line of the preserved tree. 
c.  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, place any paving material or place any drive or parking area within the drip line of any Protected Class or Heritage Class Tree without prior written approval of the City Manager or his/her designee at the time of Site Plan approval. 
d.  No person shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any Protected Class or Heritage Class Tree. 
2.  It is the intent of the City to control and prevent the spread of Oak Wilt. 
a.  If any oak tree is wounded by intentional damage or pruning or as a result of natural causes, the damaged area shall be immediately treated with tree wound dressing. 
b.  All necessary and reasonable efforts shall be given during the permitted removal of any trees to utilize best known practices to prevent the spread of Oak Wilt disease to any other surrounding trees. 
F.  Tree Preservation Credits-Nonresidential and Multifamily Developments . To encourage the preservation of existing Protected Class or Heritage Class Trees contained within a proposed development, tree preservation credits may be requested to reduce the amount of new trees required on nonresidential and multifamily sites. Tree preservation credits can be issued for landscape buffer requirements when the tree being preserved is located within the buffer. Tree preservation credits can be issued to satisfy total trees per acre requirements of UDC Sec.21.9.7.E.2. The following minimum tree preservation credits may be requested: 
1.  Protected Class Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required landscaping or mitigation standards at a one-to-one (1:1) caliper inch ratio; 
2.  Heritage Class Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required landscaping or mitigation standards at a three-to-one (3:1) caliper inch ratio; 
G.  Tree Survey Required . Every application for a final plat for residential development or Site Plan for nonresidential and multifamily development shall be accompanied by a tree survey that includes the following information: 
1.  total number of DBH caliper inches of Protected Class and Heritage Class on the site; 
2.  total number of DBH caliper inches of Protected Class and Heritage Class to be removed; and 
3.  total number of DBH caliper inches of Protected Class and Heritage Class to be preserved. 
H.  Tree Removal Permit . A tree removal permit is required for the removal of any Protected Class or Heritage Class trees not exempt in section 21.9.9.B.2. above. The permit must be accompanied by an appropriate application and shall contain a tree preservation plan showing the following: 
1.  existing/proposed topography; 
2.  location of property lines, easement, rights-of-ways, setbacks, parking areas and sidewalks; 
3.  location, species and size (in DBH) of each Protected Class and Heritage Class Tree, except those trees exempted by section 21.9.9.B.2.f. above; 
4.  a tree inventory that summarizes the following: 
a.  total number of DBH caliper inches on the site; 
b.  total number of DBH caliper inches to be removed; 
c.  total number of DBH caliper inches to be preserved; 
d.  location of any proposed tree mitigation; 
e.  any proposed tree preservation credits; and 
5.  a summary of the tree protection methods to be utilized. 
I.  Waiver . 
1.  General . The City Manager or his/her designee may authorize waivers from the provisions of this Article when, in their opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. Waivers may be granted only to items specifically stated in this section. Waivers must meet one of the following eligibility requirements: 
a.  The tree is proposed for removal in order for the property to achieve compliance with other applicable City requirements and standards (i.e. site design or storm water management); or 
b.  The tree is proposed for removal because it is within a future public utility location. 
2.  Criteria for approval . Waivers shall be evaluated using the following criteria: 
a.  Removal of the tree will not have a significant negative impact on erosion, soil stability, flow of surface waters, protection of adjacent trees or windbreaks; 
b.  The requested waiver does not violate the intent of this section or the UDC; 
c.  Strict interpretation of the provisions of the section would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other nearby properties in the same zoning district or with the same land use that would comply with the same provisions; 
d.  A reasonable effort to preserve the tree has been made and reasonable alternatives have been evaluated and determined to not be feasible. 
3.  Any decision of the City Manager or his/her designee regarding waivers to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. When considering an appeal, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the same standards as the City Manager or his/her designee as outlined above. 
(Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 6, 8-30-2016; Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-27-2018) 
Sec. 21.9.10. - Park and Open Space Dedication Requirements. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the adequate provision of parkland and open space to meet the needs of a growing City population; for improvements to existing parkland; for establishment, maintenance and operation of a Parkland Dedication Fund; establish requirements and procedures for governing required dedications of parkland or improvements to existing parkland by subdividers of land; and for cash payments-in-lieu of land by subdividers of land in certain cases. 
2.  It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form of parks and open spaces are necessary and for the public welfare and that the only adequate procedure to provide for parkland and park improvements is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property or subdivisions in the City, whether such development consists of new residential construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on existing residential land. It is the policy of the City to require subdividers of residential subdivisions and lots to provide for parkland and park facilities at the time of development approval in proportion to the need for such improvements created by the developments and in proportion to the benefits received from contribution of such facilities. 
B.  Applicability. The parkland dedication and park development requirements of this section shall be applicable to every residential subdivision developed under the provisions of this UDC, whether such subdivision consists of new residential construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on existing residential land, within the City limits or the City's ETJ. 
C.  Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Prior to Submittal of a Subdivision Master Plan or Preliminary Plat, a General Parks Plan shall be submitted and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  location and size of any proposed parks to be dedicated to the public or to be retained as private parkland; 
b.  a statement of the suitability of the parkland in meeting the criteria in subsection H. of this section; 
c.  a general park development plan including any proposed improvements; and 
d.  a phasing plan. 
2.  Prior to submittal of a Final Plat, a Detailed Parks Plan shall be submitted and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  location and size of the proposed park; 
b.  a statement of the suitability of the parkland in meeting the criteria in subsection H. of this section; and 
c.  a detailed plan of any proposed improvements, including cost. 
3.  The Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services shall review the General Parks Plan and make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to approval of a Subdivision Master Plan or Preliminary Plat. Recommendations should be based upon the Comprehensive Land Plan and/or the Parks and Open Space Master Plan as adopted by the City, and the standards and provisions contained herein regarding the amount and location of park land and fees-in-lieu of park land dedication. 
4.  All parkland to be dedicated to the City shall meet the suitability requirements of section 21.9.10.H. 
D.  Parkland Dedication Rrequirements. 
1.  Land Dedication. A final plat establishing a residential (including multifamily) subdivision or commercial or manufacturing district either within the City or within the ETJ of the City shall contain the dedication of an area of land for park purposes meeting the requirements set out in this section, or a notation signed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services of receipt of an approved cash payment-in-lieu of land. The subdivider of a residential (including multifamily) subdivision or commercial or manufacturing district shall dedicate to the City developed parkland in the amount as established within the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. A proposed plat submitted for approval must: 
a.  show the location and dimensions of the area proposed to be dedicated for parkland; 
b.  show the number of dwelling units to be located within the proposed residential subdivision (whether single or multi-family units) or LUEs in a commercial or manufacturing district; 
c.  tell whether all or any part of the property to be dedicated as a park is located in a special flood hazard area, as such areas are defined in this UDC; and 
d.  show the proposed streets and utilities to serve the parcel to be dedicated as parkland. 
2.  Development of Areas Smaller Than Five (5) Acres. The development of park areas smaller than five (5) acres for public park purposes is deemed to be impractical. If fewer than five (5) acres are proposed to be created by a plat, then prior to filing the plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay to the City the applicable cash payment-in-lieu of land. No plat showing a dedication of less than five (5) acres for a public park shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. While dedication of parkland to the City in an amount less than five (5) acres is deemed impractical, it is the City's policy to encourage the development of private parkland in accordance with subsection I below and provide credit for development of these private parklands accordingly. 
3.  Dedication Procedures. The owner of property for a residential subdivision shall be required at final plat approval to dedicate parkland. Dedication of parkland shall be evidenced by a formal dedication on the plat to be recorded. The land so dedicated and conveyed shall not be subject to any reservations of record, encumbrances of any kind, or easements, which in the opinion of the City will interfere with or materially increase the cost of making such land available for parks or recreational purposes. 
4.  Development of Subdivision in Phases. If a subdivision is to be developed in phases and the final platting of the park area to be dedicated is to be included in a future phase, then the subdivider shall be required to provide a notation on the plat which acknowledges that dedication of parkland to serve said subdivision will occur with the platting of future phases. 
5.  Right to Accept/Reject Land. If the City determines that sufficient park area is already in the public domain within proximity of the proposed development, or if the recreation needs for the area would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks, the City has the right to accept the dedication or to refuse same and require a cash payment-in-lieu of land. 
6.  Compliance with Parks and Open Space Master Plan. The City has adopted a Parks and Open Space Master Plan which outlines the necessity for parkland dedication and the types of improvements deemed appropriate for the City. The dedication and development of any parkland and the expenditure of any fees-in-lieu of dedication or development shall be in accordance with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan of the City. 
E.  Fee-in-Lieu of Land Dedication Requirements. 
1.  Right to Request Waiver of Dedication Requirements. A subdivider obligated to make a dedication of land may request the City waive the required dedication of land, in whole or in part, and to accept a cash payment-in-lieu of land dedication. Any request for a waiver to the land dedication requirements shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and final approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  Required Fee-in-Lieu of Land Dedication. Any subdivider who is required to make a cash payment-in-lieu of land dedication or who is granted a waiver in accordance with section 21.9.10.1. above, shall make a cash payment-in-lieu of land in accordance with this section. The amount of such cash payment-in-lieu of land shall be calculated by multiplying the number of dwelling units proposed to be established by the plat times the amount per dwelling unit as established in the fee schedule set from time to time by the City Council. A cash payment-in-lieu of land shall be made prior to the recordation of the final plat. 
F.  Parkland Improvement Agreement . The property owner or applicant may request to defer the obligation to dedicate parklands and/or develop parklands until after a final plat recordation. The request shall be submitted in writing and specify what is requested for deferral. Deferral of the obligation to dedicate parkland and/or develop parklands shall be conditioned on execution of an Improvement Agreement and provision of sufficient security, pursuant to Section 21.4.15.F, Improvement Agreements. The City Manager or his/her designee may approve or deny the request to defer obligations to dedicate parkland dedication and/or develop parklands. 
G.  Park Development. 
1.  A subdivider who elects to dedicate parkland in accordance with section 21.9.10.D. above shall improve all dedicated public parkland with improvements approved by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and the City Parks and Recreation Department. Design, specification, and construction of the improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the City. Construction of the improvements must be completed within one (1) year of the approval of the final plat of the subdivision. No final plat shall be recorded for any subdivision in which completion of the required improvements has not been accepted by the City; however, in the event that a subdivider requests that a final plat be approved prior to completion of the required improvements, surety for construction of improvements may be provided in the same manner as required of other subdivision- and site-related construction. 
2.  In-lieu of constructing the improvements required in section 21.9.10.F.1. above, the subdivider may elect to make a cash payment-in-lieu of construction to the City to meet the City's current or future recreational needs. If a developer who has dedicated land in accordance with section 21.9.10.D. above elects to make a fee-in-lieu of payment for park development, the City shall utilize those funds for improvement of parkland within the subdivision in which the funds are collected. In the event there are remaining funds after development of said parkland, the City may utilize the remaining funds to complete improvements in any public park within the City. 
3.  If the subdivider elects to pay fees-in-lieu of parkland dedication in accordance with section 21.9.10.E. above, then the subdivider shall make a cash payment-in-lieu of construction to the City for the required improvements in addition to the fees paid-in- lieu of dedication. Cash payments made in accordance with this paragraph may be utilized to complete improvements in any public park within the City. 
4.  Cash payments-in-lieu of required improvements shall be calculated by multiplying the number of dwelling units times the price per dwelling unit as established in the fee schedule set from time to time by the City Council. 
H.  Parkland Dedication Fund. 
1.  Special Fund. The City shall reserve all fee-in-lieu of payments and any accrued interest from the fee-in-lieu of parkland dedication or fee-in-lieu of parkland development in a separate account from the general funds of the City. This fund shall be known as the Parkland Dedication Fund. 
2.  Deposit/Expenditure of Parkland Dedication Fund. The City shall deposit sums collected as cash payments-in-lieu of land and cash payments-in-lieu of improvements in the Parkland Dedication Fund. The City shall expend such funds collected for the acquisition of land or for the improvement of existing parks on a first in, first out basis. 
3.  Records and Method of Expenditure. The City shall maintain records detailing the receipts and expenditures for the Parkland Dedication Fund. All funds deposited as credit for fee-in-lieu of parkland dedication may be utilized for the acquisition and/or development of parkland within the City. All funds collected as fee-in-lieu of parkland development shall be utilized for the development of parkland in accordance with section 21.9.10.F. above. 
I.  Parkland Design Criteria. 
1.  Location. Any land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of this section shall be reasonably located and adaptable for use as parkland and/or recreation facility, consistent with the most recent edition of the Comprehensive Land Plan and/or Parks and Open Space Master Plan as adopted by the City Council. 
2.  Land Suitability. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the suitability of proposed park land. The location, access, size, shape, topography, natural drainage, utilities, parking facilities, and wooded areas and other vegetative cover of the parcel or tract of land to be dedicated shall be appropriate for public parks and recreation purposes. All such park land shall be designated and located so as to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
3.  Usable Land. At least fifty percent (50%) of proposed parkland dedication site shall be level, well drained and suitable for open play. Such land shall be located outside of any one hundred (100) year floodplain or any other special flood zone identified on the most recently approve FEMA FIRM map and shall not exceed five percent (5%) slope. 
4.  Access. Access to parkland designated on a subdivision plat shall be provided by the dedication of at least 200 feet of street frontage in a manner satisfactory to the City, preferably at the corner of two (2) intersecting streets. When the land abutting the designated parkland is developed, the subdivider of such abutting land shall furnish and pay for all paving of all abutting street frontage. 
5.  Utilities. Potable water and wastewater connections shall be readily available at the park site with water and wastewater lines located along the street frontage. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that sufficient living unit equivalents that are not otherwise committed to other property are available to serve the park within these water and wastewater lines. 
6.  Drainage Improvements. Any detention ponds and/or other drainage facilities to be constructed in areas that are to be dedicated as parkland must be designed and constructed to also allow for recreational use. The subdivider may be required to demonstrate that the design, placement and construction of such ponds meet the requirements of the City. 
7.  Floodplain. The following standards shall apply to all land proposed for dedication or parkland which is located in a FEMA designated floodplain or other special flood hazard area. 
a.  Amount of Credit. Every acre of proposed dedicated parkland located within the floodplain or other special flood hazard area shall count as one-half (1/2) acre of land towards the total parkland dedication requirement. 
b.  Criteria for Parkland. Floodplain areas will be considered for eligibility as land to be dedicated based on the following criteria: 
i.  The floodplain area is easily accessible and has adequate street frontage. 
ii.  There has been minimal alteration of the natural character of the waterway and the floodplain area. Some improvements are necessary for City access and maintenance. 
iii.  In no case will floodplain areas be accepted which are less than one hundred feet (100') in width. 
iv.  The area's configuration and topography is suitable for the placement of low impact facilities such as playgrounds, picnic facilities and open play fields. 
8.  Disturbed Area. Any disturbed parkland shall be restored and the soil stabilized by a vegetative cover by the subdivider. 
9.  Disclosures. Prior to dedication of parkland, the subdivider shall make full disclosure of the presence of any hazardous substances and/or underground storage tanks (USTs) of which the subdivider has knowledge. The City, at its discretion, may proceed to conduct such initial environmental tests and surveys on the land as it may deem appropriate, and the subdivider shall grant to the City and its agents and employees such reasonable access to the land as is necessary to conduct such surveys and tests. If the results of such surveys and tests indicate a reasonable possibility of environmental contamination or the presence of USTs, the City may require further survey and tests to be performed at the subdivider's expense as the City may deem necessary prior to its acceptance of the dedication, or in the alternative, the subdivider may be required to identify alternative property or pay the fees-in-lieu of such parkland dedication. 
10.  Trash and Debris. The park site shall be free of trash and debris. If the condition of the dedicated parkland is disturbed during construction of subdivision improvements then the subdivider shall be responsible for returning the dedicated land to its previous condition prior to or at the time of final plat filing. The public improvements to be constructed per the applicable subdivision plat will not be accepted by the City until such time that the above conditions have been met. 
11.  Areas not Meeting the Minimum Requirements. In the event that areas proposed for dedication do not meet the grade, slope, or other requirements for parkland dedication found in this section, but are known to contain sensitive environmental features, the City may, at its discretion and after review by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, modify the standards of this section subject to the following limitations: 
a.  that such areas shall provide recreational or educational opportunities for the surrounding community in-lieu of parkland dedication; 
b.  that such areas shall be given a partial credit against the requirement of land dedication and/or payment of fees; and 
c.  that such areas shall meet any additional standards deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, pertaining to the dedication of land containing sensitive environmental features. 
J.  Private Parks. 
1.  Private Parkland Required. It is the intent of the City to provide for adequate areas of parkland within every subdivision as deemed practical by the City. All residential subdivisions developed after the effective date of this UDC that do not dedicate land in accordance with Paragraph D above, shall be required to dedicate an area as private parkland or open space. The amount of parkland dedicated and amenities provided shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
2.  Credit for Private Parkland. Up to fifty percent (50%) in area of a subdivision's total parkland dedication requirement may be satisfied through the dedication of a private park within the subdivision. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parkland development fee may be satisfied through the development of a private park within the subdivision. 
3.  Maintenance of Private Parks. The subdivider must submit a condominium declaration, homeowner's agreement or similar document which establishes the private ownership and maintenance responsibility of any private park areas together with a mechanism for funding the maintenance of the park established to meet the requirements of this section. In addition, a plat note must be included on the preliminary plat and final plat stating the ownership and maintenance responsibility of all private park areas. 
4.  Requirement of Continued Use. A restrictive covenant shall be recorded at the time of the recording of the plat, which covenant shall run with the land subdivided. The covenant shall restrict use of private parks and facilities to park and recreational purposes and must be submitted for approval by the City prior to final plat acceptance. 
5.  Security for Performance. The City may require financial assurances from the subdivider that the private park will be developed and completed, with assurances that a failure by the subdivider to timely complete the improvements to the park shall result in dedication of the private park to the City and the proceeds of the financial assurances as offered become the property of the City for use in completing the park. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.9.11. - Lighting and Glare Standards. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate outdoor lighting in order to reduce or prevent light pollution in the City. New lighting technologies have produced lights that are extremely powerful, and these types of lights may be improperly installed so that they create problems of excessive glare, light trespass, and higher energy use. Excessive glare can be annoying and may cause safety problems. Light trespass reduces privacy, degrades the enjoyment of the night sky, and results in higher energy use and increased costs for everyone. Appropriately regulated, and properly installed, outdoor lighting will contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents, and will help preserve the rural and historic character of the City. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The regulations contained in this section are applicable only within the corporate limits of the City. 
2.  Compliance with the regulations in this section is strongly encouraged for improvements and developments within the ETJ in order to prevent light pollution and preserve the rural and historic character of the City. 
3.  All outdoor lighting fixtures installed on private and public property within a new development or redevelopment within the City limits shall be required to comply with this UDC. This UDC does not apply to interior lighting; however, overly bright lighting emitted from a structure will be subject to this UDC if it is determined by the City Manager or his/her designee that it creates a nuisance or a potential safety hazard. 
4.  All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operating before the effective date of this UDC shall be exempt from this UDC unless they are determined to create a safety hazard. When existing lighting fixtures become inoperable, their replacements are subject to the provisions of this UDC. 
5.  Modifications to nonconforming lighting fixtures shall also comply with this section. 
6.  In the event of a conflict between this section and any other section of this UDC or any other regulation of the City, the more stringent requirements shall apply. 
C.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this UDC: 
1.  publicly maintained traffic control devices; 
2.  street lights installed prior to the effective date of this UDC; 
3.  temporary emergency lighting (fire, police, repair crews); 
4.  lighting fixtures and illumination requirements imposed by TxDOT within TxDOT rights of way (ROW); 
5.  moving vehicle lights; 
6.  navigation lights (aircraft warning beacons on water towers and wireless transmission facilities) required by State or Federal law; 
7.  signs and associated lighting that conform to the sign regulations of this section; 
8.  seasonal decorations with lights in place no longer than sixty (60) days; 
9.  sports field lighting; 
10.  other temporary uses approved by the City Council (festivals, carnivals, fairs, night-time construction); 
11.  covered porch lighting on residences provided that each external light fixture does not exceed 150 watts; and 
12.  security lights of any output that are controlled by a motion sensor switch provided they do not exceed 0.25 footcandle at the property line and do not remain illuminated for a duration not to exceed ten to twelve (10-12) minutes after activation. 
D.  Submittals. Applications for all building permits for new construction or redevelopment, including the installation of outdoor lighting fixtures, shall provide proof of compliance with this UDC. The submittal shall contain the following information as part of the Site Plan: 
1.  plans indicating the location, type, and height of lighting fixtures including both building mounted and ground mounted fixtures; 
2.  a description of the lighting fixtures, including lamps, poles or other supports and shielding devices, which may be provided as catalog illustrations from the manufacturer; 
3.  photometric data, which may be furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of light emission; 
4.  detailed site lighting plan illustrating the footcandle power measured throughout the site; and 
5.  additional information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to determine compliance with this UDC. 
E.  General Standards. The following standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of this UDC. 
1.  Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate safety, night vision, and comfort, and not create or cause excessive glare onto adjacent properties and public street rights of way. 
2.  Outdoor lighting must be hooded, shielded, and/or aimed downward at at least a forty-five degree (45°) angle. 
3.  The hood or shield must mask the direct horizontal surface of the light source. The light must be aimed so as to ensure that the illumination is only pointing downward onto the ground surface or into the building. No illumination may spill onto adjacent property. 
4.  Any bright light shining onto an adjacent property or street that would result in a safety hazard is not permitted. Light trespass beyond property boundaries or above the horizontal plane shall be considered non-compliant. 
5.  Existing fixtures may be adapted to comply with this UDC by adding a properly designed hood or shield, or by redirecting any upward mounted fixture downward onto the ground surface, sign, or illuminated structure. 
6.  All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, located, and maintained to minimize light trespass and all direct illumination shall be kept within the boundaries of the property upon which the light fixture is positioned. 
7.  When approved, accent lighting shall be directed downward onto the structure or object and not toward the sky or adjacent properties. Direct light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline or beyond the building edge. 
8.  Spotlights on landscaping and foliage shall be limited to 150 watts output. The light shall be shielded and so as not to create a nuisance or safety hazard. 
9.  Wall lighting attached to exterior buildings and structures shall not be the only source of light for parking lots. 
10.  Wall lighting shall be hooded or shielded to prevent light trespass beyond the property line. 
F.  Specific Nonresidential Lighting Requirements. 
1.  The maximum allowable intensity of lighting for any nonresidential use shall be 0.25 footcandles measured at the property line adjacent to any residentially zoned area or at the street ROW line when the residentially zoned area is separated by a public street ROW. 
2.  Light poles shall be placed on the site at a setback equal to their height from all adjacent residential property or street rights-of-way. 
3.  Lighting facilities used to light signs, parking areas or for other purposes shall be so arranged that the source of light is concealed from adjacent residential properties and does not interfere with traffic. 
4.  When a light source has elements such as shields, reflectors or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle that is less than ninety degrees (90°), the maximum permitted height shall be thirty (30) feet. 
5.  When a light source has a cutoff angle of ninety degrees (90°) or greater, the maximum permitted height shall be fifteen feet (15'). 
Sec. 21.9.12. - Site plan process. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. 
1.  Purpose. This section establishes a Site Plan review process for certain proposed residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use developments. The purpose of Site Plan approval is to: 
a.  ensure compliance with the requirements of this UDC; 
b.  promote better site design; 
c.  integrate projects more effectively into their surrounding environment; 
d.  prevent the impairment or depreciation of property values; 
e.  improve internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation; 
f.  encourage quality and innovative site planning techniques; 
g.  project and enhance the overall general public health, safety and welfare; 
h.  ensure efficient and safe land development; 
i.  ensure harmonious use of land; 
j.  ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Land Plan and other appropriate design standards; and 
k.  ensure adequate parking and loading, water supply, drainage and storm water management, sanitary sewer facilities, and other utilities and services. 
2.  Applicability. Site Plan review and approval shall be required as follows: 
a.  for any development that contains two (2) or more residential dwelling units on a single tract, lot, or parcel of land; 
b.  for any development that contains single-family attached dwelling units; 
c.  for any non-residential development; 
d.  any increase in an existing non-residential structure or a residential structure that contains two (2) or more residential dwelling units that is greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing building square footage; 
e.  for any PDD or SUP; 
f.  for any single-family residential development that includes a private amenity or facility or a golf course; and 
g.  no building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments until a Site Plan and all other required engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all construction and development conforms to the approved Site Plan and associated engineering/construction plans. The Site Plan review process shall include, but not be limited to, the following steps: 
i.  pre-application conference; 
ii.  site Plan review and approval; and 
iii.  construction of project (after City approval of required Site Plan and other associated plans, including platting and engineering plans). 
3.  Exempted Uses. The following land use activities are exempted from the requirements of this Article: 
a.  construction of one- or two-family dwellings, ordinary accessory structures and related land use activities; 
b.  ordinary repair and maintenance of existing structures or uses; 
c.  agricultural land use; 
d.  incidental landscaping or grading; 
e.  individual manufactured homes; and 
f.  interior alterations that do not substantially change the nature or use of the structure. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for Site Plan approval shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. An application for a Site Plan shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at his/her option, request a recommendation from any other City Department or consultant. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. 
D.  Contents of a Site Plan . An application for a Site Plan shall include the information required by the Development Manual. 
E.  Criteria for Approval. The Development Services Department and City administrative staff, in considering final action on a Site Plan, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the Site Plan is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; 
2.  the Site Plan is compatible with adjacent developments and neighborhoods and includes improvements to mitigate development related adverse impacts; 
3.  the Site Plan does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic which will be hazardous or conflict with the existing traffic patterns in the area; 
4.  the Site Plan incorporates features to minimize adverse effects on adjacent properties; 
5.  adequate capacity of public or private facilities for water, sewer, electricity and transportation to and through the development are provided to the site; 
6.  the proposed use and associated Site Plan promote the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City. 
F.  Revisions to Approved Site Plan . Changes to an approved Site Plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original approved Site Plan; however, changes of details within a Site Plan which do not alter the basic physical relationship of the property to adjacent property, do not alter the use permitted, increase the density, floor area, height, or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site as indicated on the approved Site Plan, may be authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this UDC. 
G.  Expiration of Site Plan. A Site Plan shall expire if any of the following occurs: 
1.  a building permit, if any, for the use has not been approved within two (2) years after the approval of a Specific Use Permit; 
2.  a building permit has not been approved within two (2) years after the approval of a Site Plan as part of a planned development district; 
3.  a building permit has not been approved within two (2) years for the construction of any building on the property for which the Site Plan was approved; and 
4.  a building permit that was approved as a result of an approved Site Plan expires within two (2) years after approval of the Site Plan. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
ARTICLE 10. -  PARKING STANDARDS 

Sec. 21.10.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish the number of required off-street vehicular parking spaces so as to provide for the needs of occupants, customers, visitors or others involved in the use or occupancy of any building or structure, to eliminate the undue use of the surface street system for parking purposes, to require allocation of sufficient off-street/on-site loading facilities by business and industry which ensures that the loading and unloading of vehicles will not interfere with traffic flow or block roadways and/or fire lanes, to promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and to grant and define the administrative powers and duties necessary to enforce this Article. 
Sec. 21.10.2. - General provisions. 
A.  Required off-street parking in residential districts shall be provided on the same site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided. 
B.  Required off-street parking in nonresidential districts may be located on the same site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided or on a site, lot or tract located within the same zoning district and within 150 feet of the main use. 
C.  If specific requirements for off-street parking result in a fraction of a parking space, the next larger whole number of spaces is required. 
D.  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this UDC is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the minimum number of required parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided to accommodate the enlargement or change. 
E.  All driveways and all required off-street parking spaces shall be on a paved concrete or asphalt surface. All drive approaches shall be of paved concrete. 
F.  Parking spaces provided within a public right-of-way shall not be counted as meeting the minimum requirements of this Article. 
G.  In the event of the construction of a phased development, the minimum number of parking spaces provided shall apply to each phase as it is developed. 
H.  In computing the parking requirements for any building or development with multiple uses, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking requirements for each individual use included in the building or development. 
I.  Residential curb cuts. 
1.  Straight driveways. Curb cuts for residential driveway aprons shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, and not more than twelve feet (12') in width for a single driveway apron nor more than twenty-four feet (24') in width for a double driveway apron. Curb cuts will be permitted only for driveway aprons providing access to a garage, carport or hardstand. Not more than one curb cut will be permitted for each residential parcel of land except as follows for circular driveways. 
2.  Circular driveways. Circular driveways are allowed for lots with a minimum of one hundred feet (100') of frontage. Circular driveways shall have a maximum of two sixteen-foot curb cuts with a minimum of thirty feet (30') between each cut. 
J.  Detached accessory, ancillary or storage structures in commercial and manufacturing districts shall not be located in a manner that decreases the minimum number of parking spaces required. 
K.  Areas intended for outdoor displays and general outdoor storage shall not be allowed in designated off-street parking areas or fire lanes and shall not be located in a manner that decreases the minimum number of parking spaces required. 
Sec. 21.10.3. - Size of space. 
A.  Each standard off-street surface parking space shall measure not less than ten feet by 20 feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition. 
B.  Wheel stops. Wheel stops shall be required for all areas of head-in parking adjacent to a landscaped area required in section 21.9.7. Wheel stops shall be designed so that the overhang of vehicles is contained totally within the parking space. If wheel stops are not provided at locations where vehicles extend over the sidewalk areas, a minimum of five feet (5') of free walking area, exclusive of vehicle over hang, width must be provided. 
C.  Each parking space designed for parallel parking shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet by twenty-two feet (8' x 22'). 
D.  Each standard parking space located in a parking garage shall measure not less than ten feet by eighteen feet (10' x 18'), exclusive of access drives or aisles. 
E.  Handicap accessible parking. 
1.  The number and size of the handicap parking spaces required must follow the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act and Texas Accessibility Standards. The number of handicap parking spaces required is based on the total number of spaces provided. Accessible spaces for cars must have at least a sixty inch (60") wide access aisle located adjacent to the designated parking space. Van parking spaces need to have a wider access aisle of ninety-six inches (96") to accommodate a wheelchair lift and vertical clearance to accommodate van height. 
Table 21.10.3 
Minimum Number of Handicap Accessible Parking Spaces Total number of parking spaces provided (per lot) Total minimum number of accessible parking spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total parking provided in lot 1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
2.  Location. 
a.  Accessible parking spaces must be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible facility entrance. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, the accessible parking spaces must be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances and at the most level ground close to the accessible entrance. 
b.  An accessible route must always be provided from the accessible parking to the accessible entrance. An accessible route never has curbs or stairs, must be at least three feet (3') wide, and has a firm, stable, slip-resistant surface. The slope along the accessible route should not be greater than 1:12 in the direction of travel. 
c.  Accessible parking spaces may be clustered in one or more lots if equivalent or greater accessibility is provided in terms of distance from the accessible entrance, parking fees, and convenience. Van-accessible parking spaces located in parking garages may be clustered on one floor (to accommodate the ninety-eight inch (98") minimum vertical height requirement). 
3.  Signage. A sign with the international symbol of accessibility must be mounted in accordance with applicable state and federal laws to see marking each disabled parking space. Van accessible spaces must have a sign with "van accessible" on it in addition to the international symbol of accessibility. 
Sec. 21.10.4. - Schedule of off-street parking requirements. 
A.  Off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient quantities to provide the following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the districts designated: 
Table 21.10.4 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements Use Type Parking Requirement Amusement, Commercial (Indoor) 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor) 1 space per 500 square feet of outdoor site area plus 1 space per each 4 fixed spectator seats Assisted Care, Living Facility, Care Facility 1 parking space for each 2 beds Bank, Savings And Loan, Or Other Financial Institution 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area Bar Or Night Club 1 space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area Bed And Breakfast 1 space for each guest room plus 1 space per employee Bowling Alley 5 parking spaces for each lane Car Wash 1 space for each 200 Square feet of floor area Day Care Center 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area Fitness Center/Gym 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area Convenience Store/Gas Station 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. Spaces provided for fueling at the pump stations shall not be considered parking spaces. Group Home 4 spaces Hospital 1 parking space for each bed Hotel Or Motel 1 space for each sleeping room or suite plus 1 space for every 200 square feet of common area not designated as sleeping rooms Lodging Houses And Boarding Houses 1 parking space for each bedroom Manufacturing, Processing Or Repairing 1 space for each 2 employees or 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater Medical Or Dental Clinic 1 space for each 200 square feet of total floor area Mini-warehouse/Public Storage 1 space for each 300 square feet of office floor area plus 1 space for each 3,000 square feet of storage area Mortuary/Funeral Home 1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in service rooms or 1 space for each 3 seats, whichever is less based on maximum design capacity) Multifamily, Duplex, Two-Family, Condominium Or Other Similar Use 1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom unit 
2 spaces per 2 bedroom unit 
2.5 spaces per 3+ bedroom unit 
Plus additional guest parking provided at a ratio of 5% of required spaces Nursery 1 space per 300 square feet of total sales area 
Wholesale nursery: 1 parking space per employee of the largest work shift, plus 1 space per 10,000 square feet of display area and 1 space per acre of growing areas Offices 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area Outdoor Facilities (Outdoor Recreational Fields i.e. Football, Soccer, etc.) 20 spaces per designated field or 1 per 4 person design capacity Public Use Parking shall be provided at a ratio approved by City staff based on a parking study provided by the applicant Residence Halls, Fraternity Buildings And Sorority Buildings 1 space per person capacity of permanent sleeping facilities Restaurants 1 parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 space for each 4 seats, whichever is less (based on maximum design capacity) Retail Sales And Service 1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area School, High School, Vocational, All Other Schools Parking shall be provided at a ratio approved by City staff based on a parking study provided by the applicant that shall include vehicle stacking requirements Single Family Attached And Detached Dwelling Units 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit Theaters, Auditoriums, Churches, Assembly Halls, Sports Arenas, Stadiums, Conference Center, Convention Center, Dance Hall, Exhibition Halls, Or Other Place Of Public Assembly 1 space for each 4 seats or 1 space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is less (based on maximum design capacity) Automobile Sales Or Rental 1 space for each 3,000 square feet of sales area (open and enclosed) devoted to the sale, display or rental of vehicles Automobile Service, Repair, Garage 1 space for each 200 square feet of total floor area Warehouse 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of total floor area  
B.  New and Unlisted Uses . When a proposed land use is not classified in this section or a single use which have varying parking needs depending on the function of that specific single use, an applicant may submit a parking ratio based on best/current planning and transportation practices. 
1.  A best/current parking ratio application should include the following: 
a.  An application shall fully cite the sources used to derive the applicant-submitted parking ratio, possible resources include parking standards material from the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the American Planning Association (APA). 
b.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the applicant submitted parking ratio to confirm best/current planning practices for a use. 
c.  The City Manager or his/her designee shall approve, modify, or deny the applicant submitted parking ratio. 
2.  Parking ratio determination where no application is submitted 
a.  If the applicant does not submit a parking ratio, then the City Manager or his/her designee shall determine the parking ratio based on the best/current planning and transportation practices. 
C.  Mixed uses. In the event that several users occupy a single structure, or parcels of land, the total requirements for off street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses computed separately unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are offset, for example with retail and residential, or theater and office uses. In such case the City Manager or his/her designee may reduce the total requirements accordingly, but not more than twenty-five percent (25%). 
D.  Joint use of facilities. Required parking facilities of two (2) or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facility used jointly, to the extent that it can be shown by the owners or operators that the need for the facilities does not materially overlap and provided that such right of joint use is evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. 
E.  Properties zoned main street mixed-use. Properties zoned Main Street Mixed-Use shall only be required to provide two (2) on-site parking spaces but must still provide the minimum required number of handicapped spaces on site. 
(Ord. No. 14-S-47 , § 5, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 7, 8-30-2016; Ord. No. 18-S-03 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.10.5. - Striping. 
A.  All parking lots shall be striped in a manner that will clearly delineate parking spaces, fire lanes and pedestrian crosswalks. 
B.  Directional arrows shall be provided in all drive lanes and driveways. 
Sec. 21.10.6. - Shared access and cross lot access easements. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this UDC, unless otherwise approved by the City, to reduce the number of curb cuts and access driveways, the dedication of joint-use, private access driveway easements and cross lot access easements shall be required for all commercial development. 
Sec. 21.10.7. - Stacking requirement for drive-through facilities. 
A.  A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet by twenty feet (8' x 20') with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. 
B.  All stacking spaces shall be located entirely within the lot and shall be outside of any right-of-way, fire lane or similar access. 
C.  For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five stacking spaces. 
D.  For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven stacking spaces shall be provided. 
E.  For kiosks, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided. 
Sec. 21.10.8. - Off-Street loading/unloading requirements. 
    All retail, commercial, industrial and service structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. All public schools shall provide adequate stacking for vehicles based on a parking study approved by City Staff. Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet (10') by forty feet (40') and the spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Table 21.10.8 
Off-Street Loading Requirements Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 0-5,000 None 5,000-15,000 1 15,000-50,000 2 50,000-100,000 3 100,000-150,000 4 Each Additional 50,000 over 150,000 1  
(Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 8, 8-30-2016) 
Sec. 21.10.9. - Additional regulations and illustrations. 
A.  Handicapped ramps. 

B.  Handicapped parking space dispersal. 

C.  90° parking dimensions. 

D.  Angle parking dimensions. 

E.  Drive aisle dimensions. 

F.  Separation of right-of way and parking areas. 

G.  Landscaping and fencing. 

ARTICLE 11. - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES 

Sec. 21.11.1. - Purpose. 
    The City recognizes the safety, commercial, emergency, and informational needs for signs. This Article has been adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens by regulating the location, construction, duration, size, height, installation, and maintenance of all signs within the jurisdiction of the City, including its ETJ in accordance with LGC Chapter 216. Additionally, this Article is intended to enhance property values, maintain aesthetic attractiveness, and promote commercial opportunity in the City, and to support and further the objectives of the City's Comprehensive Land Plan. 
Sec. 21.11.2. - Applicability. 
    All signs shall be erected, displayed, altered or reconstructed in conformity with this Article. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
A.  Other Laws. The provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to nullify any other provisions of federal or state law. 
B.  Partial Invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this Article is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. 
C.  Existing Signs. All signs legally existing on or before February 19, 2008 shall be permitted to continue without change. 
Sec. 21.11.3. - Administration. 
A.  General. The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Article and other laws, ordinances, codes and regulations applicable thereto. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Article and other laws, ordinances, codes and regulations applicable thereto, and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Article and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for herein. 
B.  Applications. The City Manager or his/her designee shall receive applications, review plans and documentation and issue permits for the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, and repair of all signs within the City and its ETJ. 
C.  Inspection. The City Manager or his/her designee shall make all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with all state and local requirements governing signage. 
D.  Notices and Orders. The City Manager or his/her designee shall issue all necessary citations, notices or orders to ensure compliance with this Article. 
E.  Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Article, or where the City Manager or his/her designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this Article, the City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to enter premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Article, provided that if such premises are occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such premises are unoccupied, the City Manager or his/her designee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the City Manager or his/her designee shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
F.  Department Records. The City Manager or his/her designee shall keep official records of applications received, permits issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and citations, notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required by the State of Texas for the retention of public records. 
G.  Liability . The City Manager or his/her designee, members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or other City employees charged with the enforcement of this Article, while acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this Article or other pertinent laws, ordinances, codes or regulations shall not be rendered liable personally and are hereby relieved of personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Article shall be defended by a legal representative of the City until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.11.4. - General Requirements. 
A.  Permit Required. 
1.  No person shall erect, alter or display any sign nor shall any person allow the erection, alteration, or display of any sign upon any property within the City or its ETJ owned or controlled by them without first obtaining a sign permit to do so from the City Manager or his/her designee, except as hereinafter provided. No sign permit shall be released by the City Manager or his/her designee until after the building permit for the principal building on the site has been issued. 
2.  Electrical Permit Required. No person shall install and connect electrical systems for a sign within the City or its ETJ without first obtaining an electrical permit to do so from the Building Inspections Division, except as hereinafter provided. The Building Inspections Division shall not issue an electrical permit for a sign until after the principal sign permit for such work has been issued. 
B.  Application. The following information shall be required for each application for a permit: 
1.  completed building permit application obtained from the Building Inspections Division; 
2.  a Site Plan which includes: 
a.  location of all buildings, structures or tracts to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; and 
b.  position of the sign in relation to rights-of-way, easements, buildings or structures and other existing signs; 
3.  plans that illustrate height, length, width and all other dimensions associated with the sign. Plans shall include all electrical elements of the sign; and 
4.  a letter or copy of a contract signed by the owner of the property stating that the applicant has permission to erect such sign. 
C.  Fees. All fees for a sign permit shall be in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by City Council. 
1.  A permit shall not be valid until such fee has been paid. An amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fees, if any, have been paid. 
2.  Where work for which a permit is required by this Article has been started prior to obtaining a permit, the fees established by City Council shall be doubled. Payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person(s) from any other penalties prescribed by this UDC under section 21.1.11 or any other law, ordinance, code or regulation applicable thereto. 
D.  Action on Application. The City Manager or his/her designee shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within fifteen (15) business days after a complete application is filed. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of this Article and other pertinent laws, ordinances, codes or regulations, the City Manager or his/her designee shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the City Manager or his/her designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Article and other laws, ordinances, codes and regulations applicable thereto, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practical. 
E.  Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any proposed work for which a permit has not been issued shall be deemed abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion, grant one extension for additional time not exceeding ninety (90) days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permits issued under this Article are non-transferable from one person to another. 
F.  Condition of Permit. A permit issued under this Article shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Article or other law, ordinances, codes and regulations applicable thereto. Nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the City Manager or his/her designee from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans, construction, or removing violations of this Article or other laws, ordinances, codes or regulations applicable thereto. Every permit issued shall become invalid six (6) months after its issuance if the work is not completed unless otherwise stated in this Article. 
G.  Suspension or Revocation. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this Article whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this Article or any other laws, ordinances, codes or regulations applicable thereto. 
H.  Public Rights-of-Way, Alleys and Easements. A permit shall not be given by the City Manager or his/her designee for the placement of a sign that will encroach upon any public right-of-way, alley or utility or drainage easement. 
I.  Placement of Permit. The permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site until the work permitted is completed. 
J.  Appeal . An individual who has been denied a permit of had a permit revoked may appeal in writing along with the established filing fee to the Planning and Zoning Commission within ten (10) days after the date of denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.11.5. - Exempted Signs. 
    The following types of sign or sign work are exempt from the permit requirements of this Article provided, however, that the exemption from the permit requirements of this Article shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Article or any other laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the City: 
A.  Governmental Signs. 
B.  Political Signs. 
C.  Railway Signs. Any sign within the railway right-of-way placed and maintained in reference to the operation of such railway. 
D.  Utility Signs. Any sign marking utility or underground communications or transmission lines. 
E.  Vehicle Signs. Any sign placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer as a form of transportation and which identifies the business, products, or services with which the vehicle and/or trailer is related 
F.  Flags. Official flags of governmental jurisdictions or non-profit organizations. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the display of a national or state flag or to limit flags, insignias, or legal notices or informational, directional or traffic signs which are legally required and necessary to the essential functions of governmental agencies. Flag poles shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
G.  Warning Signs. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger but containing no advertising material. 
H.  Street Address Signs. Address signs containing only numeric address and street or complex names. 
I.  Holiday Signs. Any temporary sign promoting the celebration of a holiday and containing no commercial advertising. 
J.  Plaques. Any commemorative sign of a recognized historical society or organization. 
K.  Menu Board Signs. A maximum of two (2) menu board signs, each with a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall be permitted per drive through service restaurant or restaurant drive-up window or similar drive through business. 
L.  Minor Repairs and Maintenance. Minor repair work to any sign, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles, painting or other similar exterior maintenance of a sign structure so long as no structural alterations are made to the sign. 
Sec. 21.11.6. - Prohibited Signs. 
A.  Obscene Signs. No person shall erect or display on any site a sign in which the dominant theme of material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex, and is patently offensive because it affronts current community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social literary, artistic, political, and scientific value, according to contemporary community standards. 
B.  Obstructing Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes. No person shall erect or display on any site any sign that prevents free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
C.  Obstructing Vision/Sight Triangle. No person shall erect or display on any site any sign in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of moving vehicles at any location, street intersection, or driveway. All signs placed at any intersection shall prevent such problem by observing a visibility triangle (see definition of visibility triangle). 
D.  Interference With Traffic. No sign shall be permitted which interferes with vehicular or pedestrian traffic as a result of the position, size, shape, movement, color, fashion, manner, or intensity of illumination, or any other characteristics causing such interference. No person shall erect or allow to be displayed any sign in such a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, including, signs making use of the words "stop", "go", "look", "slow", "danger", or any other similar word, phrase, symbol or character. No person shall employ any red, yellow, green, or other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to cause confusion or otherwise interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
E.  Over Public Property or Public Right-of-Way. It shall be prohibited to erect or display any type of sign on or over public ROW or other public property, unless the same is erected by the City, County, State or other authorized governmental agency, or with the permission of the City (in its sole discretion), for public purposes. 
F.  Signs on Utility Poles. No person shall erect or display any sign except as specifically authorized by section 21.11.5 on any utility pole located upon any public right-of-way or utility easement. 
G.  Private Property. No sign shall be located on private property without the consent of the owner of the premises, including signs located on trees, light poles or mail boxes. 
H.  Dilapidated Signs. No sign shall be permitted which is deteriorated, dilapidated or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe. 
I.  Signs in Violation. No sign shall be permitted that does not comply with any applicable provisions of the building code, this UDC, or any other applicable laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the City. 
J.  Home Occupation Signs. No exterior home occupation signs shall be permitted unless otherwise specifically authorized in another applicable section of this UDC. 
K.  Non-Motorized or Portable Signs. No trailer type, non-motorized signs using wheels and axles as the primary support shall be permitted. 
L.  Off Premise Signs. Except as set forth elsewhere in this Article, all off premise signs not legally existing on February 19, 2008 are prohibited except that the following signs may be permitted provided they otherwise meet the applicable requirements of this Article: 
1.  Community Service Signs; 
2.  Garage Sale Signs; 
3.  Official Government Signs; 
4.  Historical Markers and Plaques; 
5.  Political Signs; 
6.  Real Estate Signs; 
7.  Temporary Signs; 
8.  Traffic Signs; 
M.  Bandit Signs. 
N.  Painted Signs. No sign shall be permitted which is painted on the wall of any building or on any part of a building. 
O.  Other Signs. Except as set forth elsewhere in this Article, any signs not specifically permitted by this Article are prohibited within the City and its ETJ. 
Sec. 21.11.7. - Removal of Signs. 
A.  Damaged Signs. Signs which are determined by the City Manager or his/her designee to be a public hazard or in a state of disrepair shall be repaired or removed within ten (10) days after written notification to the property owner. 
B.  Abandoned Signs. Signs which are determined by the City Manager or his/her designee to be abandoned shall be removed or otherwise painted over and neutralized within thirty (30) days after written notification to the property owner by the Director. 
C.  Extensions. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to grant extensions as necessary to resolve a damaged or abandoned sign. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
D.  Signs in Right-of-Way and/or Public Property. Any sign that is erected, constructed, or otherwise located within or upon public right-of-way or on public property may be removed by City personnel and disposed of immediately. The City is not required to notify the owner of the sign of its removal and disposal. 
E.  Relocation of Certain Detached On-Premise Signs. 
1.  Legal and non-conforming detached on-premise signs located on or overhanging a parcel of land acquired by a governmental entity may be relocated subject to the restrictions in this section. The owner of the sign and the governmental entity must sign an application requesting the relocation. The relocation must be completed within one (1) year after the date the governmental entity becomes the owner of the property. All relocated signs must fully comply with spacing, setbacks, and other restrictions in this section. All signs must relocate on the remainder of the tract from which the parcel of land was acquired unless: 
a.  There is no remainder; or 
b.  The remainder is not of sufficient size or suitable configuration to allow the relocated sign to fully comply with the spacing, setback, and other restrictions in this section. 
2.  No relocated detached on-premise sign may have a greater effective area or increased height than it had at its original location, or contain new materials that are more than five feet (5') above grade. 
3.  No detached on-premise sign may be relocated until demolition and other required permits have been applied for and approved by the City. 
4.  No new electrical or mechanical properties may be added to a relocated detached on-premise sign. (For example, a non-illuminated sign may not be converted to an illuminated sign.) 
F.  Illegally Erected Temporary Sign. Any temporary sign that is erected, constructed or otherwise displayed, without a permit or in direct violation of this Article shall be removed by City personnel and disposed of immediately. The City is not required to notify the owner of the sign of its removal and disposal. 
G.  Illegally Erected Permanent Sign. Any permanent sign installed without a permit or in direct violation of this Article shall be removed by the owner of the sign or property within ten (10) days after written notification by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
H.  Filing of Liens Against the Property. The City is authorized to file a lien against any property which is not otherwise exempt to recover reasonable expenses incurred by the City for the removal of a sign or portion of a sign. 
I.  Appeal . Any decision rendered by the City Manager or his/her designee or other City personnel in the enforcement of this Article may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission by any person, agent, or representative affected by such decision. Such appeal must be in writing and received within ten (10) days after a decision rendered along with the established fee. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.11.8. - General Sign Provisions. 
    The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all signs hereafter erected, constructed, displayed, altered or repaired on any premise under the jurisdiction of the City. 
A.  Height of Signs. The vertical height of a sign shall be measured from ground level at the base of the sign to the highest part of the sign or its structure. 
B.  Wind and Dead Load Requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind load of not less than thirty-two (32) pounds per square foot of area and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required by building codes adopted by the City. The sign application must include a statement signed or a letter with an engineer's seal that states compliance with this requirement. 
C.  Location of Business/Residential. All business and residential locations shall be identified by an address, which is clearly visible from the street. 
D.  Illumination of Signs. No sign shall be illuminated to such intensity to exceed a maximum of one (1) footcandle measured at the property line. No lighted sign shall be erected or displayed within 150 feet of a single-family residential zoned property unless the lighting is shielded from view. 
E.  Building and Electrical Codes Applicable. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformity with all applicable provisions of the building code, electrical code or other applicable laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the City. 
F.  Maintenance of Signs. Every sign shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted including all metal parts and supports that are not galvanized or of rust resistant material. On undeveloped parcels of land, the area between any sign and the street or highway to which the sign is oriented and the area within twenty-five feet (25') of such sign must be kept free and clear of debris, trash, and weeds or other refuse and shall be maintained by mowing or trimming of any vegetation. 
G.  Structural Sign Elements. The structural elements of permanent signs shall be constructed of materials that are noncombustible and may be supported by noncombustible materials only and finished in a presentable manner. Wood or unpainted steel supports are prohibited. Heavy timber and other materials may be used only if approved by the Director. 
H.  Sign Clearance. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this UDC, all signs shall maintain a clearance of at least ten feet (10') when located over a public sidewalk and at least fourteen feet (14') when located over a driveway and shall extend no closer than eighteen inches (18") from the curb line of a public street, unless painted or mounted flat on the surface of an existing awning or canopy. 
I.  Sign Area. The maximum effective sign area shall be the total square footage of a single face specified for each type of sign within this Article. 
Sec. 21.11.9. - Wall Signs. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section shall be applicable to all wall signs. Wall signs may not be attached to light fixtures, poles, or trees. 
B.  Maximum Area. 
Table 21.11.9 
Maximum Area of Wall Signs Areas with Limited Access 15% of the façade area or 250 square feet, whichever is less Areas with Unlimited Access 12% of the façade area or 125 square feet, whichever is less All Other Streets 10% of the façade area or 80 square feet, whichever is less  
1.  Wall signs located on properties zoned Manufacturing District-Light (M-1); Manufacturing District-Heavy (M-2); and PDD (Planned Development District) with a base zoning of M-1 or M-2 and with a minimum primary façade elevation of 300 linear feet or greater may have the primary wall sign calculated at fifteen percent (15%) of the façade area or 250 square feet, whichever is less. 
C.  Maximum Number of Signs. The maximum number of signs permitted for single occupancy or single tenant buildings shall be limited to one (1) per wall with a maximum of three (3) signs. Each sign in excess of the primary wall sign shall be a maximum seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the primary wall sign. 
    The maximum number of signs permitted for multi-tenant buildings shall be limited to one (1) per tenant or lease space except for those spaces located on the ends of buildings which may have one (1) additional wall sign to be located on the side wall of the structure and being a maximum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the primary wall sign. Multi-tenant buildings with the rear of the building directly adjacent to a public or private street or access drive may have one (1) additional wall sign located on the rear wall of the structure and being a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the primary wall sign. In no case shall the number of wall signs permitted for any single tenant within a multi-tenant development exceed a maximum of two (2) signs. 
D.  Roofline Limitations. In no case shall a wall sign project above the roofline of any building nor extend above the parapet wall if attached thereto. Wall signs shall be no closer vertically to the eave of the roofline or overhang than the predominant letter height. Wall signs may be attached to a continuous plane fascia if the sign does not extend above or below the projection of the fascia. Signs attached to fascia are only allowed when attached to structural canopy supported to the ground by columns constructed of similar masonry material as the primary structure. 
E.  Illumination. Wall signs shall be illuminated utilizing only internal lighting. 
F.  Projection. Wall signs shall not project farther than eighteen inches (18") from the building, excluding signs attached to canopies. 
G.  Adjacent Residential. Wall signs shall not be located on any façade (other than the main front of the building) which faces property zoned for single-family residential uses if the sign is within 150 feet of the property line of said residential property. 
Sec. 21.11.10. - Freestanding Ground Signs. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section shall be applicable to all freestanding ground signs. 
B.  Minimum Setback. The minimum setback of all freestanding ground signs shall be fifteen feet (15') from any property line. 
C.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a freestanding ground sign shall not exceed the following: 
Table 21.11.10A 
Maximum Height of Freestanding Ground Signs Areas with Limited Access 50 ft. Areas with Unlimited Access 40 ft. All Other Streets 20 ft.  
Exception: Freestanding ground signs located on properties along FM 3009 and Schertz Parkway shall have a maximum height of eighteen feet (18'). 
D.  Maximum Area. Freestanding ground signs shall not exceed the following: 
Table 21.11.10B 
Maximum Area of Freestanding Ground Signs Areas with Limited Access 250 sq. ft. Areas with Unlimited Access 100 sq. ft. All Other Streets 32 sq. ft.  
Exception: Freestanding ground signs located on properties along FM 3009 and Schertz Parkway shall have a maximum of ninety (90) square feet in area. 
E.  Number of Signs. The maximum number of freestanding ground signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot per street frontage. Developments consisting of shopping centers or other multi-tenant type developments shall be required to construct multi-tenant signage in accordance with section 21.11.12 of this Article except that any primary or anchor store greater than 50,000 square feet may be allowed one (1) freestanding sign in accordance with this section. 
Sec. 21.11.11. - Monument Signs. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section shall be applicable to all monument signs that are allowed under this Article. 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a monument sign shall be five feet six inches (5'6"). 
C.  Maximum Area. The maximum area of a monument sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
D.  Number of Signs. The maximum number of monument signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot per street frontage. Developments consisting of shopping centers or other multi-tenant type developments shall be required to construct multi-tenant signage in accordance with section 21.11.12. 
E.  Minimum Setback. The minimum setback of all monument signs shall be fifteen feet (15') from any property line. 
F.  Material Requirements. All monument sign bases shall be constructed of masonry material consisting of brick, stone or split face concrete block. The monument sign structure must be constructed or covered with the same masonry material as the principal building or shall be constructed of brick, stone or split face concrete block. Sculpted aluminum sign panels will be allowed. All sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six inches (6") from the outer limits of the sign structure. 
G.  Illumination. Monument signs shall only be illuminated utilizing internal lighting for sculpted aluminum panels or a ground lighting source where the light itself and supporting sign structure are not visible from public right-of-way. 
H.  Driveway Entrances. Freestanding non-residential street address signs at driveway entrances are limited to one (1) monument sign per driveway entrance not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, and three feet in height. 
Sec. 21.11.12. - Multi-tenant Signs. 
A.  General. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all signs located within developments consisting of shopping centers, as defined within this UDC, and all other similar multi-tenant developments. Multi-tenant signs designed as monument signs shall meet the requirements of this section. 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of a monument sign within a multi-tenant development shall not exceed the following: 
Table 21.11.12 
Maximum Height of Multi-tenant Signs Areas with Limited Access 20 feet Areas with Unlimited Access 18 feet All Other Streets 15 feet  
    The monument base shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height measured from ground level at the center of the base to the top of the base. The overall height shall not exceed the maximum heights listed above, including monument base. 
C.  Maximum Area. The maximum area of a multi-tenant monument sign shall be equivalent to one percent (1%) of the gross building square footage within the shopping center with a maximum of 150 square feet. 
D.  Maximum Number. The maximum number of multi-tenant monument signs shall be limited to one (1) per platted lot per street frontage. 
E.  Monument Sign Design. Each multi-tenant monument sign shall be designed so as to provide adequate sign spaces for each tenant within the development except for the primary, or anchor store within the development which shall be prohibited from advertising on the monument sign. The developer shall be responsible for determining the adequacy and size necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
F.  Minimum Setback. The minimum setback of all multi-tenant monument signs shall be fifteen feet (15') from any property line. 
G.  Material Requirements. All multi-tenant monument signs shall be constructed of masonry material consisting of brick, stone or split face concrete block which shall be consistent in nature with the overall theme of the development. Sculpted aluminum sign panels will be allowed. All sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six inches (6") from the outer limits of the sign structure. 
H.  Illumination. Monument signs may only be illuminated utilizing internal lighting for sculpted aluminum panels or a ground lighting source where the light itself and supporting sign structure are not visible from public right-of-way. 
Sec. 21.11.13. - Electronic Signs. 
A.  General. Electronic signage shall be permitted in-lieu of any permitted freestanding or monument signs on a property. In the event that an electronic sign is permitted for a property, no other additional freestanding or monument sign shall be permitted. 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum height of an electronic sign shall be eighteen feet (18'). 
C.  Maximum Area. The maximum area of an electronic sign shall not exceed 100 square feet with a maximum area per sign face of fifty (50) square feet. 
D.  Number of Signs. The maximum number of electronic signs shall be limited to one (1) per platted lot. No other on-premise freestanding signs shall be permitted. 
E.  Minimum Setback. The minimum setback of all electronic signs shall be fifteen feet (15') from any property lines. 
F.  Material Requirements. All monument sign bases shall be constructed of masonry material consisting of brick, stone or split face concrete block. The monument sign structure must be constructed or covered with the same masonry material as the principal building or shall be constructed of brick, stone or split face concrete block. All sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six inches (6") from the outer limits of the sign structure. 
G.  Illumination. Electronic signage shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) footcandle illumination at the property line. 
H.  Location Restrictions. No electronic signs shall be permitted within 150 feet of a residentially zoned property or property used for residential purposes. 
I.  Additional Restrictions. 
1.  Any change of pictures or information on the electronic sign shall not produce the illusion of moving objects, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any similar effect of animation. 
2.  Any change of pictures or information on the message board sign shall not change more often than once every four (4) seconds. 
3.  Any sign picture or information shall not have a solid white background between the time period of thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise. 
Sec. 21.11.14. - Directional Signs. 
A.  General. This section shall be applicable to any on-premise sign that directs the movement of traffic on private property within developments or warns of obstacles, overhead clearances, or controls parking. 
B.  Maximum Height. Directional signs shall have a maximum height of three feet (3'). 
C.  Maximum Area. Directional signs shall not exceed a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet. 
D.  Maximum Number. The maximum number of directional signs permitted within a development shall be based on the square footage of building space constructed within the development. Directional signs shall be permitted at a rate of one (1) sign for every 10,000 square feet of building area. 
E.  Location Restrictions. Directional signs shall be located in a manner where they will not interfere with the safe movement of vehicles or pedestrians and shall not be located within any visibility triangle. 
Sec. 21.11.15. - Subdivision Entry Signs. 
A.  General. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all subdivision entry signs identifying a residential or mixed use development. 
B.  Maximum Height. Subdivision entry signs shall be monument signs and shall have a maximum height of six feet (6') in height. 
C.  Maximum Area. The maximum area of a subdivision entry sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. 
D.  Maximum Number of Signs. No more than one (1) subdivision entry sign shall be permitted at the primary subdivision entrance. Secondary entrances may have one (1) subdivision entry sign per entrance which shall be a maximum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the size of the primary entrance sign. 
E.  Placement of Sign. A subdivision entry sign may be located on a median at the street entrance if approved in writing by the Public Works Director. 
F.  Subdivision Entry Feature. A subdivision entry feature which is appropriate in scale to the size of the development and incorporating masonry walls, berms and/or decorative fencing in combination with the subdivision entry sign may be constructed at the primary subdivision entrance provided, however, that the maximum area containing the subdivision sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet (32') per sign face. 
Sec. 21.11.16. - Price-Per-Gallon Display. 
A.  General. All price-per-gallon displays must be an integral part of the general permitted sign for the site. Displays, whether electronic or manual, shall not scroll or flash. 
B.  Minimum Letter Height. The minimum height allowed for price-per-gallon display signs shall be six inches (6") for the fuel classification (i.e. "unleaded", "diesel", etc.). 
C.  Maximum Area. Price-per-gallon displays shall not exceed two-thirds (?) of the permitted gross surface area per face of the general permitted sign. 
D.  Number of Signs. Only one (1) price-per-gallon sign shall be permitted per site. 
E.  Illumination. Only internal illumination may be utilized for fuel classification and price-per-gallon signs. 
Sec. 21.11.17. - Temporary Signs. 
A.  General. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, this section shall be applicable to all temporary signs identified in this Article. 
B.  Maximum Area. The maximum area permitted for temporary signs shall not exceed the following: 
Table 21.11.17A 
Maximum Area of Temporary Signs Areas with Limited Access 32 sq. ft. per face or ten percent (10%) of the building façade, whichever is less Areas with Unlimited Access 24 sq. ft. per face or seven percent (7%) of the building façade, whichever is less All Other Streets 16 sq. ft. per face or five percent (5%) of the building façade, whichever is less  
C.  Maximum Height. The maximum height permitted for temporary signs shall not exceed the following: 
Table 21.11.17B 
Maximum Height of Temporary Signs Areas with Limited Access 6 feet Areas with Unlimited Access 4 feet All Other Streets 3 feet  
D.  Minimum Setback. The minimum setback for all temporary signs shall be fifteen feet (15') from any property line. 
E.  Time Limitations. Temporary freestanding signs shall be permitted for a maximum of 180 days per calendar year. No additional temporary sign permit shall be issued for the same property or business for a period of fourteen (14) days after the expiration of the previous permit. There shall be no limit to the number of temporary sign permits that may be issued for a particular property or business. The cumulative total number of days for which all temporary sign permits issued for a property or business shall not exceed 180 calendar days. 
F.  Number of Signs. No more than two (2) types of temporary signs shall be permitted per business or tenant at any given time. 
Sec. 21.11.18. - Development Signs. 
A.  Maximum Area. Development signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
B.  Maximum Height. Development signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. 
C.  Number of Signs. Each development shall be permitted no more than one (1) sign per commercial development, or one sign per entry of a residential subdivision not to exceed two (2) signs. 
D.  Duration. Development signs shall be installed at any time after the issuance of the building permit for a commercial development or after approval of the final plat for a residential subdivision. The development sign must be removed within six (6) months or upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for commercial developments, and upon three (3) years or seventy-five percent (75%) of development of a residential subdivision, whichever is less. 
Sec. 21.11.19. - Real Estate Signs. 
A.  Applicability. Real estate signs meeting the requirements of this section shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this Article. 
B.  Maximum Height. The maximum height for commercial real estate signs shall not exceed five feet (5') for freestanding ground signs and must be below the roof line for wall signs. 
C.  Maximum Area . The maximum area of a commercial real estate sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Residential real estate signs shall not exceed four square feet in area. 
D.  Maximum Number of Signs. The maximum number of real estate signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot per street frontage. 
Sec. 21.11.20. - Banners over Public Rights-of-Way. 
A.  General. Banners may be erected over public rights-of-way within the City with the approval of the City Manager or his/her designee. The applicant shall be responsible for securing any and all necessary permits to erect a banner over a TxDOT right-of-way and shall provide such information to the City with the application for a banner permit. 
B.  Restrictions. Banners over public rights-of-way shall be permitted only for non-commercial or charitable events that are of general interest to the community as a whole and shall be restricted to non-profit or governmental entities. 
C.  Responsibility. The applicant shall be responsible for the erection of any banner over public rights-of-way. The banner shall be inspected by the City to ensure the banner is adequately secured. The applicant shall be responsible for removal of any banner erected over public rights-of-way. 
D.  Maximum Banner Size. The maximum area of a banner shall not exceed 144 square feet. The standard banner size shall be four feet (4') wide by thirty-six feet (36') long. Variations to the standard banner size may be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee when differing variations are necessary to contain the entire message within the banner. In no case shall the area exceed the maximum area identified in this section. 
Sec. 21.11.21. - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  General. A sign, including its supporting structure, shall be considered nonconforming when it does not conform to all or part of the provisions of this Article and 
1.  was in existence and lawfully located prior to the adoption of this Article; 
2.  was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provisions of the prior law, ordinance, code or regulation applicable thereto or which was considered legally nonconforming there under and has since been in continuous or regular use; 
3.  was in existence, located and used on the premises at the time it was annexed into the City and has since been in continuous use; or 
4.  was in existence and lawfully located and used as an off-premise sign prior to or on February 19, 2008. 
B.  Registration. Except as to signs constructed before September 1, 2006, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any nonconforming or off-premise sign within the corporate limits of the City or its ETJ without having a valid registration number affixed thereto as required in this section as follows: 
1.  Application. To register a nonconforming sign or off-premise sign, application shall be made to the City Manager or his/her designee on forms provided for that purpose. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of the established fees and shall contain the name and address of the owner of the sign, the exact location of the sign, the date of placement, and any other information reasonably required by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
2.  Issuance of Registration Number. If the City Manager or his/her designee determines that the nonconforming or off-premise sign is a lawfully nonconforming or off-premise sign, he/she shall issue a registration number to the applicant. The owner of the sign shall cause the registration number to be affixed in a conspicuous place on the registered nonconforming or off-premise sign. 
3.  Invalidation of Registration. The City Manager or his/her designee shall invalidate any registration for a nonconforming or off-premise sign when: 
a.  it is removed from the premises for any reason; 
b.  it has been damaged or destroyed so as to lose its nonconforming sign status as provided in this Article; 
c.  it has become an abandoned sign. 
Sec. 21.11.22. - Licenses. 
A.  Licenses Required. 
1.  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, place, locate, reconstruct, repair, replace or service any sign for compensation without first obtaining a license to do such work from the City Manager or his/her designee. 
2.  License. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to perform construction work subject to this Article unless the person is licensed as a sign contractor or is exempt under b below. 
b.  A maintenance person who performs work upon a property with more than one property owner is deemed to be performing work for the general public and shall be licensed as a sign contractor. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to: 
1.  display or cause a permit to be displayed or to have in one's possession any license for doing any construction work, knowing it to be fictitious or to have been canceled, suspended or altered; 
2.  lend or permit the use of any license for doing any construction work to any person not entitled to it; 
3.  fail or refuse to surrender to the City Manager or his/her designee any license for any construction work that has been suspended or canceled; 
4.  apply for or have in one's possession more than one current City construction license of the same type; 
5.  use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for any license or permit provided for in this Article or any renewal or duplicate, or make a false statement or conceal a material fact or otherwise commit fraud in making any application; 
6.  perform any construction work in the City or its ETJ for which a license is required without having the license or while the license is suspended, expired or canceled; 
7.  perform any construction work for which a permit is required without having the permit or after the permit has been suspended, canceled or expired; 
8.  fail or refuse to make the necessary repairs or changes as provided in a written notice issued by the City Manager or his/her designee. A separate offense is deemed to be committed each day after the expiration of the time for correction provided in the notice until the work is corrected; or 
9.  place or leave a property in such condition that it injures or endangers persons or property. 
C.  Insurance Required. It is the duty of all sign contractors who practice their craft within the City to show proof of general commercial liability insurance. A current copy of the insurance must be maintained on file with the building inspections division of the City or the sign contractor's license may be revoked. The insurance shall include a minimum of: 
1.  $300,000 per occurrence (combined for property damage and bodily injury); 
2.  $600,000 aggregated (total amount the policy will pay for property damage and bodily injury coverage); and 
3.  $300,000 aggregate for products and completed operation. 
    A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the Building Inspections Division a completed certificate of insurance when applying for an initial license, when changing a business name, or upon request by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
D.  The City Manager or his/her designee, within 30 days after the receipt of the completed application, shall issue the license or give a written refusal setting out the reasons for refusal. 
1.  Application. A written application for a sign contractor's license will be submitted to the Building Inspections Division on a form prescribed by the City along with the required initial fee and evidence of two (2) years experience to include the following: 
a.  required initial fee (as established by City Council); 
b.  renewal fee (as established by City Council); 
c.  completed application; 
d.  reference from one (1) financial institution; 
e.  reference from two (2) suppliers; and 
f.  reference from three (3) customers with work performed within the last two (2) years. 
2.  Renewal. All renewals shall be due January 1st of each year. Failure to renew within thirty (30) days after the renewal date shall require the applicant to reapply for license at the initial fee rate. 
3.  Revocation. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager or his/her designee for the following: 
a.  The City Manager or his/her designee may suspend the license of a person who has been convicted two (2) times within a one-year period of any violation of this Article or other laws, ordinances, codes or regulations applicable hereto. 
b.  If the City Manager or his/her designee decides to suspend a sign contractor's license, the Director shall notify the licensee of the suspension by first class mail to the licensee's last address on record, or by hand delivery to the licensee. Notice by mail will be deemed received three (3) days after posting. 
c.  The licensee may appeal a suspension decision to the Building and Standards Commission by filing a written request within ten (10) days after receiving notice of the suspension. The Building and Standards Commission shall hold a hearing to determine whether the suspension decision should be sustained or reversed. 
d.  If a licensee's license has been suspended twice in a three (3) year period, and the licensee then commits another violation under this Article or other laws, ordinances, codes and regulations applicable hereto, the City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the Building and Standards Commission. The Building and Standards Commission shall then hold a hearing to consider cancellation of the license. 
e.  Enforcement actions taken under this section are not exclusive and do not affect any other remedies for violations of this Article or other applicable laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. 
4.  Appeal . A person, whose license has been denied or revoked, may appeal in writing along with the filing fee then in effect to the Building and Standards Commission within ten (10) days. 
5.  Electrical License. It shall be unlawful for any person to install and connect electrical systems for a sign within the City and its ETJ without first obtaining a license to do so from the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) for such work. A sign contractor may subcontract the electrical portion of a project to someone licensed by TDLR. Someone so licensed shall obtain all electrical permits to do such work. 
6.  Electrical License Registration. Electrical contractors shall register with the City's Inspection Department as follows: 
a.  Registration of Company. Each electrical company shall register with the Inspection Department and shall provide a copy of general liability insurance in the amount established by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) for electrical contractors. 
b.  Application. A written application to register an electrical company, along with the established filing fee, shall be submitted to the Director on a form prescribed by the City. 
c.  Renewal. All registered electrical companies shall renew their registrations annually. All renewals shall be due March 1st of each year. 
Exception: Licensed sign contractors who hold an electrical license issued by TDLR and who submit a copy of such license with their application, and do not work as an independent electrical company, shall not be required to register as an electrical company. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.11.23. - Violations. 
A.  Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish a sign regulated by this Article, or cause the same to be done in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Article. 
B.  Notice of Violation. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing or demolition of a sign in violation of the provisions of this Article or in violation of a permit issued under the provisions of this Article. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
ARTICLE 12. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 21.12.1. - Purpose and Applicability 
A.  It is the purpose of this Article to promote sound planning in the subdivision of land, and to provide consistent rules, which protect the public health, safety, and welfare while allowing the legal platting of land. The regulations herein have been made after careful study of existing local conditions and the desirable future development of the City. It is not the desire or the intent of the City to regiment the design of subdivisions of property and its environs, but rather to recommend the utilization, to the fullest extent possible, of good, sound, modern subdivision planning principles. 
B.  It is intended that as much freedom as possible be allowed the individual owners and subdividers in the design and ultimate development of new subdivisions so that they will contribute innovation, individuality, and character to the community's new residential neighborhoods, commercial developments, and industrial districts. At the same time, these rules are intended to assure that such development provides for: 
1.  sufficient, adequate major and secondary traffic thoroughfares and public facilities; 
2.  minimum standards for facilities; 
3.  a consistent and equitable pattern of development among neighboring parcels of land; and 
4.  consistency with the City's Comprehensive Land Plan, Master Thoroughfare Plan, parks and open space master plan, and other adopted plans. 
C.  The regulations contained within this Article are adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly LGC Chapter 42, Chapter 212, and Chapter 242. Pursuant to the authority herein granted, the City Council extends to all of the area within its City limits and its ETJ, the application of all of the terms and provisions in this Article establishing rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land. 
Sec. 21.12.2. - General Provisions 
A.  The owner of a tract of land located within the City limits or in the ETJ of the City who divides the tract in two (2) or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares parks or other parts must have a plat of the subdivision prepared. A division of a tract under this section includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. 
B.  No person shall create a subdivision of land within the City or within its ETJ without complying with the provisions of this Article, and all plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this Article. 
C.  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City and its officers shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this UDC by injunction issued by a court of common jurisdiction. 
D.  All land subdivided or platted into lots, blocks and streets within the City or within its ETJ, as provided by state law, shall comply in full with the requirements of this UDC. No plat shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk for a tract within the City or its ETJ unless it is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Manager or his/her designee, as applicable. 
E.  The City has requested each County in which the City is located not to issue a permit for the installation of septic tanks on any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
F.  No permit shall be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full. 
G.  The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
H.  The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself sell or supply any water or sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
I.  Disapproval of a plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvement. Any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation may be vacated by the City in any manner provided by law. 
J.  On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this UDC or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or part of the provisions of this UDC. 
K.  In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this UDC may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises. 
L.  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the City Council shall take appropriate action reciting the fact of such noncompliance of failure to secure final plat approval. Reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure the final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of subsections 21.12.2.G. through 21.12.2.K. of this Article will apply to the subdivision and lots herein, the City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council, cause certified copy of such action under the seal of the City to be filed in the deed records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such action, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the Deed Records of such county or counties stating that sections 21.12.2.B. through 21.12.2.K. no longer apply. 
M.  The provisions of this Article shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this UDC nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this UDC was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this UDC. 
Sec. 21.12.3. - Pre-Application Conference 
    Prior to the official filing of an application for approval of a plat or plan for a subdivision, the subdivider, at his/her option, may consult with and present a proposed plan for the subdivision to the City Manager or his/her designee for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the City for the subdivision of land. At such a meeting the City Staff will be able to make any suggestions that would direct the proposed subdivision toward desirable objectives and possibly prevent unnecessary work and expense if objectives are not met. This step does not require formal application or fee. No vesting shall occur under this Article in accordance with section 21.1.6. 
Sec. 21.12.4. - Application Required 
    Any proposed plan for subdivision or development of a property under this Article shall be accompanied by a completed application for the proposed development. No vesting shall occur in accordance with section 21.1.6 of this UDC until a completed application has been submitted in accordance with the requirements of this Article. Filing "checklists" provided by the City to assist applicants shall not change or override any filing requirements set forth in this UDC. 
Sec. 21.12.5. - Subdivision Master Plan 
A.  General. Where required by section 21.12.6, a Subdivision Master Plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with this Article. 
B.  Submittal Requirements for Subdivision Master Plan. An application for a Subdivision Master Plan shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  Completeness Requirements 
a.  appropriate fees; 
b.  application signed and notarized by owner; 
c.  agent authorization letter; 
d.  Legal metes and bounds description; 
e.  subdivision Master Plan checklist; 
f.  traffic Impact Analysis Determination form; 
g.  15 folded black line or blue line copies at 18"X24" or 24"X36"; 
h.  one (1) folded 11"X17" reduction of exhibit; 
i.  one (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plan in PDF format; and 
j.  completed application for street name approval acknowledged by Bexar Metro 911, the United States Postal Service, and the applicable county Clerk's Office. 
2.  Technical Requirements 
a.  location/vicinity map with north arrow; 
b.  title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name, acreage, survey name and abstract number, City, County and preparation date; 
c.  legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used; 
d.  name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor; 
e.  north arrow; 
f.  graphic and written scale (minimum 1"=100'); 
g.  surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances; 
h.  legal metes and bounds description with calls matching boundary dimensions and distances; 
i.  lot dimensions; 
j.  location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas; 
k.  location of significant manmade features, including railroads, buildings, utilities, or physical features; 
l.  for residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public access to existing public streets; 
m.  right-of-way dedications or reservations; 
n.  location of existing and proposed Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain limits with elevations; 
o.  existing and proposed topography at five foot (5') contour intervals including drainage channels and creeks; 
p.  outline of all property offered to be dedicated to the City for parkland dedication; 
q.  outline of all property to be maintained as private parkland; 
r.  land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent properties; 
s.  schematic layout of tract to be subdivided, any remainder tract, and relationship of proposed subdivision to adjacent properties and existing adjoining development; 
t.  designation of each phase of development, the order of development, and a schedule for the development of each phase; 
u.  table indicating the phasing, acreage, land uses, zoning, and anticipated dwelling units for each phase; 
v.  arterial, collector, and local street layout; 
w.  provision for water, wastewater and storm drainage facilities to serve the development; 
x.  any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development; 
y.  provide the following notes: 
i.  "The thoroughfare alignments shown on this exhibit are for illustration purposes and do not set the alignment. Alignment is determined at time of final plat"; 
ii.  "According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________, dated _________, a 100-year floodplain {does or does not} exist on this site"; 
iii.  "All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easement etc. are the responsibility of the developer or its successors and/or assigns"; and 
iv.  State any and all waivers requested for the master plan; and 
z.  Provide the following acknowledgement and certificate: 
"This master plan of the _____________________________ development has been submitted to and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Schertz, Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission. 
Dated this _____ day of _____________________, 20___ 
By: Chairperson ____________________________ 
Secretary ____________________________" 
Sec. 21.12.6. - Subdivision Master Plan Process 
A.  Applicability 
1.  The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City limits and throughout the City's ETJ. A Subdivision Master Plan is required to provide for review of certain developments for compliance with the Comprehensive Land Plan, this UDC, any additional adopted plans (i.e. Water, Wastewater, Transportation, Drainage), the compatibility of land uses and the coordination of improvements within and among individual parcels of land or phases of development prior to approval of a preliminary or final plat. 
2.  A Subdivision Master Plan is required for any development meeting the following criteria: 
a.  the property is undeveloped, is under one (1) ownership, and is greater than fifty (50) acres in size; 
b.  the proposed subdivision of land is to occur in phases; 
c.  the proposed subdivision will require off-site road, drainage or utility connections or improvements that will have a substantial impact or effect on other properties or developments; or 
d.  the property is part of a Development Agreement under section 21.4.10. 
3.  If a preliminary plat encompasses the entire development, a Subdivision Master Plan will not be required. 
B.  Application Requirements 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a Subdivision Master Plan shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. An application for a Subdivision Master Plan may be accompanied by an application for a Preliminary Plat for the first phase of development. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision 
1.  Submittal An application for a Subdivision Master Plan shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a copy of the proposed plan to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Prior to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Subdivision Master Plan shall be reviewed by the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services for consistency with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan and any other applicable plans of the City. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall provide a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to the acceptability of any area proposed for dedication as public parkland. 
3.  Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission . The Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive the written recommendation of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services and the City Manager or his/her designee and shall consider the proposed Subdivision Master Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed Subdivision Master Plan. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission's action. 
4.  Acceptance of Subdivision Master Plan Approval of a Subdivision Master Plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed as an expression of the approval of the layout submitted on the master plan as a guide to the final design of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of a Preliminary Plat in accordance with the requirements of this UDC. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in considering final action on a Subdivision Master Plan, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the Subdivision Master Plan is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any development regulations approved as part of a Development Agreement; 
2.  the proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities are adequate to serve each phase of the subdivision; 
3.  the schedule of development is feasible and prudent and assures that the proposed development will progress to completion within the time limits proposed; 
4.  if the land lies within a Planned Development (PDD) zoning district or is part of an approved Development Agreement, the proposed Subdivision Master Plan conforms to the PDD district regulations and is consistent with the incorporated Conceptual Plan or any development regulations contained in the approved Development Agreement; and 
5.  the location, size and sequence of the phases of development proposed assures orderly and efficient development of the land subject to the plan. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of a Subdivision Master Plan shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for a Preliminary Plat for any portion of the land subject to the Subdivision Master Plan. If a Preliminary Plat has not been approved within the two (2) year period, the Subdivision Master Plan approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plan shall be null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owners or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a Subdivision Master Plan may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed one (1) year. A Subdivision Master Plan is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
F.  Revisions Following Approval of Subdivision Master Plan. 
1.  Minor Changes. Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a Subdivision Master Plan may be incorporated in an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a Subdivision Master Plan. Minor changes shall include adjustment in street or alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and adjustment of lot lines that do not result in creation of additional lots, provided that such changes are consistent with any approved prior applications. 
2.  Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Subdivision Master Plan shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a revised Subdivision Master Plan before approval of a Preliminary Plat. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.7. - Preliminary Plat 
A.  General. Where required by section 21.12.8, a Preliminary Plat shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with this Article. 
B.  Submittal Requirements for Preliminary Plat . An application for a preliminary plat shall include the information required by the Development Manual. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.8. - Preliminary Plat Process 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City's limits and throughout the City's ETJ. A Preliminary Plat is required to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this UDC. 
2.  A Preliminary Plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved Subdivision Master Plan. Where a Subdivision Master Plan is not required and the area to be platted is part of a larger tract of land, the Preliminary Plat must encompass the entire tract of land under ownership of the subdivider and shall provide a preliminary layout of streets, lots, blocks, utilities and drainage for the larger tract. A final plat may be submitted for individual lots to be platted out of the larger parcel. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. An application for a Preliminary Plat may be accompanied by an application for a Master Plan for the entire area to be platted or for any portion of the proposed Preliminary Plat. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a Preliminary Plat shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive the written recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee and shall consider the proposed Preliminary Plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date a complete application is filed. The Planning and Zoning Commission must approve a Preliminary Plat that is required to be prepared in accordance with this section and that satisfies all applicable regulations of this UDC. The Planning and Zoning Commission may vote to approve with conditions or deny a Preliminary Plat that does not satisfy all applicable regulations of this UDC. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission's action. 
3.  Acceptance of Preliminary Plat. Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed as an expression of the approval of the layout submitted on the plat as a guide to the final design of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of a final plat in accordance with the requirements of this UDC. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in considering final action on a Preliminary Plat, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any approved Development Agreement; 
2.  the plat conforms to the general layout of the Subdivision Master Plan (if applicable) and is consistent with the phasing plan approved therein; 
3.  the proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities conform to the master facilities plans for the facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; and 
4.  the proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities, and easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the subdivision. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for a final plat for any portion of the land subject to the Preliminary Plat. If a final plat has not been approved within the two year period, the Preliminary Plat approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plat shall be null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owners or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a Preliminary Plat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A Preliminary Plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
F.  Revisions Following Approval of Preliminary Plat. 
1.  Minor Changes. Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a Preliminary Plat may be incorporated in an application for approval of a Final Plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plat. Minor changes shall include a revision to plat notes, a revision to street or alley lengths, paving details, scrivener's errors, adjustment of lot lines that do not result in the increase or creation of additional lots or additional acreage, or changes or clarifications to easements, provided that such changes are consistent with any approved prior applications. 
2.  Major changes include the reconfiguration of street or alley alignments, the addition of streets or alleys, an increase in the number of lots or acreage, the addition or revision of a unit previously approved by the Preliminary Plat, any change to the open space dedication requirement, changes to drainage, changes to flood plain data, and any other changes that may not be included herein as determined by the Planning Department. Major changes shall require submittal of a revised master plan and Preliminary Plat. 
3.  Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plat before approval of a Final Plat. Approval of major revisions to an approved Preliminary Plat shall occur prior to the date any approved Subdivision Master Plan would have expired for the same land. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.9. - Final Plat 
A.  General. Where required by section 21.12.10, a final plat shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with this Article. 
B.  Submittal Requirements for Final Plat . An application for a final plat shall include the information required by the Development Manual. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.10. - Final Plat Process 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City's limits and throughout the City's ETJ. A Final Plat is required to assure that the division or development of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of this UDC pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City or that provision for such installation has been made, that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the plat to be recorded, and to assure that the subdivision or development meets all other standards of this UDC to enable initiation of site preparation activities for any lot or tract subject to the plat. Approval of a Final Plat shall be required prior to any non-exempt division of land and prior to any site preparation activities for a lot or tract of land that requires installation of public improvements on or adjacent thereto. 
2.  A Final Plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved Preliminary Plat. 
B.  Application Requirements 
1.  Application Required . Any request for a Final Plat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
2.  Accompanying Applications. An application for a Final Plat shall be accompanied by a letter of approval from the City Engineer and/or the Director of Public Works approving the public infrastructure improvement construction plans showing details of streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers and other engineering details of the proposed subdivision. Such plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall conform to the standard specifications established by the City. Approval of any public infrastructure improvement plans is required prior to Final Plat application. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a Final Plat shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive the written recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee and shall consider the proposed Final Plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date a complete application is filed. The Planning and Zoning Commission must approve a Final Plat that is required to be prepared in accordance with this section and that satisfies all applicable regulations of this UDC. The Planning and Zoning Commission may vote to approve with conditions or deny a Final Plat that does not satisfy all applicable regulations of this UDC. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission's action. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in considering final action on a Final Plat, should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the Final Plat conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat, except for minor changes that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved Preliminary Plat; and 
2.  the final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this UDC. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of a Final Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the Final Plat has not been recorded within the two (2) year period, the Final Plat approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plat shall be null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owner or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a Final Plat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A Final Plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
F.  Revisions to Final Plat. 
1.  Approved Final Plat. An applicant may make minor changes to an approved Final Plat to reflect changes arising from installation of public improvements thereafter, provided that the approved Final Plat has not been recorded and that approval of the revised Final Plat occurs prior to expiration of approval of the initial Final Plat application. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to approve minor changes to an approved Final Plat. If the approved Final Plat has been recorded, an amending plat or replat must be approved and recorded. 
2.  Conditionally Approved or Denied Plat. Following conditional approval or denial of a Final Plat application, the applicant may submit a revised Final Plat application, together with any revised public infrastructure improvement construction plans, for approval. The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to approve revisions required for conditional approval of the Final Plat. Revisions to a plat which was denied shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Approval of a revised plat is required prior to the original expiration date of any approved Preliminary Plat for the same land. 
a.  Filing of security in-lieu of completing construction shall be in accordance with section 21.4.15. Where public infrastructure improvements have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner shall submit a warranty bond in accordance with section 21.4.15 from each contractor, three sealed sets of "as built" plans or record drawings, and one (1) CD containing a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the Department of Public Works), together with a letter stating the contractors' compliance with section 21.4.15, and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all City construction standards. The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved Final Plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number required by the Planning Division. Where public improvements have yet to be completed in connection with an approved Final Plat, the property owner shall submit in the format and number required by the City Manager or his/her designee, copies of the approved Final Plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number required by the Planning Division for signing and recording. 
b.  Upon notification of acceptance of required public improvements or filing of security in-lieu of infrastructure construction, the City Manager or his/her designee shall procure the signature of the chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission on the plat and shall promptly cause the plat to be recorded. 
G.  No Final Plat will be received for recording until all back taxes owed to the City have been paid in full and a certified copy of a Tax Certificate from the applicable school district and county tax office has been received for the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.11. - Minor Plat Process. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City's limits and throughout the City's ETJ. A minor plat may be submitted for approval where the proposed division of land involves four (4) or fewer lots fronting onto an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for a minor plat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a minor plat shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at his/her option, forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. 
2.  Minor Plat Approval. In accordance with LGC Section 212.0065, the City Manager or his/her designee may approve a minor plat. The City Manager or his/her designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Manager or his/her designee shall not disapprove a minor plat and shall be required to refer any plat for which approval is refused to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If a minor plat is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date of the City Manager or his/her designee's determination. 
3.  Contents of Minor Plat. An application for a minor plat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a Final Plat in accordance with section 21.12.9. 
D.  Criteria for Approval. The City Manager or his/her designee in considering final action on a minor plat should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the minor plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this UDC that apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved Development Agreement; 
2.  all lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required City utilities and infrastructure; and 
3.  the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of a minor plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the City Manager or his/her designee or the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeal, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the minor plat has not been recorded within the two (2) year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owners or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a minor plat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A minor plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
F.  Plat Recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved minor plat, following any required revisions, to the City Manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.12. - Amending Plat Process 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City's limits and throughout the City's ETJ. An amending plat may be filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in LGC section 212.016 and may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat and without notice and hearing, if the amending plat is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being replatted and is solely for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
1.  to correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
2.  to add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
3.  to correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
4.  to indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
5.  to show the location or character of a monument which has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
6.  to correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
7.  to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: 
a.  both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  neither lot is abolished; 
c.  the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
d.  the amendment does not have a materially adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat; 
8.  to relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
9.  to relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; or 
c.  the amendment does not increase the number of lots; 
10.  to make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or 
11.  to replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  the amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for an amending plat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for an amending plat shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee may, at his/her option, forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. 
2.  Amending Plat Approval. In accordance with LGC section 212.0065, the City Manager or his/her designee may approve an amending plat. The City Manager or his/her designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat for approval to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Manager or his/her designee shall not disapprove an amending plat and shall be required to refer any plat for which approval is refused to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If an amending plat is referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date of the City Manager or his/her designee's determination. 
3.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review of Administratively Approved Plats. The City Manager or his/her designee shall provide a quarterly report to the Planning and Zoning Commission containing a summary of plats that have been administratively approved during that quarter and shall include a copy of the approved plat for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
D.  Contents of Amending Plat. An application for an amending plat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a Final Plat in accordance with section 21.12.9. 
E.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of an amending plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the City Manager or his/her designee or the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeal, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the amending plat has not been recorded within the two (2) year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owners or their representative, the expiration date for approval of an amending plat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. An amending plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
F.  Plat Recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved Amending Plat, following any required revisions, to the City Manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.13. - Replat Process. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within the City's limits and throughout the City's ETJ. A replat is any plat that complies with LGC sections 212.014, 212.0145, and 212.015, as amended, which is generally submitted to replat a subdivision or part of a subdivision without vacation of the original plat. Replatting a portion of a recorded lot is not permitted. A replat does not itself constitute approval for development of the property. 
B.  Application Requirements . Any request for a replat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the Development Manual. 
C.  Processing of Application and Decision. 
1.  Submittal. An application for a replat shall be submitted to the City Manager or his/her designee. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the application for completeness in accordance with section 21.4.2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager or his/her designee shall forward a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. 
2.  Notification Requirements. An application for a replat requires notification in accordance with LGC section 212.015. Published notice and written notice to property owners within 200 feet who are also within the original subdivision shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of LGC. 
3.  Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing and receive the recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee and shall consider the proposed replat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date a complete application is filed. The Planning and Zoning Commission must approve a replat that is required to be prepared in accordance with this section and that satisfies all applicable regulations of this UDC. The Planning and Zoning Commission may vote to approve with conditions or deny a replat that does not satisfy all applicable regulations of this UDC. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission's action. 
D.  Contents of Replat. An application for a replat shall include the same information and documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with section 21.12.9. 
E.  Criteria for Approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission in considering final action on a replat should consider the following criteria: 
1.  the replat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this UDC that apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved Development Agreement; 
2.  the replat is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
3.  a public hearing was held and parties in interest and citizens have had an opportunity to be heard; and 
4.  the replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. 
F.  Protests. If the replat application is accompanied by a variance petition and is protested in accordance with this section, approval of the replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission present at the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the replat application and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area under this section, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
G.  Expiration and Extension. 
1.  Expiration. The approval of a replat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years after the date the application was approved or conditionally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for approval and recordation of the plat. If the replat has not been recorded within the two (2) year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat shall be deemed null and void. 
2.  Extension. At the request of the property owners or their representative, the expiration date for approval of a replat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A replat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration. 
H.  Plat Recordation. The property owner shall submit the approved replat, following any required revisions, to the City Manager or his/her designee, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the property records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 21.12.14. - Reserved. 
Sec. 21.12.15. - Waivers. 
A.  General. The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize waivers from the provisions of this Article when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making their findings, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waivers upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. Waivers shall not be granted unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds: 
1.  That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and 
2.  That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this UDC. Such findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission, together with the specified facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which such waiver is granted. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this UDC so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and justice done. 
B.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may establish a time period for execution of each granted waiver. 
C.  Such findings together with the specific facts on which such findings are based shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which such exception is granted. 
D.  Planning and zoning commission shall not authorize a waiver that would constitute a violation of a valid law, ordinance, code or regulation of the City. 
E.  Any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding waivers to the provisions of this Article may be appealed to the City Council. When considering an appeal, the City Council shall consider the same standards as the Planning and Zoning Commission as outlined above. 
ARTICLE 13. - LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES AND DRAINAGE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-M-31, § 1(Exh. A), adopted August 20, 2013 , amended the former Art. 13, §§ 21.13.1-21.13.7, in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Art. 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 13-M-12, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 16, 2013 . 

Sec. 21.13.1. - Clearing and Grading. 
A.  No removal of trees, land clearing and/or grading activities shall occur without the required approvals and permits including but not limited to the Grading and Clearing Permit and Tree Permits. Grading and clearing activity shall be limited to the limits of grading area identified on an approved grading plan. A Grading and Clearing Permit is required for any land disturbing activities greater than 0.1 acres outside of the FEMA designated special flood hazard area (SFHA), and all areas within the SFHA unless specifically exempted in this Section. 
B.  All Grading and Clearing Permits shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and Public Works Department and approved by the City Engineer or his/her designee. Grading and Clearing Permits shall be reviewed in accordance with this Unified Development Code, the Public Works Specifications Manual, the City of Schertz Code of Ordinances, and any other applicable law, code, or regulation governing grading and clearing activity. 
A.  The following shall be exempt from the requirement for Grading and Clearing Permit: 
1.  grading and clearing in emergency situations involving immediate danger to life and property or substantial fire hazards; 
2.  the removal of underbrush, dead trees or diseased or damaged trees which constitute a hazard to life and property based upon field inspection verification; and 
3.  grading and clearing practices associated with agricultural operations, excluding timber cutting, grading cuts or fills, and/or work within SFHA. 
Sec. 21.13.2. - Construction Storm Water Management. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates service and/or repair of sewers and ditches and the dredging of lakes. In addition, grading and clearing during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat. 
    The intent of the Construction Storm Water Management Ordinance ("this Ordinance") is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Schertz ("the City") by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth in the City. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Applicability. This Ordinance shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City including any developed and undeveloped land unless explicitly exempted by Public Works or an authorized state or federal enforcement agency. 
C.  Responsibility for Administration. Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest in the employ of the City. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall apply. 
D.  Severability. All sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid in any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not cause any remaining section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance to fail or become invalid. 
E.  Ultimate Responsibility. The issuance of any permit, certificate, or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other municipality, county, special district, State or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the storm drainage system for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. This Ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. This Ordinance in no way alleviates any requirement for applicable federal or state approvals or releases. 
F.  Permits. 
1.  No person shall be granted a Grading and Clearing Permit, Development Permit or Construction Permit for land-disturbing activity without the approval of a Grading Plan by the City Engineer, Director of Public Works, and the City Manager or his/her designees. 
2.  No Grading and Clearing Permit is required for the following activities: 
a.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. Public works must be notified within 24 hours of such activities; 
b.  The removal of underbrush, dead trees, or diseased or damaged trees which constitute a hazard to life and property based upon field inspection verification; or 
c.  Grading and clearing practices associated with agricultural operations, excluding timber cutting, grading cuts or fills, and/or work within designated special flood hazard area. 
G.  Applications. 
1.  Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and the physical address of the site or a detailed description of its location. Applications shall be accompanied by all items required per the submittal process and the application and all applicable fees. 
2.  The City of Schertz may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance bond/escrow in the amount of $1,000/acre prior to the issuance of a permit in order to insure that the storm water management practices as required by the plans approved for the permit are installed and maintained by the permit holder for the duration of the construction activity. The bond shall not be released until eighty-five percent (85%) coverage of all disturbed areas with approved vegetation is accomplished as determined by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
H.  Review and approval. 
1.  Engineering/Public Works will review each application for a permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within 30 days after receiving an application, Engineering/Public Works shall, in writing, complete one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the permit application. 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions. 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
2.  By approving a plan under this regulation, the City does not accept responsibility for the design, installation, operation or maintenance of construction storm water management activities for the permit holder. 
I.  Grading Plan. 
1.  The Grading Plan shall include the following: 
a.  One plan sheet showing existing floodplain/floodway limits, and one plan sheet showing the existing floodplain/floodway limits and the proposed floodplain/floodway limits. 
b.  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation and removal of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
c.  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of the City's regulations throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
d.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measure. 
e.  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance. 
2.  Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as Section 8. of this regulation. The City Engineer and Director of Public Works or his/her designees will provide written authorization to the permit applicant, and shall include: 
a.  Major amendments of the Grading Plan submitted to Public Works and Engineering. 
b.  Field modifications of a minor nature. 
J.  Design Requirements. 
1.  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the City's UDC, Public Works Specifications Manual and Public Works Design Standards, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works or his/her designees. 
2.  Grading and clearing shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with the UDC, this Ordinance, and any other applicable authority. 
3.  Clearing, except as necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
4.  Phasing is strongly recommended and may be required on sites disturbing greater than 15 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by Engineering and Public Works. 
5.  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
a.  Soil stabilization shall be completed within five days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
b.  If seeding or another vegetation erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two weeks or Public Works may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetation option employed. 
c.  Special techniques required to ensure stabilization, other than design criteria outlined in UDC for steep slopes or in drainage ways, shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
d.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday. 
e.  The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season. 
f.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
g.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
6.  Sediment controls requirements shall include: 
a.  Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls. Other control measures may be approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term storm water management, if required by the City. 
c.  Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
7.  Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
a.  A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by Engineering and Public Works if a watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction. 
b.  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work. 
c.  All on-site storm water conveyance channels designed according to the criteria outlined in the UDC. 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
8.  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
a.  A temporary construction access road provided at all sites. 
b.  Other measures required by Engineering and Public Works in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicle or washed into storm drains. 
K.  Inspection. 
1.  The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall approve the portion of the work completed or shall notify the permit holder wherein the work fails to comply with this Ordinance, the UDC, or other City regulations as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permit holder shall notify Public Works at least two working days before the following: 
a.  Start of construction. 
b.  Installation of sediment and erosion measures. 
c.  Completion of site clearing. 
d.  Completion of rough grading. 
e.  Completion of final grading. 
f.  Close of the construction season. 
g.  Completion of final landscaping. 
2.  The permit holder or his/her principal contact shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved grading plan. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measure. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to public works at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
3.  The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under paragraph B of this Section. 
L.  Enforcement. 
1.  Stop-Work Order-Revocation of Permit. In the event that any person holding a Grading and Clearing Permit, Development Permit or Construction Permit pursuant to this Ordinance violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of a person residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the City Engineer or Director of Public Works or his/her designees at the time interval specified in the approved permit may issue a Stop Work Order or Revoke aforementioned permit. 
2.  Violation and Penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Ordinance. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fined a minimum amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation and a maximum amount of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation. In addition, any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. A civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation of this Ordinance may be imposed. Each violation of a particular section of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense, and each day such an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this Ordinance. 
3.  Notice of Violation. If the City Engineer or the Director of Public Works determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, approved Grading Plan, or the provisions of this Ordinance, he or she shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the storm water management plan, the storm water maintenance agreement, or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action. 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City Council of the City of Schertz by filing a written notice of appeal within five (5) business days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
The City of Schertz may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
4.  Appeals. The decisions or orders of the City Council of the City of Schertz shall be final. Further relief shall be to a higher court of competent jurisdiction. 
5.  Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law. 
Sec. 21.13.3. - Flood Damage Prevention. 
A.  Finding of Fact, Purpose and Methods. 
1.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Act, Texas Water Code Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Schertz, Texas ("the City") does ordain as follows: 
2.  Finding of Fact. 
a.  The flood hazard areas of the City and extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
3.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Protect human life and health. 
b.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
c.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
d.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
e.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains. 
f.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas. 
g.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
4.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Section uses the following methods: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause increases in flood heights or velocities. 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement. 
c.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
d.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
e.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
B.  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below or in Article 16 of this Ordinance, words or phrases used in this Section shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Ordinance the most reasonable application. 
    ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    APEX means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    APPEALS BOARD means the board of adjustment of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
    APPURTENANT STRUCTURE means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or special flood hazard area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    BASEMENT means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on three or more sides. 
    BASE FLOOD ELEVATION or BFE means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the base flood. 
    BREAKAWAY WALL means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    CRITICAL FEATURE means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    DEVELOPMENT means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    ELEVATED BUILDING means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    EXISTING CONSTRUCTION means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FLOOD or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  the overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY or FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY or FIS means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS means zoning, ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a flooding ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    FLOOD PROOFING means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    FREEBOARD is a factor of safety above the BFE. (The City requires 1 foot above the BFE.) 
    FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    HISTORIC STRUCTURE means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either. 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior. 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    LEVEE means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    LEVEE SYSTEM means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    MEAN SEA LEVEL means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    NEW CONSTRUCTION means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, hotels and motels with normal room rentals for less than 6 months' duration, and nursing homes. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a vehicle which is 
(i)  built on a single chassis; 
(ii)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(iii)  designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(iv)  designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    REGULATORY FLOODWAY or FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES means a structure that is considered to be domicile or is used for residential purposes for 6 months or more. Residential structures include a single family home, multiple unit apartment buildings, a residential condominium, or a manufactured or modular home. 
    RIVERINE means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    STRUCTURE means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure or any series of reconstructions, rehabilitations, additions, or other improvements of a structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure as of the effective date of this ordinance. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    VARIANCE means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    VIOLATION means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
C.  General Provisions. 
1.  Lands to Which This Section Applies. This Section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
2.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard . The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The flood insurance study (FIS) for { Guadalupe County Texas and Incorporated Areas Volume 1 & 2 }," dated { November 2, 2007 }, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated { November 2, 2007 }. Also applicable are the effective FIS and FIRM maps for Bexar County dated {September 29, 2010} and Comal County dated {September 2, 2009}. And any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
3.  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Section. 
4.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable regulations. 
5.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Section and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail as determined by the Floodplain Administrator. 
6.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
7.  Warning and Disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
D.  Administration. 
1.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this Section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
2.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Section. 
b.  Reviews permit applications to determine whether the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
c.  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this Section. 
d.  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits relating to floodplain management have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
e.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
f.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the Texas Water Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and require that evidence of such notification is submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
g.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
h.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 21.13.3.C.2., the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 21.13.3.E. 
i.  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30, A, AO, AH and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community unless said increase is completely contained within the property of the development. 
j.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, A or AO on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12. 
3.  Permit Procedures. 
a.  Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
i.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
ii.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), to which any non-residential structure shall be flood-proofed. 
iii.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing criteria of Section 21.13.3.E.2.b. 
iv.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
v.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 21.13.3.D.2.a. 
b.  Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Section and the following relevant factors: 
i.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
ii.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
iii.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
iv.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
v.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
vi.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
vii.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
viii.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
ix.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
c.  The Floodplain Administrator may grant a waiver to certain submittal requirements, within the specified area shown on Exhibit A, for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structure constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 21.13.3.D.3.b. have been fully considered and the standards of Section 21.13.3.E. are met. The ability to be granted a waiver for the requirements to the specific area outlined in the exhibit attached hereto are: 
i.  To prevent slum and blight. 
ii.  To prevent undue hardship on property owners in the area shown on Exhibit A to which the substantial build out and close proximity of the existing structures creates unique situations where any impact may be deemed negligible. 
4.  Variance Procedures. 
a.  The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this Section. 
b.  The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Section. 
c.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
d.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
e.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section. 
f.  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Section, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Section (Section 21.13.3.A.3.). 
g.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
h.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
i.  Prerequisites for granting variances. 
i.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
ii.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  showing a good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
(3)  a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
iii.  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
j.  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that 
(1)  the criteria outlined in Sections 21.13.3.D.4(a)-(j) are met, and 
(2)  the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
E.  Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
1.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
a.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
d.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
e.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
f.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
g.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
2.  Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 21.13.3.C.2., (ii) Section 21.13.3.D.2.h. or (iii) Section 21.13.3.E.3.c. the following provisions are required: 
a.  Residential Construction -new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Section 21.13.3.D.3.a. is satisfied. 
b.  Non-Residential Construction -new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level plus one foot of freeboard or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level plus one foot of freeboard, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
c.  Enclosures -new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade. 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
d.  Manufactured Homes- 
i.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, the lowest floor of manufactured homes must be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
ii.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites 
(1)  outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 
(2)  in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 
(3)  in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
(4)  in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
iii.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions in (1) or (2) be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard, or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
e.  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM be fully licensed, have current motor vehicle inspection certificate, state registration, is operable and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, has no permanently attached additions. 
3.  Standards for Subdivision Proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Section 21.13.3 of this Ordinance. 
b.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of Section 21.13.3.C.3.; Section 21.13.3.D.3.; and the provisions of Section 21.13.3.E. of this Ordinance. 
c.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals, Master Plans and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 21.13.3.C.2. of this Ordinance. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals, Master Plans and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions less than 5 acres, 50 lots, or where zone A exists within 100 feet of the property line, base flood elevation data and/or elevation certificates may be required by the floodplain administrator to ensure any new development is reasonably safe from flooding. 
d.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
e.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
4.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 21.13.3.C.2., are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
i.  have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard, or 
ii.  together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the Base Flood Elevation plus one foot of freeboard in an AH Zone, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
c.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Section 21.13.3.D.3. are satisfied. 
d.  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
5.  Floodways. Lands located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 21.13.3.C.2., are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If Section 21.13.3.E.5.a. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of 21.13.3.E. 
c.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 

Exhibit A: Sec. 21.13.2 Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance 
Sec. 21.13.4. - Drainage. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this Article shall apply to any Capital Improvement Project, application for Subdivision Plat, Master Development Plan, Site Plan, Grading and Clearing Permit, and/or Building Permit approval except as otherwise provided by this chapter. A Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be provided as set forth in Section 21.13.2. 
B.  Storm Water Management Program. 
1.  System Criteria. 
a.  All storm water management facilities, or combination of facilities, shall be designed for ultimate development. Facilities with drainage areas less than one hundred (100) acres none of which lies within the SFHA shall be designed for a twenty-five-year storm. Facilities with drainage areas over one hundred (100) acres or any part of which is within a SFHA shall be designed for a 100-year storm or a twenty-five-year storm plus freeboard, as defined in the Public Works Specifications Manual, if that elevation is higher. 
b.  Detention facilities and streets are exceptions to the frequency criteria cited above. Refer to the Public Works Specifications Manual for specific drainage design criteria for streets and detention facilities. 
c.  Three (3) development conditions shall be analyzed for each development. 
i.  Existing Conditions. This refers to current development conditions in the watershed and on-site. Use as the baseline analysis for determining the impact of development. 
ii.  Proposed Conditions. This refers to existing conditions with the proposed development added. Use to determine if the increased runoff from the proposed development results in an adverse impact to other properties. 
iii.  Ultimate Conditions. This refers to ultimate development conditions within the watershed used to design the drainage facilities. This condition may be used in-lieu of subsection (ii) above, to determine if the increased runoff from the ultimate watershed development results in an adverse impact to other properties. 
d.  Responsibility to Accept Storm Water. The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be responsible for the conveyance of all storm water flowing through the property. This responsibility includes the storm water flowing onto the property by any other developed property as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. Future upstream development shall be accounted for by assuming ultimate development when sizing drainage systems as specified in this section. 
e.  Positive Overflow Pathways. Storm water management facilities for local drainage systems will be designed to ensure that a positive overflow pathway is provided to the nearest one hundred (100) year conveyance facility. The overflow pathway must be delineated on a plan that shows all existing structures in the vicinity impacted by the overflow pathway. 
f.  Maintenance. 
i.  Maintenance of publicly owned facilities will be the responsibility of the City. Maintenance of private facilities is the responsibility of the property owner or the community association and must be specified in a maintenance schedule submitted to the City. A maintenance schedule for privately owned facilities must be approved by the Director of Public Works prior to the approval of construction drawings. 
ii.  Authorized personnel from the City shall conduct periodic inspections of these facilities and structures. Any required repairs will be consistent with current construction standards. Maintenance issues identified by the City or state during inspections shall be the responsibility of the current owner. 
iii.  If the current owner fails to address any maintenance issues identified by the City or State, then the City may perform required maintenance at the expense of the current owner. 
g.  New Development. Peak storm water runoff rates from all new development shall be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates from the site's predevelopment conditions for the five-year, twenty-five-year and one-hundred-year (100) design storm events, except as provided in subsection B.1., above. 
h.  Redevelopment. Peak storm water runoff rates from an area of redevelopment shall be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates produced by existing development conditions for the five-year, twenty-five-year and one-hundred (100) year design storm events, except as provided in subsection B.1., above. 
C.  Drainage Easements/Rights-of-Way. 
1.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional width as outlined below. 
2.  Easements shall be the one hundred (100) year floodplain or the twenty-five-year plus freeboard (Public Works Specifications Manual) whichever is greater. In floodplain areas where ongoing maintenance is required or the floodplain will be reserved for use by the public, the drainage easements shall be maintained by a public entity and the property will be dedicated to the City as a multi-use drainage easement. A drivable access way shall be provided in floodplain easements for the length of the easement. Diversion of storm water away from the natural watercourse will not be allowed except within the boundaries of the property controlled by the developer, provided that the diverted water is returned to the watercourse within which it would naturally have been flowing prior to leaving the developer's property. An analysis of the timing of the diverted hydrograph on watersheds greater than twenty (20) acres, as it reenters the receiving watercourse, must be performed to show that the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse has not been increased as a result of the diversion. 
3.  An unobstructed access right-of-way connecting the drainage easement with an alley or roadway parallel to or near the easement shall be provided at a minimum spacing of one (1) access right-of-way at approximately one thousand-foot intervals. The access right-of-way shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width and shall be maintained clear of obstructions that would limit maintenance vehicular access. If the flow line of the designed channel incorporates grade control structures or vehicular bridges that would prevent maintenance equipment from accessing that portion of the channel, additional access points may be required. Channel design, earthen or concrete, shall have ramps in the side slopes near the access points that would allow maintenance equipment to descend to the floor level of the channel. The maximum allowable ramp slope for vehicular access is seven to one (7:1). Access points adjacent to roadways or alleys shall be provided with a post and cable feature with padlock to prevent unauthorized use. 
4.  For single family residential subdivisions, drainage easements crossing lots and property lines are prohibited. Drainage easements should be placed in separate common area lots. Fencing or other structures may be allowed across drainage easements only in accordance with the following restrictions: 
a.  The fence or structure will not interfere with adequate drainage flow. 
b.  Bottom of fence shall be a minimum of the flow depth, plus freeboard (see Public Works Specifications Manual) above design flow line of channel or drain. Fences located within drainage easements shall be equipped with a bar screen at the bottom to allow for proper drainage flow to be approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
c.  A hinged gate will be placed across the entire width of the drainage easement. 
d.  Fence posts located within the easement must be structurally designed to resist damage from the storm water flows and impact from debris. 
e.  A Floodplain Development Permit will be required to construct a fence within an easement within the 100-year floodplain. 
5.  Interceptor drainage easements and channels shall be provided where the drainage area to the back of platted lots exceeds the depth of one (1) platted residential lot or 120 feet whichever is greater. Interceptor drains shall be constructed prior to the issuing of building permits on any lot that would be affected by natural drainage being intercepted. 
6.  All developments shall provide for adequate drainage outfall at the lower end of the site into an existing street, alley, drainage, easements or right-of-way, or to the centerline of an existing natural drain. Where proposed street, storm sewer, or open channel does not discharge into a natural low or into an existing adequate drainage easement then facilities and drainage easements of adequate width to contain the design discharge shall be constructed and dedicated to the centerline of an existing natural low within the same watershed. However, where the natural low lies within the developer's property, the developer will be required only to plat an easement to natural low and include the design storage area for the volume of runoff, provided that the easement is adequate to accommodate the facilities that will be built in conjunction with the future development of that property to build out of the watershed. 
D.  Site Design and Grading. 
1.  All land disturbing or land filling activities or soil storage shall be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation, and to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare in accordance with the TPDES General Permit TXR150000, as amended, and the document entitled "Complying with the Edwards Aquifer Rules; Technical Guidance on Best Management Practices," by Michael E. Barrett, Ph.D., P.E. Center for Research in Water Resources, Bureau of Engineering Research, University of Texas at Austin, (RG-348, July 2005), which documents are hereby incorporated by this reference. 
2.  Erosion and sedimentation controls in accordance with the specifications established by the Director of Public Works in compliance with the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permitting requirements and the Public Works Specifications Manual are required. 
3.  Projects shall not be considered complete until restoration has been made in accordance with TPDES requirements. 
4.  Where possible, multiple uses of drainage facilities and open space shall be incorporated by the owner or developer of a new subdivision. Alternative uses such as public recreation, horse/bike/hiking trails, walking paths, nature preserves, wildlife habitat areas, etc. are encouraged subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
5.  A note must be placed on the plat for residential lots, which states that finished floor elevations must be a minimum of eight (8) inches above final adjacent grade. A grading plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City, which indicates typical lot grading for all lots in the subdivision using typical FHA lot grading types (A, B and C). A more detailed grading plan is also acceptable. 
E.  For projects or series of projects with an increased impervious area of greater than 0.1 acres, storm water detention shall mitigate peak flow rates to predevelopment or existing development conditions including the initial 0.1 acres increase as stated in subsections 21.13.4.B. of this Article. 
1.  The maximum allowable outflow rate from the detention facility must be restricted to the flow rate from the undeveloped or existing development tract for the five-year, twenty-five-year and one-hundred-year frequency. Best management practices shall be used in the design of detention facilities in accordance with this section. The timing of the hydrograph released from the detention facility must be checked against the timing of the flow rate in the first open watercourse to prevent any increase in the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse. For detention basins constructed in-line on an existing watercourse, the creation of the basin shall not increase flood elevations in the channel upstream of the new development boundaries. 
2.  On-site detention facilities must be privately owned and shall be maintained by the community association or property owner. A maintenance schedule shall be submitted to the Public Works Department and approved by the Director of Public Works prior to approval of construction plans. The City will have the right to do periodic inspections of privately owned and maintained detention facilities to ensure that the maintenance schedule is being implemented. 
3.  Multi-use facilities are encouraged, but not required (multi-use facilities allows for water quality, satisfy TPDES requirements, enhance ground water recharge, provide open space, provide recreation or other amenities, and/or provide habitat) and may be utilized so long as the facility meets the standards set forth in subsection (B.1.a.) of this Section and does not increase the rate or volume of erosion above that which would result from the use of a facility without multiple uses. The use of multi-use detention facilities to alleviate existing flooding problems, enhance and provide amenities for older neighborhoods, and support the revitalization of economically depressed areas is encouraged in public and private redevelopment initiatives. 
4.  Storm water retention with permanent wet pool or pumped detention systems will not be acceptable methods of storm water mitigation unless the facility will remain privately owned, operated, and maintained. The City will approve the use of a pumped facility for private use under the following conditions: 
a.  A gravity system is not feasible from an engineering and economic standpoint. 
b.  At least two (2) pumps are provided each of which is sized to pump the design flow rate. 
c.  The selected design outflow rate must not aggravate downstream flooding. 
d.  Controls and pumps shall be designed to prevent unauthorized operation and vandalism. 
e.  Adequate assurance is provided that the system will be operated and maintained on a continuous basis. 
5.  All storm water detention facilities considered to be dams as defined by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall conform to any applicable law, regulation, and ordinance of any regulatory entity and the following criteria: 
a.  All dams shall be approved by the Dam Safety Team of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) for safety. All other new dams shall be designed in accordance with acceptable design criteria as approved by the Director of Public Works, or his authorized representative. 
b.  All hydrology and hydraulic properties of a dam will be reviewed by the Department of Public Works with regard to spillway design, freeboard hydraulics, backwater curves and downstream effects due to the dam site. 
c.  The spillway section of any earthen dam with a height greater than six (6) feet shall be large enough to pass a PMP (probable maximum precipitation) flood, as defined by the NRCS, without overtopping the crest of the dam in accordance with TCEQ regulations. 
d.  A 100-year frequency flood shall be routed through the proposed dam and all land subject to flooding shall be dedicated as drainage easement or right-of-way. An unobstructed fifteen-foot access easement around the periphery of the flooded area shall be dedicated as drainage easement for facilities that require regular mowing or other ongoing maintenance, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. An unobstructed fifteen-foot access right-of-way shall be established which connects the drainage easement adjacent to the dam structure to a road or alley. 
e.  Development below existing dams will take into account the original design conditions of the existing dam. Dam breach analysis checks will be required, dependent upon location of development with respect to dam site. 
f.  All spillway discharges shall be adequately routed to the centerline of the natural low below the dam site. The adequate routing of spillway discharges pertains to the hydraulic routing of the one hundred (100) year frequency flood for dedication of drainage easement limits. Probable maximum precipitation (PMP) defined PMP on definition section flood routing or breaches will only be considered for safety considerations (that is, the placement of building and the setting of minimum floor slab elevations below the dams). Any proposed concrete dam structure need not have spillway capable of routing a PMP flood, however, it shall be shown to be structurally capable of withstanding any range of flood conditions with regard to possible failure due to sliding, overturning, and structural integrity, up to and including the PMP flood. 
Sec. 21.13.5. - Control of Storm Water Run-off. 
A.  Procedure for Submittal of a Storm Water Management Plan. To standardize the review process and minimize the time for approval by the City during review of any applications indicated in Section 21.13.4.A. of this Article, a complete submittal regarding the analysis of existing drainage conditions and the design of modifications or new drainage facilities is necessary. The owner of the property to be developed is required by the Director of Public Works to provide, at the owner's expense and as a condition of construction plan approval, a Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) for the total development area to be ultimately constructed. The SWMP shall contain all of the necessary support data, methodologies used in calculations, and conclusions as required by the Public Works Specifications Manual (Section 4.3). A checklist is found in the Public Works Specifications Manual (Section 6) that will be used by the City reviewer as a guide during the evaluation of all SWMPs submitted to the City. The purpose of the checklist is to expedite the review process for both the engineer and the City, and to aid the engineer in the preparation of reports for the City's review. The SWMP shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee prior to approval of any construction plans. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the Ordinance for the Control of Storm Water Run-off ("this Ordinance") is to establish minimum storm water management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This Ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
1.  Minimize storm water run-off from any property in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels. 
2.  Minimize nonpoint source pollution caused by storm water run-off from property which would otherwise degrade local water quality. 
3.  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water run-off which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.  Reduce storm water run-off rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, through storm water management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
C.  Applicability. This Ordinance shall be applicable to all territory within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City including any developed and undeveloped land unless explicitly exempted by Section 4 of this Ordinance or an authorized state or federal enforcement agency. This Ordinance also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans may also be reviewed by local environmental protection officials to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction run-off levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. 
    To prevent the adverse impacts of storm water run-off, the City has developed a set of performance standards that must be met by new developments. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing (1) one acre or more of land. The following activities may be exempt from these storm water performance criteria: 
1.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. Public Works must be notified within 24 hours of such activities. 
2.  The removal of underbrush, dead trees, and diseased or damaged trees which constitute a hazard to life and property based upon field inspection verification. 
3.  Grading and clearing practices associated with agricultural operations, excluding timber cutting, grading cuts or fills, and work within designated special flood hazard area. 
D.  Responsibility for Administration. Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of the City. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, shall apply. 
E.  Ultimate Responsibility. The issuance of any permit, certificate, or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate, or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other municipality, county, special district, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the storm drainage system for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. This Ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutant. 
F.  Development of a Storm Water Design Manual. The City may furnish additional policy, criteria, and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this Ordinance and may provide such information in the form of a Storm Water Design Manual as part of the Public Works Specifications Manual. This manual will include a list of acceptable storm water treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each storm water practice. The manual may be updated and expanded at the discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. Storm water treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards of the City. 
G.  Permit Required. No land owner or land operator shall receive a Grading and Clearing Permit, Development Permit or Construction Permit, required for land disturbance activities, without first meeting the requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
H.  Application Requirements. Unless specifically excluded by this Ordinance, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the City a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. 
    Unless otherwise excluded by this Ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  A storm water management concept plan. 
2.  A maintenance agreement. 
3.  A non-refundable permit review fee. 
    The storm water management plan and maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet at minimum the requirements of this Ordinance, the Public Works Specifications Manual, the Unified Development Code, and any other applicable law, code, or ordinance. The fees shall be established by the City in the current fee schedule at the time of application submittal, or as required in this Ordinance. 
    The City may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance bond/escrow in the amount of $1,000/acre prior to the issuance of a permit in order insure that the storm water management practices as required by the plans approved for the permit are installed and maintained by the permit holder for the duration of the construction activity. The performance bond or escrow will not be released until all land disturbed by construction activity has eighty-five percent (85%) coverage of approved vegetation as determined by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
I.  Application Review Fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the City. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection, and program administration. Payment shall be made prior to the issuance of any permit for the development. 
J.  Application Procedure. 
1.  Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the Inspections Department on any regular business day. 
2.  A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the appropriate department(s) for review. 
3.  Permit applications shall include the following; two copies of the storm water management concept plan, two copies of the maintenance agreement, one copy of the storm water management concept plan, and the maintenance agreement in PDF on a CD/DVD, and any required review fees. 
4.  Within 30 days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this Ordinance, the City shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan, and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
5.  If the permit application, storm water management plan, or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the storm water management plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the City shall have 30 days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
K.  Permit Duration. Permits issued under this Section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date of completion as specified on each individual permit. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that all storm water management practices have passed the final inspection required under the permit's conditions, or an extension has been approved if applicable by the date of completion of the permit. 
L.  Waivers for Providing Storm Water Management. 
1.  Every applicant shall provide for storm water management as required by this ordinance, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the storm water management plan requirements shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
The minimum requirements for storm water management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this Ordinance. 
b.  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of storm water discharges have been established in a storm water management plan that has been approved by the City and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance. 
c.  Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place and be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the storm water practice. 
d.  The City determines that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
e.  Non-structural practices will be used on the site that reduces: 
1.)  the generation of storm water from the site, 
2.)  the size and cost of storm water storage and 
3.)  the pollutants generated at the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the City. 
2.  In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the City may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these storm water management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
a.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures. 
b.  Degradation of biological functions or habitat. 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or stream bed erosion or siltation. 
d.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, safety, and/or property. 
3.  Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for storm water management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the jurisdictional storm water authority. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The creation of a storm water management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack storm water management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this Ordinance. 
c.  Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund storm water management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macro-invertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of storm water management practices). 
4.  The City Manager or his/her designee may authorize waivers from the provisions of this Ordinance when, in his/her opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the City Manager shall prescribe only conditions that he/she deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making his/her findings, the City Manager shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waivers upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. Waivers shall not be granted unless the City Manager finds: 
a.  That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, and will not violate any applicable law or ordinance of any regulatory entity. 
b.  That the granting of the waiver will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the UDC and any other applicable code or ordinance so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and justice done. 
5.  Such findings of the City Manager, together with the specified facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official records of any related permit for which such waiver is granted. 
6.  The City Manager may establish a time period for execution of each granted waiver. Any decision of the City Manager or his/her designee regarding waivers to the provisions of this Ordinance may be appealed to the City Council. When considering an appeal, the City Council shall consider the same standards as the City Manager, as outlined above. 
M.  Fee in Lieu of Storm Water Management Practices. Where the City waives all or part of the minimum storm water management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate storm water facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the City. When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required storm water management, the monetary contribution required shall not exceed the proportionate cost of his/her contribution to the system discharged into (unless the applicant and storm water authority reach an agreement on a greater alternate contribution). All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any permit for development. 
N.  Dedication of Land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required storm water management by entering into an agreement with the City for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site storm water management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the City prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
O.  General Performance Criteria for Storm Water Management. Unless judged by the City to be exempt or by waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for storm water management at all sites: 
1.  All site designs shall establish storm water management practices to control the peak flow rates of storm water discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of storm water. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for storm water treatment and to infiltrate storm water run-off from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
2.  All storm water run-off generated from new development shall not discharge untreated storm water directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the City. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the United States Army Corp of Engineers (USACE) or the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ) responsible for natural resources. 
3.  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. 
4.  For new development, structural storm water treatment practices (STP) shall be designed to remove the average annual post development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a STP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
a.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQ v ). 
b.  Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the local storm water design manual. 
c.  Constructed properly and maintained regularly. 
5.  To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the current storm water manual. 
6.  Storm water discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e. Edwards Aquifer regulated zones and other water supply reservoirs) will be required to meet the requirements of the Edwards Aquifer Protection Program. 
7.  Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) general permit. The storm water pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
8.  Storm water discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots", may require the use of specific structural storm water treatment practice (STPs) and pollution prevention practices. 
9.  Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the City to determine if they are subject to additional storm water design requirements. 
10.  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Public Works Specification Manual shall be used for sizing all storm water management practices. 
P.  Minimum Control Requirements. All storm water management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, five year, 25 year, 100 year) as identified in the current storm water design manual are met, unless the City grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. 
    In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of run-off. 
Q.  Site Design Feasibility. Storm water management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered: 
1.  Topography. 
2.  Maximum drainage area. 
3.  Depth to water table. 
4.  Soils. 
5.  Slopes. 
6.  Terrain. 
7.  Head. 
8.  Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
R.  Conveyance Issues. All storm water management practices shall be designed to convey storm water to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points. 
2.  Protection of inlet and outfall structures. 
3.  Elimination of erosive flow velocities. 
4.  Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
    The Storm Water Design Manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved storm water management practices. 
S.  Treatment/Geometry Conditions. All storm water management practices shall be designed to capture and treat storm water run-off according to the specifications outlined in the Storm Water Design Manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved storm water management practice. 
T.  Landscaping Plans Required. All storm water management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. 
U.  Maintenance Agreements. All storm water treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the storm water treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the storm water treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all storm water treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. 
V.  Non-Structural Storm Water Practices. The use of non-structural storm water treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of storm water that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of storm water from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. 
W.  Storm Water Management Plan Required for all Developments. No application for development will be approved unless it includes a storm water management plan detailing in concept how run-off and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the City, must indicate whether storm water will be managed on-site or off-site and the general location and type of practices. 
    The storm water management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final storm water management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all storm water management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the Submittal Checklist found in the storm water design manual. No Grading and Clearing Permit, Development Permit or Construction Permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final Storm Water Management Plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the City after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
X.  Storm Water Management Concept Plan Requirements. A storm water management concept plan shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient information (i.e, maps, hydrologic calculations, etc) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing storm water generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of storm water management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of storm water run-off from future development. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
1.  A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural storm water management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of grading and clearing; a written description of the Site Plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
2.  Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed storm water management measures are capable of controlling run-off from the site in compliance with this Ordinance and the specifications of the Storm Water Design Manual. 
3.  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
4.  A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed storm water management facility. 
5.  The City may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
Y.  Final Storm Water Management Plan Requirements. After review of the storm water management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the City, a final storm water management plan must be submitted for approval. The final storm water management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the storm water management plan checklist found in the Storm Water Design Manual. 
Z.  Performance Bond/Escrow. 
1.  The City may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance escrow or bond prior to issuance of any permit in order to insure that the storm water practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved storm water management plan. The amount of the performance bond/escrow and the forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the storm water management plan shall be in accordance with Section 8 of this Ordinance. 
2.  The performance bond/escrow shall be released in full only upon submission of "as-built plans", quantity and cost of any public storm water conveyance facilities, eighty-five percent (85%) coverage of vegetation of all disturbed areas, and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the storm water practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  The City will make a final inspection of the storm water practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this Ordinance. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the City. 
AA.  Notice of Construction Commencement. 
1.  The applicant must notify the City at least two business days in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the storm water management system construction shall be conducted by the staff or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the jurisdictional storm water authority. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection. 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved storm water management plan. 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications. 
d.  Any violations that exist. 
2.  If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the City. 
BB.  As-Built Plans. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any storm water management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all storm water management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A full size set of as-builts and one copy PDF on CD/DVD as well as final inspection by the City is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
CC.  Landscaping and Stabilization Requirements. Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be revegetated within ten (10) days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
1.  Reseeding must be done in accordance with the criteria established in the Public Works Specification Manual to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over eighty-five percent (85%) of the seeded area. 
2.  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
3.  In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be approved prior to receiving a permit. 
4.  In order to file a plat before establishing eighty-five percent (85%) coverage of approved vegetation on all land disturbed by construction activity, a performance bond/escrow must be submitted to and accepted by the City in accordance with Section 25 of this Ordinance. 
DD.  Maintenance Easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has an storm water management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this Ordinance. The easement agreement shall be recorded prior to final plat approval or prior to any building permit issued within the development, whichever is sooner. 
EE.  Maintenance Covenants. 
1.  Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the City and recorded into the land record prior to construction plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the storm water management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
2.  The City, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future storm water management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of the Public Works Specifications Manual and the Unified Development Code and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
FF.  Requirements for Maintenance Covenants. All storm water management facilities will be subject to, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include; removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the storm water management facility. 
GG.  Inspection Storm Water Facilities. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the TPDES storm water permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other storm water treatment practices. 
HH.  Right-of-Entry for Inspection. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Ordinance. 
II.  Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a storm water management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least 3 years. These records shall be made available to the City during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
JJ.  Failure to Maintain Practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the storm water management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the storm water management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 60 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. 
KK.  Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this Ordinance, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
LL.  Notice of Violations. 
1.  When the City determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the storm water management plan, the storm water maintenance agreement, or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action. 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City Council of the City by filing a written notice of appeal within five (5) business days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
2.  The City may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this Ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
MM.  Stop Work Orders . Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities not directly related to the actions necessary to restore compliance with this Ordinance. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the City confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this Ordinance. 
NN.  Civil and Criminal Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation may be punished by and fined a minimum amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation and a maximum amount of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. A civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation of this Ordinance may be imposed. Each violation of a particular section of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense, and each day such an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this Ordinance. 
OO.  Restoration of Lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the City may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner and may become a lien upon the property until paid. 
PP.  Holds on Occupancy Permits. Occupancy permits will not be granted or may be revoked until all corrections to all storm water practices have been made and accepted by the City. 
Sec. 21.13.6. - Illicit Discharge and Connection. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Schertz ("the City") through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system as required by the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit and state law. The objectives are to regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drainage system by storm water discharges of any user, to prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the storm drainage system, to establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance, and to establish penalties for violations of this Ordinance. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all discharges entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands within the corporate limits of the City or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction unless explicitly exempted by public works or an authorized state or federal enforcement agency. 
C.  Responsibility for Administration. Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest in the employ of the City. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall apply. 
D.  Ultimate Responsibility. The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other municipality, county, special district, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the storm drainage system for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. This Ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
E.  Prohibitions. 
1.  Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or watercourse any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following are exempt discharges not prohibited by the establishment of this Ordinance: uncontaminated water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, fire hydrant flushing, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants of concern or other materials as described in this Ordinance. 
b.  Discharges from swimming pools are generally not allowed unless: de-chlorinated to less than 1 ppm chlorine or discharged through the yard of the property on which it is located, and does not cross adjacent property, to aid in dissipating the chlorine and notification to the Public Works Department at least one business day in advance of discharge. 
c.  Discharges specified in writing by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
d.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires written approval from the Director of Public Works or his/her designee and all other applicable enforcement agencies prior to the time of the test. 
e.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
2.  Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
a.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited 
b.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
c.  A person is considered to be in violation of this Ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or allows such a connection to continue. 
F.  Suspension of Storm Drainage System Access. 
1.  Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system discharge access to a person or entity when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage system, water of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
2.  Termination Due to the Detection of Illicit Drainage. Any person discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this Ordinance may have their access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm drainage system access. The notifications will be in accordance with Section 21.13.6.L. of this Ordinance as specified below. 
G.  Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. Any person or persons subject to an industrial or construction activity TPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply will all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit will be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm drainage system. 
H.  Monitoring of Discharges. 
1.  Public Works's representatives shall be allowed to enter and inspect permitted facilities subject to regulation under this Ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of Public Works. 
2.  Facility operators shall allow Public Works's representatives, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an TPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
3.  Public Works's representatives shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
4.  Public works has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
5.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
6.  Unreasonable delays in allowing public works's representatives access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this Ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with a TPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies Public Works's representatives reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Ordinance. 
7.  If Public Works's representatives have been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this Ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Public Works representative may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
I.  Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Storm water pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices. The City will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or continue to contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this Section. These BMPs shall be part of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the TPDES permit. 
J.  Watercourse Protection. Every person owning a property through which a watercourse passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within said person's property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
L.  Notification of Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such as release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify Public Works in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director of Public Works within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years from the date of the discharge. 
M.  Violation, Enforcement, Penalties and Appeals. 
1.  Notification of Violation. Whenever the Public Works representative finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
2.  Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within five (5) business days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
3.  Enforcement Measures After Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the representative upholding the decision of Public Works, then representatives of the City may enter the subject's private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the Public Works representative or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
4.  Cost of Abatement of the Violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation beginning on the 1 st day following discovery of the violation. Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest in the City Secretary's Office objecting to the amount of the assessment within five (5) business days. The written protest shall be addressed by the City Council within thirty (30) days. If the amount due is not paid in full within 60 days from the notification of the cost of abatement the charges may become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
5.  Injunctive Relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
6.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
N.  Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies. 
Sec. 21.13.7. - Waivers and Amendments. 
A.  General. The City Manager or his/her designee may authorize waivers from the provisions of this Article when, in his/her opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the City Manager shall prescribe only conditions that he/she deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making his/her findings, the City Manager shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waivers upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. Waivers shall not be granted unless the City Manager finds: 
1.  That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, and will not violate any applicable law or ordinance of any regulatory entity; and 
2.  Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this UDC so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and justice done. Such findings of the City Manager, together with the specified facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official records of any related permit for which such waiver is granted. 
B.  The City Manager may establish a time period for execution of each granted waiver. 
C.  Any decision of the City Manager or his/her designee regarding waivers to the provisions of this Article may be appealed to the City Council. When considering an appeal, the City Council shall consider the same standards as the City Manager as outlined above. 
D.  The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby granted authority to amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal the text of any portion of the Public Works Specifications Manual in order to establish and maintain appropriate standards for development and use of property within the City's corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction in accordance with Section 21.1.4. 
ARTICLE 14. - TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 21.14.1. - Streets. 
A.  Street Layout. The arrangement, extent, character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Master Thoroughfare Plan and the Comprehensive Land Plan. Collector streets shall provide adequate circulation within the neighborhood and yet discourage through traffic. The street layout shall be arranged to achieve the most desirable development of the entire neighborhood unit with appropriate consideration of creeks, drainage channels, wooded areas and other topographical features, which lend themselves to special treatment. Permits must be obtained from TxDOT for driveways and streets accessing any state highway. The proposed location of driveways must comply with all applicable City and State safety requirements. 
B.  Relation to Adjoining Streets. Adjoining areas shall be continued and tied into the street layout. 
C.  Projection of Streets. When adjoining properties are not yet subdivided, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the proper projection of streets into the adjoining unsubdivided areas, and will be required to comply with the neighborhood pattern or conform to the Comprehensive Land Plan. 
D.  Private Streets. 
1.  Private streets within the City may be authorized providing all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  A homeowners association is established to maintain and upkeep all streets in a subdivision in accordance with the City's public street standards, to include the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way, removal of weeds and unclogging of culverts. 
b.  Private streets are constructed in accordance with the City's standards for public streets. 
c.  The following "maintenance agreement" note will appear on the subdivision plat: 
"Streets within this subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Schertz public streets standards. The upkeep and maintenance to include the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way, removal of weeds and unclogging of culverts shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association. The City of Schertz is released from any liability for these streets. Periodic inspection by a public official who is authorized to enforce complaints about poor maintenance is permitted." 
d.  Provide access for fire protection, ambulance, police, school bus, garbage service and other utility agencies. 
2.  One Residence. A private street or road serving only one (1) residence is exempt from construction and maintenance standards for public streets. 
3.  Ingress/Egress. Private streets shall connect directly to a public street or road. 
E.  Dead-End Streets and Cul-De-Sacs. 
1.  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs projected to be continued in future subdivisions in conformance with Paragraph C of this section when designed as cul-de-sacs. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on projected streets until such time as they are extended. 
2.  Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall have a turnaround of not less than 150 feet in diameter of ROW in single-family residential areas, 150 feet in diameter of ROW in multi-family areas and not less than 200 feet in diameter of ROW in commercial and industrial areas. This provision may be modified upon approval of the Fire Chief and City Engineer. 
F.  Alignment. The alignment of all arterial and collector streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Land Plan and the requirements of the Public Works Specifications Manual. Collector street alignment shall meet the requirements of the Public Works Specifications Manual and in no case shall street jogs be offset less than 150 feet on centerline. 
G.  Intersections. The curb radius at street intersections shall conform to the specifications in the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
H.  Street Names and Street Numbers. Names of new streets shall not duplicate the names of existing streets within the City and its ETJ unless the new street is a continuation of or part of a future continuation of such existing street. Street names shall be chosen to avoid similarity or confusion with existing street names. A new street name shall not differ from an existing street name solely by the addition of a different auxiliary designation such as "avenue", "way", "boulevard", etc. Names of all new streets shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and be coordinated on an area wide basis. Street names shall have prior approval of the United States Postal Service, Bexar Metro 911, and the applicable County Clerk's Office. Street addresses should also be coordinated with present existing addresses. The City will determine street numbers and advise the subdivider as to the street numbers. 
I.  Construction Standards. All streets shall be constructed with reference to base, surfacing, curbs, grades, horizontal curves and intersection curve radius in accordance with the standards prescribed in the Public Works Specifications Manual and any other applicable specifications of the City. 
J.  Reserve Areas are Prohibited. There shall be no reserve areas controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
K.  Half Streets or Adjacent Streets. 
1.  No new half streets shall be platted that do not conform to the Master Thoroughfare Plan and the Comprehensive Land Plan. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half street not conforming to the Comprehensive Land Plan requirements or the requirements of this UDC, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate any additional right-of-way to meet the street width required. 
2.  If new development of property that abuts City maintained roads does not meet the design or width standards in this UDC, the Developer shall be required to make the necessary dedication and improvements in conformance with this UDC or any other applicable code of the City. 
3.  The minimum dedication and construction costs shall be equal to one-half (1/2) of the minimum right-of-way (ROW) and construction costs associated with the proposed street. 
4.  Improvements shall include right-of-way dedication, paving, curb and guttering, shoulder improvements and sidewalk as determined by the City. 
5.  Should any pavement be laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be saw-cut back a minimum of two feet (2') to assure an adequate sub-base and pavement joint. 
L.  Public Accesses. All residential subdivisions shall have a minimum of two (2) locations accessing existing public streets. Access may be provided through the construction of a public street. The extent and location of all accesses is subject to review and approval by the City. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not permit "island" subdivisions, lots or streets that would be surrounded by the flood water of a one hundred (100) year flood unless the area is accessible to high ground by at least one dedicated street elevated above the one hundred (100) year flood level. 
M.  Safety Lanes (Fire Lanes). 
1.  Manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks, apartments, multi-family residences, malls, commercial and business areas shall have driving surfaces within the site designated and clearly identified as safety lanes or fire lanes for fire protection, EMS, etc. These areas must be paved with concrete or asphalt and be maintained by the owners. Exits from these sites shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') in width and must exit into a dedicated street. The pavement width for interior safety lanes will be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24'). Additional width will be required when adequate off-street parking is not provided. 
2.  All roadways that serve emergency vehicles are required to have a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14') to any overhead obstructions including, but not limited to, bridges, trees, canopies, awnings and signs. 
N.  Access to Principal and Secondary Arterial Streets. Access to principal and secondary arterial streets should be limited to protect the flow of traffic from the lots. A one foot (1') non-access easement shall be provided along principal and secondary arterial streets when lots have access to another public right-of-way. 
O.  Street and Traffic Control Signs. 
1.  All street signs in a new subdivision within the City limits, including street name, speed limit, stop and yield signs, etc. shall be paid for by the developer, and shall be provided by and installed by the City's Public Works Department in accordance with the Public Works Specifications Manual. Traffic control devices required within the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
2.  Any installation of speed control devices, such as speed bumps or humps, must also be approved by the fire department to determine potential impact to emergency response vehicles. 
3.  A required traffic control device must be fitted with traffic preemption compatible devices for activation by emergency vehicles. 
P.  Street Improvements. 
1.  All street improvements shall meet the current requirements of the Comprehensive Land Plan and this Article, but in no case shall be less than the following: 
Table 21.14.1 
Street Improvement Standards Classification ROW Pavement Drainage Width Sidewalk Width Hike/Bike Trail Principal Arterial 120 feet 48 feet with 12 foot median Curb or Curb and Gutter 5 feet 
one side 8 feet other side (unless State Hwy then both sides) Secondary Arterial 86 feet 48 feet Curb or Curb and Gutter 5 feet 
one side 8 feet other side Collector 60 feet 42 feet Curb or Curb and Gutter 5 feet 
both sides - Local Street - Residential 50 feet 30 feet Curb or Curb and Gutter 5 feet 
both sides - Local Street - Commercial/Industrial 60 feet 42 feet Curb and Gutter 5 feet 
both sides - Paved Alley 20 feet 20 feet Curb or Curb and Gutter None -  
2.  Islands in Roadways. Islands in road rights-of-way will be considered on a case-by-case basis. The street right-of-way will be engineered to accommodate all emergency and utility vehicles, after coordination by City Staff, to include a review and recommendation from the City of Schertz Transportation Safety Advisory Commission. At a minimum, all islands shall provide at least twenty-four feet (24') of pavement on each side of the island. All islands provided within street ROW shall be designated on the plat and shall be dedicated by the developer or its successors and/or assigns. A plat note shall be provided which identifies maintenance of islands as the responsibility of the developer or its successors and/or assigns. Any islands that are not maintained in accordance with this section may be removed by the City and shall be removed at the expense of the developer or its successors and/or assigns, after due notice and the written recommendation by the City Engineer and Fire Department. 
Q.  Drainage. The storm drainage for all streets shall be designed on a twenty-five (25) year flood frequency. Runoff rates shall be computed in all cases on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing runoff water to the proposed subdivision, on the basis of concrete lined channels and streets carrying storm water in the contributing area. All necessary storm drainage improvements shall be in accordance with the Public Works Specifications Manual and shall comply with the City's Stormwater Pollution Prevention and Drainage Plan. 
R.  Curb and Gutter. Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all streets within or forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. Curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Specifications Manual. The City Engineer may waive the requirements for construction of curb and gutter or may approve an alternative curb and gutter construction where developments result in an overall density of less than one (1) unit per one-half (1/2) acre. 
S.  Street Lights. 
1.  Developers shall furnish satisfactory easements for installation of services to street lights as required by the City and any applicable electric utility provider. 
2.  Street light number, type and size shall be determined by the City and any applicable electric utility provider and shall be designed to maximize the light directed toward the ground. 
3.  The developer shall pay the cost of purchasing and installing all street lighting equipment and the cost of all street lighting services for a period of two (2) years or until such time as seventy percent (70%) of the buildings for which building permits have been issued are completed, whichever is sooner. 
4.  A detailed lighting plan shall be submitted with the Public Infrastructure Improvement Plans for review and approval by the City and any applicable electric utility provider. 
T.  Street Markers (Signs). Street name, stop and speed limit signs having the following specifications shall be erected at all street intersections in such subdivisions for street markers: 
1.  The material of the street name signs, the method of attaching the sign to the post, the details of lettering, painting, and method of installation, as well as the location of the sign at the intersection shall be in accordance with the specifications in the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
2.  The street name signs shall be of the crossarm type, and shall be reflectorized on extruded aluminum metal blanks. 
3.  Street markers are to be provided by the developer. 
Sec. 21.14.2. - Criteria and Design. 
    The criteria and specific design standards for transportation related development as described in this Article are set by the City's Public Works Specification Manual. 
Sec. 21.14.3. - Additional Design Requirements. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. 
1.  The purpose of this Section is to establish additional development standards applicable to certain streets within the City to ensure uniform and quality development resulting in an attractive environment compatible with businesses and residential dwellings which does the following: 
a.  provides an environment and living conditions favorable to the public; 
b.  provides a creative approach to land use and related physical development; 
c.  creates a pattern of development which preserves trees and outstanding natural topography and prevents soil erosion and pollution; 
d.  encourages mixed use development through innovative uses of modern development concepts; and 
e.  produces open space and recreation areas. 
2.  The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all roadways classified as Principal Arterials or Secondary Arterials in accordance with section 21.14.1 including, but not limited to, Schertz Parkway, FM 3009, Old Wiederstein Road, Country Club Blvd, FM 78, FM 1518, FM 482, and Wiederstein Road. 
B.  Permitted Uses. Buildings, structures and land shall be used in accordance with the uses permitted in the applicable zoning district and shall comply with the dimensional requirements of that district in accordance with Article 5 of this UDC. 
C.  Landscape Buffer . In addition to the requirements of section 21.9.7 of this UDC for landscaping, a minimum twenty foot (20') wide landscape buffer shall be provided adjacent to any public right-of-way. Trees shall be planted at an average density of one (1) tree per twenty linear feet (20') of street frontage except for public schools. The landscape buffer shall require an irrigation system and shall be maintained by the property owner. 
D.  Off-Street Parking . Off street parking is permitted adjacent to the landscape buffer along the right-of-way. Parking and vehicular use areas adjacent to the right-of-way shall have land berm walls or a vegetative hedge barrier to reduce vehicular reflections to the right-of-way. A waiver may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission which would allow a reduction in the minimum required landscape buffer when off-street parking is located entirely along the side or rear of the building or lot. 
E.  Building Setback Line . A minimum fifty foot (50') building setback shall be required adjacent to all rights-of-way. A waiver may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission which would allow for a reduction in the minimum required setback when an alternative site layout and design provides for additional open space or landscaping and off-street parking will be located entirely at the rear of the building or lot. In no case shall the minimum building setback be reduced less than the minimum required setback for the applicable zoning district in 
F.  Driveways and Access (Connectivity). Access shall be limited to provide for safe traffic flow and the design shall provide interior drives to limit the number of accesses to the public right-of-way. Access easement should be utilized to limit the number of driveway accesses. Accesses should be planned to match existing driveways or street intersections on the opposite side of the street. All driveways shall have a minimum sight distance of 240 feet. 
G.  Screening. A masonry screening wall a minimum of eight foot (8') in height shall be provided where the rear yard of any residential or nonresidential lot abuts a Principal or Secondary Arterial. Any masonry screening wall constructed as part of a new residential subdivision shall be constructed of a like and similar material and color as screening walls in adjacent subdivisions to provide a consistent streetscape. 
(Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 9, 8-30-2016; Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.14.4. - Alleys. 
A.  Commercial and Industrial Districts. Where provided, paved alleys not less than twenty-four feet (24') wide shall be provided in all commercial or industrial districts to assure adequate provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with an adequate plan for the uses proposed. Alleys provided within commercial and industrial districts shall be privately owned and maintained. 
B.  Garden Home (GH) Zoning Districts. Where garden home districts are designated by the developer to require rear ingress/egress, a twenty-four feet (24') paved alley shall be provided. 
C.  Intersections and Turns. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where two (2) alleys intersect, or an alley turns at an angle sharper than one hundred degrees (100°), a cut off of not less than ten (10') feet from the normal intersection of the property lines shall be provided and shall be designed in accordance with the adopted Fire Code. 
D.  Dead End Alleys. Dead end alleys are prohibited. 
E.  Construction Standards. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed in the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
F.  Limitations. Construction of alleys is limited to commercial and industrial districts and prohibited in residential areas except in garden home zoning districts. 
G.  Drainage. Drainage design of alleys shall be designed on the basis of twenty-five (25) year frequency to carry storm water from only the lots within the block abutting the alleys. 
Sec. 21.14.5. - Driveways. 
    The arrangement, placement, spacing, width and return radii of all driveways connecting to a street, roadway or alley shall be constructed, provided, altered or repaired in accordance with requirements of the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
A.  Commercial Property. 
1.  Curb cuts for commercial driveway aprons shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in width, and the aggregate width of all curb cuts shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the parcel frontage. 
2.  Where multiple driveway aprons are used for commercial property, the curb cuts shall be at least twenty feet (20') apart. 
3.  For parcels of commercial property with less than one hundred feet (100') of frontage, a maximum of two (2) curb cuts will be permitted. 
4.  For parcels of commercial property, no curb cut will be permitted for any parking facility which requires vehicles to enter a street in reverse. 
B.  Curb Cuts in Curb Returns. No curb cut in curb returns will be permitted in the City. 
C.  Waivers . Where the City Manager or his/her designee finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the regulations prescribed in this Article, the City Manager or his/her designee may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Article. In granting waivers and modifications, the City Manager or his/her designee may require such conditions as will, in his/her judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. In the event the City Manager or his/her designee should disapprove a request for a waiver, the applicant may request an appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-40 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.14.6. - Sidewalks and Hike and Bike Trails. 
A.  Requirement . Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets throughout the City as required in section 21.14.1. All lots must have access to sidewalks. 
B.  Curb Ramps. Curb ramps shall be provided at all street intersections at the time of construction or reconstruction and shall comply with the provisions in the Federal Register 28, CFR part 36 (Americans with Disabilities Act or ADA) and Texas Accessibility Standards as amended from time to time. 
C.  Location and Width. Where sidewalks are required, they shall be installed in accordance with the Public Works Specifications Manual and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width. Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street for the entire frontage(s) of the lot and shall be located a minimum of two feet (2') behind the curb. 
D.  Timing of Construction. Sidewalks shall generally be installed concurrently with the construction of the primary structure on a lot except on primary or secondary arterials where they shall be installed concurrently with street construction. 
E.  Construction Concurrent with Street Construction. If a street is constructed which shall have no residential lot access points, then sidewalks shall be installed concurrently with street construction. 
F.  Corner Lot. Where sidewalks are installed on corner lots, sidewalks shall be installed along both street frontages and shall be extended to the curb with handicapped access ramps in accordance with current ADA and Texas Accessibility standards. 
G.  Waiver or Deferment of Sidewalk Installation. The City Manager or the City Engineer may waive the requirements of this section where he/she finds that topographical conditions or other unique conditions exist which would preclude the construction of sidewalks. The Planning and Zoning Commission may defer the installation of sidewalks to a time deemed more appropriate. In the event that the installation of sidewalks is deferred, the developer shall provide a subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with section 21.4.15 guaranteeing the installation of sidewalks. 
H.  Hike and Bike Trails. The City recognizes the need for connectivity and adequate access to and from public parkland areas and to provide for safe bicycling and pedestrian transportation. All streets subject to this Article with at least an eighty-six inch (86") ROW shall be required to construct a minimum eight foot (8') wide hike and bike path located within the ROW five foot (5') behind the curb. This hike and bike path is required in-lieu of construction of a sidewalk along one (1) side of the street. Additionally, hike and bike trails shall conform to the requirements as set forth in the City's Parks Master Plan. 
    In-lieu of construction of sidewalks in accordance with this Article, the City may, at its option, require construction of a hike and bike path adjacent to the street right-of-way. Any required hike and bike path shall be constructed in-lieu of the minimum sidewalk along one (1) side of the street, unless under the requirements of subsection 21.14.3.D. above. 
(Ord. No. 17-S-43 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017) 
Sec. 21.14.7. - Traffic Impact Analysis. 
A.  Application Requirements . Every application for development within the City or its ETJ shall be accompanied by a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) Determination Form provided in the Development Manual. The TIA Determination Form shall be utilized to determine if a TIA is required. 
B.  TIA Required. The threshold requirement for a TIA and the level of TIA required shall be based on a land use or combination of land uses that results in peak hour trips in accordance with Table 21.14.7A. If the proposed land use does not exceed the peak hour trip threshold, a TIA waiver shall be noted on the TIA Determination Form. 
Table 21.14.7A 
TIA Requirements Peak Hour Trips Generated TIA Level Required 1,001 or more Level 3 TIA 501-1,000 Level 2 TIA 101-500 Level 1 TIA 100 or less None Required  
C.  TIA Scope. If a TIA is required, the applicant shall meet with the City Engineer to determine the scope for the study prior to beginning work on the TIA. The applicant shall be prepared, prior to the meeting with the City Engineer, to discuss potential intersections to be evaluated, data assumptions or any other information required by the City Engineer. 
D.  TIA Study Area. The study area required for the TIA shall be based on the level of the TIA required in Paragraph B. above. The City Engineer may, at his/her discretion, require additional area to be included in the study area if deemed necessary to provide adequate review of the transportation network. The following Table 21.14.7B identifies the minimum acceptable study area: 
Table 21.14.7B 
TIA Study Areas TIA Level Study Area Level 1 or 2 TIA The site area and the area within a one quarter (1/4) mile radius from the boundary of the site. Level 2 TIA At the discretion of the City's engineer, the study area may be extended up to a maximum of one (1) mile from boundary of the site. Level 3 TIA The site area and the area within a one (1) mile radius from the boundary of the site.  
E.  TIA contents. The TIA shall conform to accepted industry standards and shall include a detailed description of the area street network, a description of proposed land uses, the anticipated stages of construction, the anticipated completion date of the various phases of land development, and the trigger points requiring implementation of necessary improvements. The City Engineer may require any additional information necessary to ensure adequate review. The TIA shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  trip generation rates for both the A.M. and P.M. peak periods using the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation Manual for all of the land uses specified; 
2.  trip distribution; 
3.  adequacy determination for existing and proposed street cross-sections by phase of development; 
4.  intersection level of service analysis for each phase of development, driveway sizes, locations, and adequacy; 
5.  layout showing lane usage (pavement marking layout) for all boundary streets including driveway locations and roadway geometry within the site; 
6.  driveways and intersecting streets connecting to boundary streets including all lane widths, traffic islands, medians, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices and existing pavement conditions; 
7.  existing and proposed turning movement counts for the site; 
8.  identification of and timing for transportation improvements, if any, needed to maintain the same or higher level of service than exists prior to development during each phase of land development and the costs of those improvements, including costs of right-of-way acquisition, utility relocation, design and construction; 
9.  The TIA shall 
a.  establish the baseline traffic conditions and peak hour operations prior to development of the subdivision or site, which baseline shall establish the existing level of service that is to be maintained or bettered as the owners develop the subdivision or site over time; and 
b.  address streets and street intersections, and driveways on commercial sites; 
10.  for projects adjacent to a TxDOT ROW, the TIA shall be accompanied by a letter from TxDOT which outlines any agreements between the developer and TxDOT for planned improvements; and 
11.  the TIA shall be certified by a registered engineer with experience in the field of traffic engineering. 
F.  TIA Submittal. Upon completion of the TIA, the applicant shall submit a minimum of three (3) copies of the report to the City Engineer who will distribute the report to the appropriate review authorities including TxDOT. 
G.  TIA Review. The TIA shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and any other necessary review authorities. Review comments shall be provided to the applicant for response. Response by the applicant shall be in the form of a letter, technical memorandum, or other appropriate document. The applicant shall submit final copies of the TIA to the City Engineer containing all modifications prior to final approval of the application for which the TIA was conducted. 
H.  City Assistance in Development. During the course of providing for improvements, the City may cooperate with the developer in the use of its governmental powers to assist in the timely and cost effective implementation of improvements. Assistance shall not mean financial aid in actual easement acquisition, construction or engineering costs. Specifically, the City agrees to: 
1.  assist in the acquisition of necessary right-of-way and easements; 
2.  assist in the relocation of utilities; 
3.  assist in obtaining approvals from applicable county entities; 
4.  assist in obtaining approvals from TxDOT; and 
5.  assist in securing financial participation for major street improvements from applicable county entities, TxDOT or the Metropolitan Planning Organization. 
I.  TIA Revisions. It is recognized that the scope of the developer's plans may change from time to time. The monitoring reports may also demonstrate changes in the area street conditions and travel patterns within and around the City. Periodic updates to the TIA may be required to address these issues and identify changes to the level of service at study intersections and streets. These updates shall address modifications to the magnitude and timing of improvements recommended by the original TIA. Any TIA amendments must be acceptable to the City. 
(Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
ARTICLE 15. -  EASEMENTS AND UTILITIES 

Sec. 21.15.1. - Easements. 
A.  Utility Easements. Utility easements including natural gas shall be provided for the installation of utilities in accordance with the requirements of the City. In general, these easements shall be in the front of residential development lots. 
B.  Drainage Easements. 
1.  When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage rights-of-way ("ROW") shall be provided. Said easement or drainage ROW shall substantially encompass the boundaries of said water course and shall be of sufficient width, in accordance with the construction standards in the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
2.  Drainage or storm water easements may be constructed as open earth channels or concrete drainage structures and shall be maintained by the developer or his/her assigns. 
3.  Drainage ROW shall contain concrete drainage structures or underground piping and shall be dedicated to and maintained by the City or other applicable jurisdictions. 
C.  Access Easements. In an effort to reduce the congestion created by a number of driveways along street rights-of-way while maintaining adequate access to developments, the City may allow Access Easements to be dedicated within and across developments of similar use. These easements shall be twenty-four feet (24') in width and meet the minimum construction requirements for streets as required by this UDC and the Public Works Specifications Manual. 
Sec. 21.15.2. - Water systems. 
A.  Installation of Water Facilities. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public water system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. Where water is to be provided through the City system, the developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, in accordance with all applicable regulations of the State, the City and any other agency regulating public water systems. 
B.  Alternative Water Sources. An alternative source of water within a development may be used for irrigation or other similar purposes, subject to City approval and the obtaining of all appropriate permits from the City, State and any other applicable agency. An alternative water source may not be used for potable water supply under any circumstances. The design and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall comply with the rules and regulations of the City, State or any other applicable agency. 
C.  Location and Cost of Installation. The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements and the boundary lines of special districts, private systems and certified water service areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the construction plans. The cost of installing all water supply improvements to be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees furnished by the developer. 
D.  Extension of Lines. Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the Public Works Director may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction at the time of final plat approval and prior to construction of the subdivision. 
E.  Fire Hydrants. 
1.  Fire hydrants are to be properly located so there will be a fire hydrant every three hundred feet (300') in commercial and industrial areas and every 500 feet in residential areas. 
2.  Any new fire hydrant is required to have a hydrant locater reflector (blue bump) installed in the roadway perpendicular to the hydrant. 
F.  Individual Wells. 
1.  Within the City Limits. A new development served by individual wells within the City limits is prohibited. 
2.  Within the ETJ. Individual wells within the ETJ shall be subject to approval by the City. The developer must submit with the plat application a certificate from a professional engineer registered in this state or a geoscientist licensed to practice in Texas verifying the adequacy of the proposed source of well supply prior to plat approval. 
3.  Compliance with Other Regulations. Installation, operations and maintenance of individual wells shall comply with City standards, regulations of the TCEQ, any other applicable state rules and regulations, and applicable regulations of groundwater conservation districts. In the event of conflict among these regulations, whichever is the most stringent shall apply. 
G.  Design and Construction. All water facilities within a subdivision shall be designed and constructed to the standards as set forth in the Public Works Specifications Manual. Said facilities shall meet all State and federal regulations pertaining to approved public water systems including regulations regarding the preparation, submittal and approval of plans and specifications for water systems. Design of water facilities shall also be in conformance with all laws, policies, standards, rules and regulations for establishing the fire insurance key rate for the City. 
H.  Other Water Systems. For water systems other than the City system, the following shall apply: 
1.  At time of preliminary platting the applicant shall provide the City with a letter of approval from the TCEQ certifying that the water system serving the development is in compliance with the rules and regulations of the TCEQ and that the public water system provider holds a current valid Certificate of Convenience and necessity (CCN) for the area proposed for development. The letter of approval from the TCEQ shall be accompanied by a map delineating the boundaries of the CCN in the vicinity of the development. 
2.  For developments in the ETJ, the developer shall obtain approval and signature of the appropriate county health official on the water system statement as shown on the Preliminary Plat prior to Planning and Zoning Commission approval. The water system statement as shown on the plat, indicates that the development will be served by a water system meeting City standards, as stated in sec. 21.15.2.F. and the applicable standards of the water purveyor. 
3.  Plans and specifications for all water systems to serve the development shall be submitted as part of the subdivision construction plans. 
Sec. 21.15.3. - Wastewater Systems. 
A.  Wastewater Connection Required. All lots within a subdivision shall be provided with a connection to an approved public wastewater system unless otherwise approved by the City. Establishment of a private wastewater utility district within the City or within the City's ETJ shall be prohibited. 
B.  Installation of Wastewater Facilities. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public wastewater system which has adequate capacity to provide water for proper disposal and treatment of wastewater. Where wastewater is to be provided through a centralized system, the developer shall install adequate facilities, subject to the standards and specifications of the City and state design criteria for wastewater systems. Where insufficient capacity exists downstream of a proposed connection, the replacement and upsizing of the existing main is required of the developer. The installation of a parallel main shall be subject to approval by the City. 
C.  Location and Cost of Installation. The location of all wastewater improvements and the boundary lines of special districts, private systems and certified areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on construction plans. The cost of installing all wastewater improvements to be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees furnished by the developer. 
D.  Future Extension of Lines. Pipe stub-outs shall be located in manholes to facilitate the future extension of wastewater lines. The Public Works Director will determine the location and size of the stub-outs. 
E.  On-Site Sewage Facilities (OSSF). The use of OSSF for the treatment and disposal of wastewater shall be subject to the approval of the City. The minimum lot area for residential subdivisions shall be a minimum one-half (1/2) acre (21,780 square feet). OSSF shall be installed on each lot concurrent with any development thereon and the design of such system and the method of installation shall conform in all respects to the standards and specifications of the City, County and State design criteria for OSSF. 
Sec. 21.15.4. - Utilities. 
    All utilities, including, but not limited to, electrical wiring, natural gas, telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be located in the front yard, shall be installed underground and shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable City codes and regulations for such systems. Any utilities required to be placed above ground must be placed on steel poles meeting the requirements of the City and the applicable utility provider. The City Manager or his/her designee may waive the requirements of this section to allow wooden poles where he/she finds that unique conditions supporting such waiver exist within the development or along rights-of-ways. 
ARTICLE 16. -  DEFINITIONS 
    For the purposes of this UDC, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural number; and words in the plural number include the singular number. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely discretionary. 
    Any term not expressly defined in this Article shall be defined by a common planning definition from the American Planning Association's, A Planners Dictionary. The City Manager, upon the recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee, shall determine the appropriateness of a definition. 
    "A" Frame Sign: A temporary sign constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or a tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top with each angular face held at an appropriate distance so as to be adequately secured by a supporting member. These signs may also be referred to as sandwich board signs. 
    Abandoned or Obsolete Sign: A sign that no longer serves to direct attention to an event, person, product, good, service, or activity, which is no longer conducted. 
    Accessory Buildings, Uses or Structures: One which: 
a.  is subordinate to and serves a principal structure, building or use; 
b.  is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal structure building or use served; 
c.  contributes to the comfort, convenience and necessity of occupants of the principal structure, building or use served; 
d.  is located on the same building lot as the principal structure, building or use served; or 
e.  may be part of the principal building. 
    Accessory Dwelling Unit: A residential dwelling unit, but not a mobile home, located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit, either within the same building as the single family dwelling unit or in a detached unit or in a detached building. 
    Advertising: To convey information, to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of the public to any location, event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution or business. 
    Advertising Vehicle: Any vehicle which has as its primary purpose the advertisement of an event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution or business, whether located on-premises or off-premises. 
    Agriculture: The use of land for the production and primary processing of food and fibers for sale, including cultivating, dairying, horticulture, pasturing, floriculture, silviculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and such incidental accessory facilities as greenhouses and nurseries, provided that the operation of such accessory facilities shall be clearly secondary to normal agricultural activities. Agriculture includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control, harvesting, and marketing. It also includes, but is not limited to, the activities of feeding, housing, and maintaining of animals such as cattle, dairy cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses, and poultry and handling their by-products. 
    Airport, Heliport or Landing Field: A place where aircraft and/or helicopters can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
    Alcohol Package Sales: An establishment engaged in the selling of alcoholic beverages to the general public for off-site personal or household consumption. 
    Alley: A public right-of-way which provides a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and which is used primarily for vehicular traffic to the rear or side of properties which otherwise abut on a street. Specifically authorized in garden home subdivisions for access to rear entrance garages. 
    Alluvial Fan Flooding: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Alternative Tower Structure: Clock towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. See also the definition of "stealth facility". 
    Amateur Radio Antenna: A radio communication antenna used by a person holding an amateur radio station license from the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Annexation: The act of incorporating an area into the domain of the City. 
    Antenna: A device used in communications, which transmits or receives radio signals, television signals, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
    Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, commercial: An antenna and its support structure used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes and the transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic radio, television, or microwave signals. All radiating equipment must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable State and Federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. The antenna may be a tower, mast, pole, tripod or box frame. Preferably the antenna may be in stealth form designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth antennas include, but are not limited to: 
a.  antennas within a building's attic space; 
b.  on the roof of a minimum three story building and not visible from the property line of the lot in which the antenna is located; 
c.  a public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission support tower; 
d.  a flagpole; 
e.  a church steeple; 
f.  a clock tower; or 
g.  an athletic field light pole. 
    Antenna, Building Attached: An antenna attached to an existing structure in two (2) general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the roofs of buildings, or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the sides of buildings. These antennas can also be mounted on structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical transmission towers, etc. 
    Antenna Facility: The mast, pole, structure, tower, building, equipment and other supporting material used to mount the antenna and equipment, equipment storage buildings and equipment concealing or screening structures needed to operate an antenna. 
    Antique Shop: A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture, or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
    Apartment: A dwelling unit in an apartment building. 
    Apartment Building: A building or portion thereof housing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
    Apex: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appliance, Furniture and Home Furnishings Store: Retail establishments selling goods used for furnishing the home, including, but not limited to, furniture, floor coverings, draperies, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances. 
    Approved Plat: The plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this UDC and which has been filed for record with the county clerk in which the land lies. 
    Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the City and its ETJ with a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exit, where path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain within the City and its ETJ subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A or AE on the FIRM. 
    Art Gallery/Library/Museum: A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, artistic, or literary objects of interest, and designed to be used for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods. 
    Assisted Care or Living Facility: A facility which provides residence and care to ten (10) or more persons regardless of legal relationship who are: 
a.  elderly; 
b.  disabled; 
c.  orphaned; 
d.  abandoned; 
e.  abused, or neglected children; 
f.  victims of domestic violence; 
g.  convalescing from illness; 
h.  terminally ill; or 
i.  temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster, or financial setback together with supervisory personnel. 
    This definition shall also include a facility providing health care or rehabilitative services over a long period of time to persons chronically ill, aged, or disabled due to injury or disease. 
    Automobile Parking Structure/Garage: An area or structure where the parking of motor vehicles serves as the primary use of the lot whether or not a fee is charged. This use does not include the storage of gasoline. 
    Automobile Parts Sales: The use of any building for the display and sale of new or used parts, including tires. 
    Automobile Repair, Major: General repairs or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems, and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker or towing service with on-site storage of vehicles; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; tire retreading; muffler services; upholstery shop; insurance estimations with on-site storage; undercoating and rust proofing, and other similar uses. 
    Automobile Repair, Minor: An establishment used for the dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, lubricants, and automobile accessories; the minor repair or replacement of parts and performing State inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; automobile detailing; window tinting; and the sales and installation of automobile radios. Uses listed under "Automobile Repair, Major" or any other similar uses are not included. 
    Automobile Sales New or Used: Sales, rental, and/or lease of new or used automobiles or light load vehicles, including as an accessory use: Automobile Repair, Major. 
    Balloon Sign: One or more inflatable devices filled with lighter-than-air gas used as a temporary sign for the purpose of directing attention to any location, event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution or business. 
    Bandit Sign: Any temporary ground sign announcing a subdivision, new development or builder. 
    Bank, Saving and Ooan, Credit Union: An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, including automated teller machines. 
    Banner Sign: A temporary sign constructed of a natural or man-made flexible material including, but not limited to, cloth, canvas, vinyl, or fabric which can be easily folded or rolled that is mounted with or without an enclosing framework that is attached or tethered to the building or structures. 
    Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement: A story (or portion of a story) wholly or partly below curb level with at least one-half of its height (measured from floor to ceiling) below the curb level. The curb level nearest to a story (or portion of a story) shall be used to determine whether such story (or portion of a story) is a basement. 
    Beauty Salon/Barber Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services generally involved in the care of the person or his/her appearance including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, nail and pedicure salons, tanning salons, ear piercing shops, cosmetic tattooing shops, and reducing salons. 
    Bed and Breakfast Inn: An owner (or operator) occupied residence with up to five (5) bedrooms available for overnight guests. A Bed and Breakfast Inn may provide for guest stays up to 14 consecutive days; however, it shall not offer weekly rental rates. Kitchen and dining facilities may be included to provide meals for guests only; however, no food preparation shall be permitted in guest bedrooms. A Bed and Breakfast Inn shall not include restaurants, banquet facilities, or similar services. 
    Billboard: Any sign erected and used for, or designed to be used for, the display of advertising material for the purpose of advertising a location, event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution or business not located on the same premises as the billboard. Mobile advertising and hand-carried signs shall not be considered as billboards. 
    Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and public parks, or corporate boundaries of the City. 
    Board of Adjustment (BOA): The Board established by City Council under the City Charter the Texas Local Government Code that reviews and acts upon requests for variances or appeals and whose duties and responsibilities are specifically provided for in section 21.3.4 of this UDC. 
    Boarding House: A building other than hotel, motel, or an apartment hotel where, for compensation and prearrangement for a definite period, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. 
    Bottling Works: A manufacturing facility designed to place a beverage into a bottle or can for distribution. 
    Boundary Street: A public street which is adjacent to and abutting one (1) or more sides of the proposed site. 
    Buffer Zone: A strip of land created to separate and protect one type of land use from another. 
    Building: Any structure which: 
a.  is permanently affixed to the land; 
b.  has one or more floors and a roof; and 
c.  is bounded by either open area or lot lines. 
    A building shall not include such structures as billboards, fences or radio towers, or structures with interior surfaces not normally accessible for human use, such as tanks, smoke stacks, grain elevators, oil cracking towers or similar structures. 
    Building Area: The total square footage on a lot covered by a building measured on a horizontal plane at mean grade level. 
    Building, Detached: A building which is surrounded by yards or open space on its own building lot. 
    Building Envelope: The net cubic space that remains for placing a structure on a site after building line, setback, side yard, height and bulk regulations are observed. 
    Building Height: The vertical distance between the average natural grade of the ground under the footprint of a building and the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof. A chimney, cupola or dormer (four feet or less in height), flagpole or residential television antenna shall be exempt from the above requirements. 
    Building Materials And Hardware Store: An establishment for the sale of materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures. 
    Building Mounted Sign: A sign attached to, or supported by any part of the building that encloses or covers usable space and is related to the business within, including but not limited to wall signs, signage on awnings, canopies, or marquees, and projecting signs. 
    Building Setback Line: A building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front, rear or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a building cannot lawfully extend. 
    Building Sign: Any sign identifying the name or title of a specific building. 
    Cabinet/Upholstery Shop: An establishment for the production, display, and sale of cabinets, furniture, and soft coverings for furniture. 
    Camping Trailer: A folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation and which can be readily towed over the road by a motor vehicle. 
    Canopy: A roof like cover including an awning that projects from the wall of a building over a door, entrance or window; a free standing or projecting cover above an outdoor service area such as a gasoline service station. 
    Carport: A roofed structure for use as an automobile shelter, open on at least two sides with inside dimensions not less than 10' by 20'. 
    Car Wash, Automated: A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile and light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration. 
    Car Wash, Self Serve: A facility, typically coin operated, used by the customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles. 
    Cemetery or Mausoleum: Property used for the interring of the dead. 
    Church, Temple, Place of Worship: A building designed and used primarily for religious assembly and worship and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis in a detached residential facility on the same premises, that is exempt from ad valorem taxes as permitted by State law. For the purposes of this definition, bible study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not be considered as a church, temple or place or worship. 
    City: The City of Schertz, Texas 
    City Council: The City Council of the City of Schertz, Texas. 
    City Engineer: A registered professional engineer employed or designated by the City to provide professional engineering services for and on behalf of the City. 
    Civic/Convention Center: A building or complex of buildings used for cultural, recreational, athletic, convention, or entertainment purposes. 
    Clinic: An establishment of offices in which a group of physicians, dentists or other practitioners of the healing arts and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of diagnosing and treating ill or injured persons. A clinic may include a medical or dental laboratory, but may not include facilities for providing room or board for patients, nor may a clinic include offices or facilities for veterinarians. 
    Club or Lodge: An association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common objective such as literature, science, politics, good fellowship and similar objectives which meets periodically and which is limited to members. 
    Co-location: The act of locating wireless communications equipment for more than one (1) telecommunications carrier on a single Antenna Facility. 
    College, University, or Trade School: An institution established for educational purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level, including trade schools and commercial schools offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation. 
    Commercial Amusement, Indoor: An enterprise providing for indoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee. Uses include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, bingo parlors, amusement arcades, and/or practice areas. 
    Commercial Amusement, Outdoor: An enterprise providing for outdoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee, including, but not limited to, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracts, and carnivals. 
    Commercial Farm Ranch: A tract of unplatted land which is used for agricultural activities such as production of cash crops or raising of livestock for the purpose of obtaining a profit in money. Includes agricultural dwelling and accessory buildings and structures necessary to the operation of the farm/ranch. 
    Common Area: An area within a subdivision not used for development which is usually owned and maintained by subdivision homeowners associations. 
    Community Center: A building or portion of a building owned and/or operated by a government entity or not-for-profit agency in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, or social purposes. 
    Community Service Sign: Any sign that solicits support for or advertises a non-profit community location, event, person, product, good, service, institution or business, a public activity, location, event, person, product, good, service institution or business. 
    Comprehensive Land Plan: The Comprehensive Land Plan of the City, as approved by the City Council and including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant: A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt. 
    Convalescent Home: Any structure used or occupied by three (3) or more persons recovering from illness or receiving geriatric care for compensation. 
    Convenience Store with Gas Pumps: A retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This definition shall also include the dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and accessories, but shall not include automotive repair or the sale of replacement parts. 
    Court: An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two (2) sides by walls. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent open space. 
    Critical Feature: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Cul-de-sac: A street having but one (1) outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn around. 
    Damaged Sign: 
a.  any sign where any portion of the finished material, surface or message area of the sign is visibly faded, flaked, broken off, missing, cracked, splintered, defective or is otherwise deteriorated or in a state of disrepair so as not to substantially appear as it was intended or designed to appear when originally constructed; or 
b.  any sign whose elements or the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, torn, twisted, leaning or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected. 
    Dance Hall/Night Club: An establishment open to the general public for entertainment; in particular, dancing. 
    Day Care Center: A commercial institution or place designed for the care of children or adults and is subject to registration with the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. This use shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or rehabilitative services and does not apply to any school. 
    Dead End Street: A roadway, other than cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet. 
    Density: The number of units per acre that may be placed on a tract in a particular zoning district under specified development conditions. 
    Development: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment. 
    Development Permit: Any permit, license, authority, order, approval, certificate, endorsement, or permission, required from the City prior to the commencement or completion of any phase of development. 
    Development Sign: A temporary freestanding sign which, by means of symbol or name, identifies a shopping center, commercial or industrial park, residential subdivision or other development that may contain a mixture of residential, commercial, or industrial uses. 
    Directional Sign: Any sign designed to provide direction to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. 
    Distribution Center: A warehouse or storage facility where the emphasis is on processing and moving goods on to wholesalers, retailers, or consumers rather than on storage. 
    Dormitory: Any structure specifically designed to house student tenants associated with a university, college or school. 
    Dry Cleaning, Major: An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
    Dry Cleaning, Minor: A custom cleaning shop or pick-up station not exceeding six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area, including, but not limited to, dry cleaning plants having no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area for dry cleaning equipment. 
    Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, Duplex: A building designed for or occupied exclusively, but separately, by two (2) families. 
    Dwelling, Multifamily: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling Unit: A room, or suite of two (2) or more rooms, designed or intended for use by an individual or family in which culinary and sanitary convenience are provided for the exclusive use of such individual or family. 
    Easement: An acquired privilege or right-of-way use which one (1) person, business, entity and/or public agency has across, over or under land of another person, business, entity and/or public agency. 
    Electronic Sign: A variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, or LCDs. 
    Elevated Building: A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of the building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or the case of the building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom level of the lowest horizontal structure member of the pilings, columns (posts and pliers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VI, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by standards of section 60.3 (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ): The ETJ of the City is the portion of the unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the City and not already in the incorporated area or ETJ of another City as set out in Section 42.021 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    Family: Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption. No single dwelling unit shall have more than four unrelated individuals residing therein, nor shall any "family" have, additionally, more than four unrelated individuals residing with such family. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group that receives federal or State funding for the care of the individual. 
    Family Home: A community-based residential home operated by either the State of Texas, a nonprofit corporation, a community center organized pursuant to State statute, or an entity which is certified by the State as a provider for a program for the mentally retarded. Family homes provide care for persons who have mental and/or physical impairments that substantially limit one (1) or more major life activities. To qualify as a family home, a home must meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  not more than six (6) disabled persons and two (2) supervisory personnel may reside in a family home at the same time; 
b.  the home must provide food and shelter, personal guidance, care, rehabilitation services, or supervision; and 
c.  all applicable licensing requirements must be met. 
    Farmers Market: An area containing individual vendors who offer fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey for sale. 
    FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Filling, Retail Service Station: An establishment where gasoline, oil and grease, or automobile accessories are sold, supplied or dispensed to the motor vehicle trade or where motor vehicles receive limited repair, are equipped for service, or where electric storage batteries are charged and cared for, or a place where any two (2) or more such activities are carried on or conducted as the principal use of the establishment. 
    Fire Lane: A concrete or asphalt driving surface identified for use by fire, EMS and other emergency vehicles within and maintained by the owners of a manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park, apartment complex, malls/shopping center, commercial or business area. 
    Flag: A piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design, usually attached at one edge to a staff or cord, and used as the symbol of a nation, state, or organization, or as a means of signaling. 
    Flea Market, Inside: A building or structure wherein space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments. 
    Flea Market, Outside: An outdoor site where space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments. 
    Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water due to: 
a.  the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  the usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official maps of the City and its ETJ on which the FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the areas mapped. 
    Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map. 
    Flood Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Flood Management Regulations: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as the floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood Protection System: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within the City and its ETJ subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood Proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Fraternity, Sorority, Civic Club or Lodge: An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members including, but not limited to, Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, Rotary International, Shriners, or a labor union. 
    Fraternity, Sorority or Group Student House: A building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or vocational institution. 
    Freestanding Sign: A sign that is not attached to a building and which is self supporting by use of a pole, mast, pylon or other similar vertical support structure and has a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches of ground clearance. 
    Frontage: All the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Garage, Private: A building designed or used for the storage of personally owned motor-driven vehicles used by the occupants of the building. 
    Garage, Public: A structure or building, other than a private garage, which is available to the general public used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles. 
    Garage Sale Sign: Any sign utilized to direct interested persons to the location of a garage sale in accordance with Chapter 50 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
    Garden Home: An individually owned single-family home, separated from its neighbor by a minimum of ten (10') feet on a lot having a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
    Gasoline Station/Fuel Pumps: A facility, equipment, or fixture used for retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels. 
    General Manufacturing/Industrial Uses: Manufacturing of finished products and component products or parts through the processing of materials or substances, including basic industrial processing. Such operations shall be determined by Health, Fire, and building officials not to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation. 
    Golf Course and/or Country Club: A land area and buildings used for golf, including fairways, greens, tee boxes, driving range, putting green, and associated maintenance and retail facilities. This definition shall also include clubhouses, dining rooms, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
    Governmental Sign: Any sign indicating public facilities, public work projects, public services, or other places, events, persons, products, goods, programs, activities or institutions conducted by the Federal, State or any local government. 
    Group Home: A specialized lodging house and boarding house which provides long term supervised housing in a conventional residential setting for no more than three (3) persons who are physically or mentally handicapped, developmentally disabled or are victims of crime, and having no more than two (2) supervisory personnel in residence at the same time. 
    Gymnastics/Dance Studio: A building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast, dancer, or martial artist or for instructional classes in gymnastics, dance, or martial arts. 
    Health/Fitness Center: A public or private facility operated to promote physical health and fitness. Activities may include exercise, physical therapy, training, and education pertaining to health and fitness. Uses or combination of uses or facilities typically include, but are not limited to, game courts, weight lifting and exercise equipment, aerobics, swimming pools and spas, and running or jogging tracts. 
    Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of structure. 
    Historic Structure: Any structure that is: 
a.  listed individually in the Natural Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in the National Register; 
b.  certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  individually listed on the State inventory of historic places with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By any approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
    Home Occupation: Any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the immediate family, residing on the premises, which there is no sign used relating to the business or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling, and there is no commodity sold upon the premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. 
    Homeowners Association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of the development. The membership in the association must be automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or other property in the development. 
    Hospital, Sanitarium, Nursing or Convalescent home: A building or portion thereof used or designed for the housing or treatment of the sick, aged, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, apartment hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons. 
    Hotel: A building used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, but not excluding permanent guests, and may include a cafe, drugstore, clothes pressing shop, barbershop or other service facilities for the guests for compensation. This definition does not include bed and breakfast and boarding houses. 
    Household Appliance Service and Repair: The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances customarily used in the home, including, but not limited to, washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, and vacuum cleaners. 
    Identification Sign: A sign whose purpose is to identify: 
a.  Street Address Sign/Markers: Address signs are composed of a numeric address and street or complex name. Street markers are signs adjacent to streets required by local government. 
b.  On-Premise Business Signs: Any sign which relates to the premises on which it is located, referring exclusively to the location, event, person, product, good, service, or activity of those premises, or the sale, lease or construction of those premises. 
c.  Personal or Professional Signs and Nameplates: Any sign that lists exclusively a name or names (including family/farm name signs). 
    Illegal Sign: A sign erected without a required permit, without the property owner's permission, or any sign not meeting the requirements established in this UDC. 
    Impervious Coverage: Impervious cover means impermeable surfaces which prevent the infiltration of water into the underlying soil and bedrock (such as pavement, concrete or rooftops). 
    Industrialized Home: See "Modular Home". 
    In-Home Day Care: A home occupation that provides care for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day to no more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14), plus no more than six (6) additional elementary school-age children (age five (5) to thirteen (13)). The total number of children, including the caretaker's own children, is no more than twelve (12) at any time. This use is subject to registration with the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. 
    Insurance Office: A building or facility used for the sales, management, and administration of insurance services, including the estimation of automobile damages, but excluding on-site parking/storage of damaged vehicles. 
    Kindergarten: Any school, private or parochial, operating for profit or not, attended by four (4) or more children at any one (1) time during part of a twenty-four (24) hour day, which provides a program of instruction for children below the first grade level in which constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum. 
    Landfill: A tract of land used for the burial of farm, residential, institutional, industrial, or commercial waste that is not hazardous, medical, or radioactive. 
    Landscape: Covering, adorning, or improving property with living plants (such as trees, shrubs, vines, grass or flowers), loose natural materials (such as rock, wood chips or shavings), decorative manmade material (such as patterned paving materials, fences, walls, fountains, or pools), or land contouring. "Landscape" does not include improving property with artificial trees, shrubs, turf or other artificial plants. 
    Laundromat: A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
    Levee: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee System: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Limited Access Highways: Interstate Highway 35 and Interstate Highway 10. 
    Livestock: Domestic animals used, raised or bred on a farm, especially those kept for a profit, including, but not limited to, horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, rabbits, sheep, or fowl, regardless of age, sex or breed. Persons who possess, own or otherwise keep livestock within the City in a residential zoned district where livestock is being kept, shall follow these restrictions: 
a.  Livestock shall be kept on a parcel of land that is at least one (1) acre in size. 
b.  Livestock shall be kept in a stable, shed, pen or other enclosure wherever located within the City, which shall be distance of at least one hundred feet (100') for every building/structure (other than the owner of such livestock) used for sleeping, dining and living, and shall be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not be offensive to neighbors or to the public. 
c.  Swine are prohibited. 
d.  The Code of Ordinances may include further restrictions. 
    Loading Dock Space: A space within the main building, or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and having a minimum dimension of twelve by thirty-five feet (12' x 35') and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14'). 
    Locksmith/Security System Company: Establishments primarily engaged in providing, installing, repairing, and/or monitoring locks and electronic security systems. 
    Lot: A physically undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other approved access and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvements; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and/or, which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly recorded. 
    Lot Depth: The distance of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines, which line shall be at right angle to the front lot or radial to a curved lot line. 
    Lot Width: The distance of a line (drawn perpendicular to the lot depth line) connecting the side lot lines at the building setback line or at a point no farther than thirty-five (35') feet from the front lot line. 
    Lot Area: The area of a lot between lot lines, including any portion of an easement which may exist within such lot lines. 
    Lot, Corner: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents of the curve at the points of the intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, Interior: A building lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat having been duly approved by the appropriate authority and recorded in the office of the County recorder of deeds and records. 
    Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured Home, HUD Code: A structure constructed after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent foundation designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems and bears a seal issued in accordance with state law. All references in this UDC to manufactured housing or manufactured home(s) shall be references to HUD Code Manufactured Housing, unless otherwise specified. 
    Manufactured Home Park: A contiguous parcel or lot which is owned by an individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation and on which individual portions are leased for the placement of manufactured homes as a primary residence. 
    Manufactured Home Subdivision: A subdivision of land planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for residential use on single lots with each lot individually owned and meeting all requirements of this UDC. 
    Mean Sea Level: For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    Medical, Dental or Professional Office/Clinic: A building used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, administrative offices and services including real estate, property management, investment, insurance, medical, dental, legal, architect, engineer, travel, secretarial, accounting, auditing and bookkeeping organizations and associations, and vehicle rental office without on-site storage of fleet vehicles. 
    Menu Board Sign: A permanent freestanding sign displaying the type and price of food, beverages or other products sold in connection with permitted outdoor dining or in connection with a restaurant with drive-through service. 
    Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage: A building(s) containing separate, individual self-storage units for rent or lease. The conduct of sales, business, or any activity other than storage shall be prohibited within any individual storage unit. 
    Miscellaneous Hazardous Industrial Use: Any industrial use not specifically defined in this section that is determined by Health, Fire or building officials to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation. 
    Mobile Home: A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. 
    Modular Home: A dwelling that is manufactured in two (2) or more modules at a location other than the home site and which is designed to be used as a residence when the modules are transported to the home site and joined together and installed on a permanent foundation system in accordance with the appropriate Building Codes of the City including plumbing, heating/air conditioning and electrical systems to be contained in the structure. The term modular home shall not mean nor apply to a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, nor is it to include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as a primary component. 
    Monopole Tower: A self-supporting tower facility composed of a single spire used to support telecommunication antennas. Monopole towers cannot have guy wires or bracing. 
    Monument Sign: A permanent freestanding ground sign whose base is directly on the ground or has a maximum of twelve inches (12") of clearance from the adjacent grade. 
    Mortuary/Funeral Parlor: A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
    Motel or Motor Hotel: A building or group of buildings including either separate units or a row of units used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, and provide off-street parking space on the same building lot for use of its occupants. 
    Multi-Tenant Sign: A sign that identifies the names and locations of tenants in a multi-tenant building or in a development made up of a group of buildings. 
    Municipal Uses Operated by the City: Any area, land, building, structure, and/or facility owned, used, leased, or operated by the City including, but not limited to, administrative office, maintenance facility, fire station, library, sewage treatment plan, police station, water tower, service center, and park. 
    Neon Sign: Any sign containing exposed transparent or translucent tubing illuminated by neon, argon or a similar gas on or near the exterior of a building or window. This shall not include those signs lighted by an internal light source and designed so that the rays go through the face of the sign. 
    Non-access Easement: The limitation of public access rights to and from properties abutting a highway or street, by restricting curb cuts and access to rear or side of property or to an area abutting a developed area that may have a deprecating and/or potentially dangerous effect on the developed properties. 
a.  One-foot non-access easement: The limitation of public access rights to and from properties abutting a highway or street by restricting curb cuts and access to rear or side of property when the property has another dedicated access to a public right-of-way. 
b.  One-foot partial access easement: The limitation of public access rights to and from properties abutting a highway or street only by use of portable ramps, and restricting curb cuts when the property has another dedicated access to public right-of-way. 
c.  Non-access easement: A designated area abutting a development which may be considered to have a deprecating and/or potentially dangerous effect to the property because it backs up to a railroad right-of-way, gas line, etc. 
    Noncommercial Farm or Hobby Farm: An agricultural operation whose income is incidental to the total household income of the occupants who are usually commuter suburbanites. Products produced are for the consumption by owner or provide insignificant income. 
    Non-Conforming Sign: A sign that was legally installed or modified in accordance with local laws, codes, ordinances and approvals in effect at the time of installation or last significant modification, but which does not comply to laws, ordinances, codes or other regulations enacted subsequent to that time. 
    Nonconforming use, structure or lot: The use of land or a building, or a portion thereof, which use does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated and which was in existence prior to the effective date of this UDC and/or prior to being annexed into the City. 
    Nursery, Major: An establishment for the cultivation and propagation, display, storage, and sale (retail and wholesale) of large plants, shrubs, trees, and other materials used in indoor and outdoor plantings; and the contracting for installation and/or maintenance of landscape material as an accessory use. Outdoor display and storage is permitted. 
    Nursery, Minor: A retail business for the display and/or sale of small trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental plants, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in indoor and outdoor planting, without outside storage or display. 
    Off-Premise Sign: Any sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Office Showroom: A building that primarily consists of sales offices and sample display areas for products and/or services delivered or performed off-premises. Catalog and telephone sales facilities are appropriate. Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services are permitted. 
    Office-Warehouse: A building primarily devoted to the storage, warehousing, and distribution of goods, merchandise, supplies, and equipment. Accessory uses may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display area for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
    On-Premise Sign: Any sign relating to the premises on which it is located referring to events, persons, products, goods, services, activities, institutions or businesses on or offered on such premises, or the sale, lease, or construction of such premises. 
    Open Space: The part of the countryside which has not been developed and which is desirable for preservation in its natural state for ecological, historical or recreational purposes, or in its cultivated state to preserve agricultural, forest or urban greenbelt areas. 
    Packaging/Mailing Store: An establishment where services are provided for the mailing and packaging of parcels. These services may include U.S. mail, UPS, FedEx and other similar services. Incidental uses may also include, but not limited to, copy services, printing, and stationary supplies. 
    Parking Spaces: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) motor vehicle, with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with the street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of a motor vehicle. 
    Pavement Width: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic between the face of curbs and gutters. 
    Pawn Shop: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged and retained by the owners (pawnbroker). 
    Peak Hour Trips (PHT): The number of traffic units generated by and attracted to the proposed development during its heaviest hour of use, dependent on type of use. 
    Pennant: Any long, narrow, usually triangular flag composed primarily of cloth, paper, fabric or other similar non-rigid material which may be used as a temporary sign to announce grand openings and/or special events. 
    Permit: An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
    Person: Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision. 
    Pervious Concrete: Concrete that is permeable as supported by an engineered drainage study. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission: The body established by City Council under the City Charter and the LGC whose duties and responsibilities are specifically provided for in section 21.3.3 of this UDC. 
    Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented and submitted for approval. 
    Political Sign: A sign pertaining to any national, state, county or local election, or issue and erected for the purpose of announcing a political candidate, political party or ballot measure, or a position on a political issue. 
    Portable or Mobile Sign: Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure. A portable or mobile sign which has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable or mobile sign under this UDC. 
    Porte-cochere: A structure attached to a residence and erected over a driveway, not exceeding one story in height, and open on two or more sides. 
    Preexisting Towers and Preexisting Antennas: Any Tower or Antenna for which a building permit or variance has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this UDC, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
    Print Shop, Major: An establishment specializing in long-run printing operations including, but not limited to, book, magazine, and newspaper publishing using engraving, die cutting, lithography, and thermography processes. 
    Print Shop, Minor: An establishment specializing in short-run operations to produce newsletters, flyers, resumes, maps, construction documents and plans, and similar materials using photocopying, duplicating, and blue printing processes. This definition shall include mailing and shipping services. 
    Private Club: An establishment providing social and dining facilities, as well as alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, State law, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs. 
    Prohibited Sign: Any sign that does not meet the requirements established in Article 11, any sign specifically prohibited in this UDC or any type of sign not specifically identified as permitted in this UDC. 
    Projected Traffic: The traffic which is projected to exist on an existing or proposed street during the proposed development's peak hour of use. 
    Public Infrastructure : Infrastructure that is generally for public use to include but not be limited to improvements of the following: water system (including water distribution lines, fire hydrants, valves and associated devices), wastewater (including lines, manholes, and lift stations), drainage system (including drainage easements, channels, storm sewer lines and inlets and associated landscaping), sidewalks, and roadways. 
    Public Schools : include elementary, intermediate, middle, junior high, high and alternate schools operated by a public school district but does not include administrative and support facilities and buildings not located on a school campus or do not solely support one campus. 
    Real Estate Sign: A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. 
    Recreational Vehicle: A bus conversion, Class A camper, Class C camper, travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or pop-up camper. 
    Recreational Vehicle Park: Any premise where recreational vehicles are parked for living and sleeping purposes, which includes any buildings, structures, vehicles, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such park. 
    Recycling Collection Center: A building and/or site in which source separated recoverable materials, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products. The materials are stored on-site in bins or trailers for shipment to market. 
    Recycling Collection Point: An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items is allowed. This facility would generally be located in a shopping center parking lot or in other public/quasi-public areas such as in churches and schools. 
    Recycling Facility: A building or site that is not a salvage yard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products, glass, metal cans, and other products are collected, stored and recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used for production. 
    Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The elevation of the regulatory flood plus one (1') foot of freeboard to provide a safety factor. 
    Rehabilitation Care Facility: A facility which provides residence and care to persons who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct. 
    Restaurant or Cafeteria: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and consumed primarily on the premises. Drive-up windows are permitted. 
    Restaurant, Drive-In: An eating establishment where food or drink is served to customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premise which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. 
    Retail Food Store: A retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, light hardware and other similar items which are purchased for use and/or consumption off the premises; may be a drive-in or supermarket type. 
    Retail Stores and Shops: An establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    Right-of-Way: The right of passage acquired for or by the public through dedication, purchase or condemnation and intended to provide pedestrian and vehicular access to abutting lots, tracts or areas which may also be used for utilities and to provide for drainage ways. 
    Road: See the definition of "Street". 
    Roof Sign: Any sign wholly erected on, affixed to or supported by a roof of a building. 
    Safety Lanes: Paved easements granted to the City, to the public generally, emergency vehicles and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. These easements may at times be referred to as fire lanes. Safety lanes may also be used as ingress and egress to the property. 
    Sandwich Board Sign: See "A" Frame Sign. 
    Satellite Antenna: An antenna, greater than one (1) meter in diameter, which enables the transmission of signals directly to and from satellites. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite earth station antenna. 
    Satellite Receive-Only Antenna: An antenna, one (1) meter or less in diameter that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed on a television monitor. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish, television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite earth station antenna. 
    School, Private: A school operated by a private or religious agency or corporation other than an independent school district, having a curriculum generally equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school. 
    School, Public: A school operated by an independent school district or charter school and providing elementary or secondary curriculum. 
    Secured (Gated) Community: A residential area surrounded by a masonry or wrought iron fence with at least two (2) entrances, electrically or manually controlled gates and administered by a Homeowners Association. 
    Setback: The minimum distance specified by this UDC from the front, rear, and side lot lines, and extending across the full width of the lot, on which no building or structure may be erected. 
    Sexually Oriented Business: A business described as such in, and regulated by, Chapter 74 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended from time to time 
    Shopping Center: A development containing a grouping of retail, service, and/or other commercial establishments in one (1) or more buildings on one (1) or more legally platted lots and constructed and designed to utilize shared parking and access. 
    Sign: A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed directly or indirectly upon the exterior of a building or structure or upon a piece of land which directs attention to an object, location, event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution, or business. 
    Sign Area: The area of any sign shall be the sum of the area enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangles, triangles, or circles which fully contain all extremities of the sign, including the frame, all words, numbers, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by which anything is made known, but excluding any supports. To compute the allowable square footage of sign area, only one (1) side of a double-face sign shall be considered. 
    Sign Height: The vertical distance between the highest part of a sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the average established ground level beneath the sign. 
    Subdivision or Neighborhood Sign: Any sign used to mark the entrance to a specific subdivision or neighborhood. Usually a low profile monument sign designed in such a way as to indicate the name of the specific community and placed at the main entry to such community. 
    Site Plan: A development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land required by this UDC. This includes, but is not limited to, existing and proposed conditions of the lot and major landscaping figures, the location of all existing and proposed buildings, lot lines, streets, driveways, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility service, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices and other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination as opposed to a subdivision plan which relates to the layout of lots and parcels, platting of lots and parcels and the provision of public facilities necessary to build a subdivision. 
    Stable, Commercial: A stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules. 
    Start of Construction (includes substantial improvements): The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction or a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets, and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    State: The State of Texas. 
    Stealth Facility: "Stealth" is a generic term describing a method that would hide or conceal an antenna, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, or any other support structure that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include totally enclosed antennas, wireless facilities that replicate or duplicate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles, alternative tower structures, and camouflaged wireless facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment. 
    Storage or Wholesale Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street: A strip of land comprising the entire paved area between the face of curbs and gutters and within the right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one (1) lot. 
    Street, Collector: A roadway which collects traffic from local streets and connects within major/minor arterial streets. 
    Street Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
    Street, Major/Minor Arterial: A designated principal traffic thoroughfare more or less continuous across the City, which is intended to connect remote parts of the City or areas adjacent thereto, and act as principal connecting street with State and Federal highways. 
    Street, Private: Any street right-of-way not dedicated to public use. 
    Street, Public: Any roadway for use of vehicular traffic dedicated to public use and/or owned, controlled and maintained by the City, a County, or the State. 
    Street Width: The shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the street. 
    Structural Alterations: Any change of a supporting member of a structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Studio, Tattoo or Body Piercing: A building or portion of a building used for selling or applying tattoos by injecting dyes/inks into the skin, and/or to pierce the skin with needles, jewelry or other paraphernalia, primarily for the purpose of ornamentation of the human body. 
    Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its prior condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
    Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  a project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
b.  any alteration of an "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure". 
    Subdivider or Developer: Are synonymous and include any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation (or combination thereof), or any officer, agent, employee, servant, or trustee thereof, who performs, or participates in the performance of, any act toward the subdivision of land within the intent, scope and purview of this UDC. 
    Subdivision: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or rebuilding development, situated within the City's corporate limits or within the ETJ. It also includes vacation and resubdivision of land or lots. 
    Surveyor: A State licensed land surveyor or registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes, to practice the profession of surveying. 
    Tavern: An establishment primarily in the business of serving alcoholic beverages to the general public which may also include the sale of food. 
    Tax Certificate: A certificate from the applicable tax assessor's office confirming that all City ad valorem taxes levied on a property that are due have been paid or that the property owner is lawfully contesting such taxes. If such taxes are being contested, the property owner must establish, to the satisfaction of the City Manager, in his/her sole discretion, that such contest is being conducted by the property owner with reasonable speed. 
    Taxidermist: An establishment whose principle business is the practice of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of dead animals for exhibition in a lifelike state. 
    Telecommunications Equipment Storage Building: An unmanned, single story equipment building or structure used to house telecommunications equipment necessary to operate a telecommunications network. 
    Telecommunications Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennae used for the provision of commercial wireless telecommunications services. This definition includes monopole towers, alternative mounting structures or any other vertical support used for wireless telecommunications antennae. This definition does not include commercial radio or television towers; nor does it include such things as Satellite Receive Only Antenna or Amateur Radio Antennas. 
    Telecommunications Tower Facility: A facility that contains a telecommunications tower and equipment storage building or structure. 
    Temporary Sign: Any sign identified by this UDC which is intended to be displayed for seasonal or brief activities including, but not limited to, sales, specials, promotions, holidays, auctions, and/or business grand openings. 
    Temporary Structure: A structure that is manufactured off-site and brought to the site. It is to be temporary in nature and used only until a permanent structure can be constructed or refurbished. 
    Theater, Drive-In: An open lot devoted to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
    Theater, Indoor: A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures or for dramatic, musical, or live performances. 
    Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit in a row of such structures and attached by one or more common walls. 
    Travel Trailer: A structure designed for temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation, and which can be readily towed over the road by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck Sales, Heavy Equipment: The display, storage, sale, leasing, or rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or buses in operable condition. 
    TV Antenna: An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted from broadcast stations. 
    Unlimited Access Highways: State Farm to Market Roads 78, 482, 1103, 1518, 2252, and 3009 and Schertz Parkway. 
    Use: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereby is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this UDC. 
    Utility Easement: An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing utilities across, on, over, upon or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
    Variance: Permission to depart from this UDC when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, strict application of the provisions of this UDC deprives such property of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity. 
    Variety Store: A retail commercial establishment which supplies a variety of household goods, toys, light hardware items, candy, some clothing and other general merchandise. 
    Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Indoor: An establishment, with no outside pens, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes. 
    Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Outdoor: An establishment with outside pens, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes. 
    Visibility Triangle: The triangular sight area from the corner of converging streets to a distance of 25 feet along each street with the triangle completed by drawing a line through the property from both 25 foot points on the converging streets. 
    Wall Sign: Any sign painted on, attached to or projected from the wall surface of a building, including window signs and signs on awnings and/or marquees. 
    Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Welding/Machine Shop: A workshop where metal fabrication tools, including, but not limited to, welders, lathes, presses, and mills are used for making, finishing, or repairing machines or machine parts. 
    Wind Sign: Any display or series of displays, banners, flags, pennants or other such objects designed and fashioned in such a manner as to move when subjected to wind pressure. Wind signs shall only be permitted as temporary signs. 
    Wrecking or Salvage Yard: An open air place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled. This definition includes automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places for storage of salvaged materials of house wrecking, automobile scrap metal, and structural steel materials and equipment. 
    Xeriscape: Environmental design of residential and park land using various methods for minimizing the need for water use. 
    Yard, Front Setback: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the main building or any projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered a parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
    Yard, Rear Setback: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. 
    Yard, Setback: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, Side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the building. 
    Zoning District: Any area of the City for which the zoning regulations governing the use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, the size of lots and the intensity of use are uniform pursuant to this UDC. 
( Ord. No. 13-S-22, § 9, 7-16-2013 ; Ord. No. 14-S-11, § 1, 3-11-2014 ; Ord. No. 16-S-27 , § 10, 8-30-2016; Ord. No. 17-S-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-S-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-2018) 
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE - COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Unified Development Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2016 republication. Ordinances adopted after the 2016 republication, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this UDC 13-M-12  4-16-2013 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 21.13.1-21.13.3       Added 21.13.1-21.13.7 13-S-22  7-16-2013 1 21.5.2 2       Added 21.5.5.M. 3 21.5.7.A.(tab.) 4 21.58.B.(tab.) 5       Added 21.5.9.C.-G. 6-8       Added 21.5.12-21.5.15 9 Art. 16 13-S-30  8-20-2013 1 21.11.9.B. 13-M-31  8-20-2013 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 21.13.1-21.13.7       Added 21.13.1-21.13.7 13-S-58 12-10-2013 1 21.4.9 14-S-11  3-11-2014 1 Art. 16 14-S-47 11-18-2014 1 21.5.2 2 21.5.5 3 21.5.7.A (table) 4 21.5.8 (table) 5 21.10.4 15-S-24  8-11-2015 1(Exh. A) 21.9.5 14-S-47 11-18-2014 1 21.5.2 2 21.5.5 3 21.5.7.A (table) 4 21.5.8 (table) 5 21.10.4 15-S-24  8-11-2015 1(Exh. A) 21.9.5 16-S-27  8-30-2016 1 21.9.5.B 2 21.9.5.E 3 21.9.7.E 4 21.9.7.H 5 21.9.8.B.3 6 21.9.9.B.1 7 21.10.4.A 8 21.10.8 9 21.14.3.C 10 21.16 17-S-39 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 21.1.1-21.1.12       Added 21.1.1-21.1.11 17-S-40 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 21.3.1-21.3.6       Added 21.3.1-21.3.6 21.4.16.C.3 21.8.4.B.10 21.8.4.C.3.c, d 21.8.4.C.3.e.i 21.9.9.C.1, C.2 21.9.12.F 21.11.3.G 21.11.4.J 21.11.7.I 21.11.22.D.3.c, d 21.11.22.D.4 21.14.3.D, E 21.14.5.C 17-S-41 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A) 21.4.15 21.9.10.F 21.12.10.F.2.a 21.16 17-S-42 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A) 21.4.3 21.5.4.C.2 17-S-43 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A) 21.14.6.A 18-S-03  1-23-2018 21.10.4.A, B 18-S-04  1-23-2018 1(Exh. A) 21.4.8.B 21.4.10.B.1 21.4.12.B 21.4.16.B 21.4.16.C.1, C.2 21.4.16.D 21.5.4.B.1 21.5.10.B.1 21.5.11.B.1 21.5.12.C.1 21.5.13.C.1 21.8.3.A.6 21.8.3.B.5 21.8.4.C.3.a, b 21.8.4.C.3.f.iii 21.8.6.C.9 21.8.7.A, B 21.9.7.C.9 21.9.12.B 21.9.12.D 21.12.6.B.1 21.12.7.B 21.12.8.B.1 21.12.9.B 21.12.10.B.1 21.12.11.B 21.12.12.B 21.12.13.B 21.14.7.A 21.16 18-S-08  2-27-2018 1(Exh. A) 21.9.9  
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE - STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Unified Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Texas law. 
Tex. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 42 21.12.1 42.021 art. 16 43.035 21.4.8 43.056 21.4.8 43.062 21.4.8 43.063 21.4.8 ch. 211 21.1.4 21.5.1 21.3.4 211.011 21.3.4 211.006(a) 21.4.3 211.006(d) 21.5.4 211.007(c) 21.4.3 ch. 212 21.1.4 21.12.1 21.12.6 21.12.8 21.12.10 21.12.11 21.12.12 21.12.13 212.0065 21.3.5 21.12.11 21.12.12 212.014 21.12.13 212.0145 21.12.13 212.015 21.12.13 212.016 21.12.12 212.172 21.4.10 ch. 216 21.1.4 21.11.1 ch. 242 21.12.1 ch. 245 21.1.6 21.7.10 Tex. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 16.315 21.13.3  
