THE CODE OF THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS 
JULY 2018 
____________ 
Doug Svien 
Mayor 
____________ 
Brady Pendleton 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Mark McClinton, Place 1 
Carla Trussell, Place 2 
TBA, Place 3 
Brady Pendleton, Place 4 
Rhett Harrison, Place 5 
Alan Nix, Place 6 
Sherry Zachery, Place 7 
Brandon Huckabee, Place 8 
Council 
____________ 
Allen L. Barnes 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Staci L. King, TRMC 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Randy Thomas 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Stephenville, TX. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as supplemented through 2015, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this publication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents the title of the Code. The number to the right of the colon represents the sequence of the page within that article; thus, page 3 of Title I of the Code would appear as T1:3. 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Vice-President, Supplement Department, and Erin Edwards, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Staci L. King, City Secretary, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication of the City's Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2000-18 
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and 
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Texas empower and authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and 
WHEREAS, the legislative authority of the political subdivision has authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the political subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form; and 
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect at an early date. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS: 
Section 1. That the general ordinances of the political subdivision as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Stephenville, Texas". 
Section 2. Such code of ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following Titles: 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chapter 
CHARTER 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
10. General Provisions 
11. City Standards 
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION 
30. City Government 
31. City Employees 
32. Departments, Boards and Commissions 
33. Fire Department 
34. Emergency Management 
35. Municipal Records 
36. Taxation and Finance 
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS 
50. Sewer and Water Service 
51. Water 
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE 
70. General Provisions 
71. Traffic Regulations 
72. Stopping, Standing and Parking 
73. Parades, Processions and Other Street Uses 
74. Traffic Schedules 
75. Parking Schedules 
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS 
90. Animals 
91. Fire Prevention and Protection 
92. Food Service Establishments 
93. Health and Sanitation 
94. Nuisances 
95. Streets and Sidewalks 
Appendix A: Details for Curbs and Gutters 
96. Unfair Housing 
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
110. General Provisions 
111. Amusements 
112. Peddlers and Solicitors 
113. Vehicles for Hire 
114. Ambulance and Emergency Medical Service 
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES 
130. General Offenses 
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE 
150. Building Regulations 
151. Dangerous Building Abatement Code 
152. Flood Damage Prevention 
153. Mobile Homes 
154. Zoning 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES 
Table 
I. Franchises 
II. Vacations 
PARALLEL REFERENCES 
References to Texas Revised Civil Statutes and Texas Codes 
References to 1975 Code 
References to Resolutions 
References to Ordinances 
INDEX 
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such code of ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in such code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions or ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the code. 
Section 4. Such code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the legislative authority and the clerk of the political subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such code of ordinances in the Office of the Clerk. 
Section 5. Such code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and such code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, section, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given. 
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by law. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Stephenville on this 5th day of September, 2000. 
	/s/ John Moser 
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Cindy L. Stafford 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
Reviewed by: 
/s/ Donald B. Davis 
      City Administrator 	
 	 
Approved as to form and legality: 
/s/ Randy Thomas 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
 
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), adopted November 15, 2018, amended the Charter in its entirety. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME, BOUNDARIES 
 
§ 1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Stephenville, Texas, within the corporate limits now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided herein, shall be and continue to be a municipal corporation and a body politic incorporated under the name of "City of Stephenville," Texas, possessed of all the property and interest of which it was possessed immediately prior to the time this charter takes effect or may hereafter acquire with the powers, duties, obligations, and liabilities now pertaining to said city, as a municipal corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limits of the City of Stephenville, until changed as hereinafter provided, shall be the same as have been heretofore established, and now exist as of the date of the adoption of this charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018)) 
State Law reference— Adoption, amendment, etc., of home rule charter, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1165 et seq.  
§ 3. - Extension of city limits upon petition. 
Whenever a majority of the inhabitants, qualified voters of the State of Texas, of any territory adjoining the City of Stephenville, as said territory may be designated by the city council or in case there are no such qualified voters in said territory, then when persons owning a majority of the land in area in said territory desire the annexation of said territory to the City of Stephenville, they may present a written petition to that effect to the city council and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters, or in case there are no such qualified voters said affidavit shall be to the effect that there are no such qualified voters in said territory and that person or persons signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory; and thereupon the city council at regular session held no sooner than twenty (20) days after the presentation of said petition may by ordinance annex such territory to the City of Stephenville and thenceforth the said territory shall be part of the City of Stephenville and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Extension of city limits by election. 
The city council of the City of Stephenville, may, at any time by resolution or ordinance submit the matter of extending the boundary limits of said city, and annexing additional territory lying adjacent to said city, to the vote of the inhabitants of the city and of the territory proposed to be annexed, qualified voters of the State of Texas, and should a majority of the persons voting at such election vote to so extend the city limits and annex such additional territory, the governing body of said city shall pass an ordinance extending said limits and annexing said territory and from thenceforth the territory so annexed shall be a part of said city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Extension of city limits by city council. 
The city council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Stephenville; and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said city, with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed. Upon the introduction of such an ordinance in the city council, it shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Stephenville, and shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty (30) days have elapsed after such publication thereof. Any citizen of Stephenville, or of the territory to be annexed, shall have the right to contest such annexation by filing with the city council a written petition setting out their reasons for such contest, and after such citizen or citizens shall have been given an opportunity to be heard, said ordinance, in original or amended form, as said council in its judgment may determine, may be finally passed, and the territory so annexed shall be a part of the City of Stephenville, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 
 
§ 1. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Powers of a home rule city. 
It is expressed intention that this charter shall confer upon the City of Stephenville and the city council all the powers of local self-government conferred upon home rule cities by the constitution and statutes of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Powers of the city. 
The city shall have all the powers, except as limited by this charter, granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose in fee simple, or any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation and may sell, ease, mortgage, hold, manage, and control such property as its interest may require; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, or restricted by this charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The city may use a corporate seal, may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, may implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the federal government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, education, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city or its inhabitants, and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, welfare, and government of the city, and for the performance of the functions thereof. The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein, or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Stephenville shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever, now and hereafter granted by the constitution and laws of Texas, including without limitation the powers conferred expressly and permissively by Chapter 13, Title 28, Article 1175, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925, as now or hereafter amended, all of which are hereby adopted. The council is expressly authorized to adopt any rule or regulation deemed necessary, advisable, or convenient for the purpose of exercising any power expressly or permissively conferred by such act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Eminent domain. 
The city shall have the full right, power, and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter, or by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas. In all cases where the city seeks to exercise the power of eminent domain, it shall be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of property. The city may also exercise the power of eminent domain in any other manner now or hereafter authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing body of the city. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in the lands so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess this power of condemnation of property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL 
 
§ 1. - Governing body. 
All governing and lawmaking powers of the City of Stephenville shall be vested in the council which shall consist of eight (8) councilmen and a mayor, and said body shall be known as the "city council." 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Mayor—Term. 
The mayor shall be elected from the city at large for a term of two (2) years or until his successor has been elected and duly qualified. The mayor shall be elected on the first Saturday in May each even-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Mayor—Duties. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him by this charter and ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance hereof. He shall be a member of the council and may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the council and shall be entitled to vote as a member thereof on all matters, but shall have no veto power. He shall sign all contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city and all bonds issued under the provisions of this charter. He shall be recognized as the official head of the city, and shall serve as such for all ceremonial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The council shall elect from its members a mayor pro tempore who shall perform the duties of mayor in case of the absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Councilmembers, terms of office. 
There shall be eight (8) members of the city council elected at large from the City of Stephenville. Councilmembers shall be elected for a term of two (2) years, four (4) councilmembers being elected each year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Reserved.  
§ 7. - Mayor, councilmembers—Qualifications. 
Each of the eight (8) councilmembers and the mayor shall be a citizen of the United States of America, have been a resident of the State of Texas for a period of at least one (1) year, have been a resident of the City of Stephenville for a period of at least six (6) months, be a qualified voter of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 8. - Mayor, councilmen—Compensation. 
The mayor and councilmen shall receive fair and reasonable compensation. The mayor and the council shall be entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 9. - Quorum. 
A quorum at any council meeting will be established by the presence of at least five (5) members. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 10. - Term Limits. 
The mayor and council members will not be allowed to seek re-election to the office of Mayor or Council Member after they have been elected to two consecutive terms in that particular office until they have taken a one-year hiatus. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 11. - Reserved.  
§ 12. - Vacancy. 
An immediate vacancy shall be declared should any councilmember or the mayor move from the city or be convicted of a crime of a grade above a misdemeanor. Vacancies in the office of council member arising from any cause shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at an election to be held on the first uniform election date not earlier than thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs. A special election shall be called in the manner provided for city general elections to elect successors to fill such unexpired terms. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 13. - Number of meetings. 
The council shall hold at least one regular meeting per month, to be designated by ordinance or resolution, and so many special meetings as the council or mayor may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 14. - Rules of procedure—Minutes. 
The council shall keep or cause to be kept a permanent record reflecting the minutes of their proceedings, and the minutes shall be open to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 15. - City attorney—Assistant city attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney residing in the City of Stephenville, who shall be its city attorney. He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his office at the council's will and pleasure. The city council may appoint a competent and licensed attorney residing in the City of Stephenville as assistant city attorney, whose compensation may be fixed by the city council and who shall hold his office at the council's will and pleasure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 16. - City secretary. 
There shall be an officer of the city known as the city secretary who shall be appointed by the city council. His duties shall be those prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 17. - Powers of the city council. 
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitations of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(1)  Establish administrative departments. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual; 
(2)  Adopt the budget of the city and fix the rate of tax of the city; 
(3)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance; 
(4)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the city, and make investigations as to municipal affairs; 
(5)  Appoint the members of the planning and zoning commission and any other commissions the council deems necessary to serve the city; 
(6)  Confer powers to said commissions or boards necessary for the commission or board to perform its designated duties, and adopt, modify, and carry out plans and recommendations proposed by said commissions or boards; 
(7)  Adopt plats; 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city; 
(9)  Regulate, license, and fix the charges of fares made by any persons owning, operating, or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city; 
(10)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and designate the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and the manner of their removal or destruction; 
(11)  Prevent the construction and use of housing accommodations below standards fixed by the city council as proper for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city; 
(12)  Open, close, abandon, widen, extend, or straighten public streets, thoroughfares, and alleys; 
(13)  License, regulate, control, or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards; 
(14)  Provide for enactment and enforcement of electrical wiring, natural or other gas installations, plumbing, or any type of construction codes that the council may deem necessary for the safety and general welfare of the city; 
(15)  Lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places, and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places of all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of the above said locations; 
(16)  May by resolution or ordinance, order a special election, fix the time for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 18. - Ordinances. 
In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by this charter to be ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the contracting of indebtedness shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Stephenville." 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 19. - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, unless otherwise spelled out in this charter or required by the statutes, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine, or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten (10) days from the date of its passage. The city secretary shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine, or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Stephenville at least within ten (10) days after the passage of said ordinance. He shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by this charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication, and promulgation of such ordinance; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the city council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of the ordinance in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified, and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 20. - Annual audit. 
The city council shall provide for an annual independent audit of its financial activities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 21. - Employee bonds. 
The city council shall require bonds of all city employees who receive and pay out any moneys of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 
 
§ 1. - Municipal elections. 
The regular election for members of the city council shall be held on such date as may be set by the Laws of the State of Texas. The city council may by resolution order a special election, fix the time for holding same and provide all means for holding such special election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Regulation of elections. 
The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this charter, any regulations made by the city council, or the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Reserved.  
§ 4. - Council ballots. 
The full names of all candidates for the city council as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot. The official ballot shall be printed not less than twenty (20) days before the date of election. The order of the names on the ballot shall be determined by lot. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Laws governing city elections. 
All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in event there should be any failure of the general laws or of this charter to provide for some feature of the city elections, then the city council shall have the power to provide for such deficiency; and no informalities in conducting a city election shall invalidate the same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Canvassing elections. 
Returns of elections, general and special, shall be made by the election officers to the city council in a called or regular council meeting as specified by the Laws of the State of Texas, when the city council shall canvass the returns and declare the results of the election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 7. - Plurality vote. 
All elections shall be determined by a plurality of the qualified voters voting in the election. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
§ 1. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court known as the "municipal court" of the City of Stephenville, with such jurisdiction, powers, procedures, and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas for municipal courts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - City judge. 
There shall be a magistrate of the municipal court known as the city judge who shall be appointed by the city council. He may be removed by the majority of the full council at any time. He shall receive such salary or fees as the city council may fix from time to time. All costs and fines imposed by the municipal court, or by any court in cases appealed from judgments of the municipal court, shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. In event of the failure of the city judge to act for any reason, the mayor or someone designated by the city council shall act in his place and in the event of a vacancy, until a city judge is appointed by the city council to fill the vacancy; but while acting as city judge the mayor shall receive no compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
 
§ 1. - Power to borrow. 
The City of Stephenville shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the city for permanent public improvements or for other public purposes consistent with the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city shall also have the power to borrow money against the revenues of any municipally owned utility and to mortgage the physical properties of such utilities in payment of such debt. In no event, however, shall such revenue bonds be considered an indebtedness of the City of Stephenville nor repaid with funds secured by taxation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Bond ordinance and election. 
The city shall authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the city council, and approved by a majority of the qualified property taxpaying voters, voting at an election called for the purpose of authorizing the issuance of such bonds. The bond ordinance shall provide for proper notice, the calling of the election, and the propositions to be submitted. The latter shall distinctly specify: 
(1)  The purpose for which the bonds are to be issued, and where possible, the probable period of usefulness of the improvements for which the bond funds are to be expended; 
(2)  The amount thereof; 
(3)  The maximum rate of interest; 
(4)  The levy of taxes sufficient to pay interest and sinking fund; 
(5)  That the bonds to be issued shall mature serially within a given number of years. 
The bond ordinance and the manner of conducting the election shall in all respects conform to the general laws of the State of Texas and the provisions of the charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Public sale. 
All bonds issued under this charter shall be sold as provided by the laws of the state of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Two or more projects combined. 
A bond ordinance may combine two or more related projects, in which event it shall for each project establish a separate appropriation and state separately the estimated maximum costs, but shall authorize a single issue of bonds to finance the aggregate of the appropriations thereby made. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Issuance of bonds. 
All bonds shall be serial bonds and shall specify for what purpose they are issued. Such bonds shall never be sold at less than par value and accumulated interest, exclusive of commissions. If practicable all bonds shall contain a redemption provision making them callable at the option of the city upon or after the expiration of fifteen (15) years from the date of issuance, or such redemption provision may be for a lesser period than fifteen (15) years if such provision will not materially affect their marketability or a favorable rate of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
§ 1. - Department. 
There shall be a department of finance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall, under the direct supervision of the City Manager, have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget; 
(2)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(3)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments, and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient; 
(4)  Submit to the council monthly statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(5)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(6)  Collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees, and other revenues of the city or for whose collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from the state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city; 
(7)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department, or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depository or depositories as may be designated by the city council, subject to the requirements of law in force from time to time as to the furnishing of bond or the deposit of securities and the payment of interest on deposits. All such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(8)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration, or exchange; 
(9)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage, and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department, or agency of the city government; 
(10)  Approve all proposed expenditures; unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriations and available funds, no expenditures shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The city council may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department, or agency. Within the last three (3) months of the budget year, the council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department, or agency to another. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Accounting supervision and control. 
The director of finance shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, or claims to be used by all the offices, departments, and agencies of the city government; 
(2)  Examine and consult on all contracts, orders, and other documents by which the city government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable; 
(3)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidence of claims, demands, or charges against the city government and with advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges; 
(4)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department, or agency of the city government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All appropriations, other than those designated for capital expenditures, shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Fees paid to city. 
All fees for city services received by an officer or employee shall belong to the city government and shall be paid to the department of finance at such times as required by the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§§ 7—9. - Reserved.  
§ 10. - Sale of city property. 
Personal property of the City of Stephenville shall be offered for sale in open competition under such rules and regulation as the city council may prescribe. Real property of the City of Stephenville shall be sold in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code. The city council shall have the power to reject any and all bids and advertise again. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 11. - Disbursement of funds. 
All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be signed by the director of finance, or his deputy, and countersigned by a person designated by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 12. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes, other revenues. 
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year of —" (stating the budget year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original note or notes shall have been issued. 
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of other revenues of that budget year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "special revenue note for the year -" (stating the budget year). Such notes may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 13. - City depository. 
At the beginning of each fiscal year, the city council shall designate a bank in the City of Stephenville as the city depository which shall be selected for a period of two years. The bank that shall bid the highest bid for the city's depository accounts and which is acceptable to the city council shall be selected. The council shall have the right to reject any and all bids offered as city depository. The bank selected as such depository shall give adequate bond. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE VIII. - THE BUDGET 
 
§ 1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this charter the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Preparation, submission; content of budget. 
A budget shall be submitted to the council by the City Manager at least forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each budget year. The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditures and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in the financial policy; 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures for all funds; 
(3)  An analysis of property valuation; 
(4)  An analysis of tax rate; 
(5)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five (5) years or for the number of years for which records are available; 
(6)  General fund resources in detail; 
(7)  Summary of proposed expenditures by fund, department and activity; 
(8)  Summary of proposed expenditures by character and object; 
(9)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries No. (7) and (8) above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay; 
(10)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds; 
(11)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued, and amount outstanding; 
(12)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds; 
(13)  A special fund section; 
(14)  The appropriation ordinance; 
(15)  The tax levying ordinance; 
(16)  A capital improvement program for the budget year and proposed method of financing; 
(17)  A summary of the condition of machinery, equipment, and buildings; 
(18)  A suggested legislative program and the highlights of the proposed administrative program. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Comparison—Anticipated revenues, proposed expenditures. 
The budget shall show in parallel columns opposite the various properly classified items of revenues and expenditures the actual amount of such items for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Budget a public record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary, open to inspection by anyone. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Budget, public hearing. 
At the meeting of the council at which the budget is submitted the council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published a notice of the hearing, setting forth the time and place thereof and presenting a condensed summary of the budget, at least seven (7) days before the date of the hearing. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice, or at any time and place to which public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item herein contained. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Budget final adoption; failure to adopt. 
The budget shall be adopted in original or amended form by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the whole council and shall be finally adopted not later than seven (7) days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. 
Should the council take no final action on or prior to such date, the budget as submitted shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council. 
Upon final adoption the budget shall be in effect for the stated fiscal year. 
(Ord. 2001-15, § 3, 7-17-2001 (Elec. of 5-5-2001); Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 7. - Reserved.  
§ 8. - Amendments to final adopted budget. 
In case of grave public necessity, emergency expenditures to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions which could not, by reasonable diligent thought and attention, have been included in the original budget may from time to time be authorized by the affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of the entire council, as amendments or supplements to the original budget. Such supplements or amendments shall be filed with the original budget. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE IX. - TAXATION 
 
§ 1. - Division of assessment. 
The appraisal and assessment of city taxes is governed by the Tax Code of the State of Texas and is vested in the Erath County Central Appraisal District. The city may contract with the Central Appraisal District and Tax Collector of Erath County, Texas, for the collection of city taxes and issuance of receipts therefor, and the city may contract with attorneys for the collection of delinquent taxes due the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Property subject to tax; method of assessment. 
All real and personal property within the city not expressly exempted by law shall be subject to annual taxation, but never to exceed its true market value. Each person, partnership, and corporation owning property within the city limits of the City of Stephenville, shall between the first day January and the thirtieth day of April of each year, hand to the city assessor-collector a full and complete sworn inventory of the property possessed or controlled by him, or her, or them, within said limits on the first day of January of the current year. In all cases of failure to obtain a statement of real and personal property from any cause, the assessor-collector shall ascertain the amount and value of such property and assess the same, and such assessment shall be valid and binding as if such property had been rendered by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§§ 3—6. - Reserved.  
§ 7. - Taxes, when due and payable. 
All taxes due the City of Stephenville shall be payable at the office of the city assessor-collector and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than October first. Taxes shall be paid before February first, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the city council may provide by ordinance, except the city council may by ordinance provide that all taxes, either current or delinquent, due the city may be paid in installments. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 8. - Seizure and sale of personal property. 
The assessor-collector of taxes shall, by virtue of his tax rolls, have power and authority to seize and levy upon all personal property and sell the same to satisfy all taxes, together with all penalty, interest, and costs due on said property by said delinquent to the city. When he seizes property for such purposes he shall keep the same at the expense of the owner until the sale is made, and shall give notice of the time and place of sale of same by posting a written notice at the courthouse door and one at another public place within the City of Stephenville at least ten (10) days before the date of sale. He shall sell the same to the highest bidder for cash for all taxes, interest, cost, and expense of caring for said property, and shall make an entry in the book of sales of the amount realized. All such sales shall be made at the front door of the city hall. A sale of property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an absolute title, and the owner shall have no right to redeem the same. This section shall be complied with so long as it does not conflict with the constitution or any laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 9. - Tax liens. 
The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge, or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge, and encumbrance on the property in favor of the city, for the amount of the taxes due on such property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 10. - Power to tax. 
The city council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to levy, assess, and collect such taxes as may be authorized by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE X. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
§ 1 - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas, or anything else that may be needed or used by the public, the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Franchises—Power of the council. 
The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Stephenville, and for such purposes is granted full power. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at three (3) separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Stephenville, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018)) 
Cross reference— Franchises, see T.S.O. Table I  
§ 3. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
In fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as to the value of any franchise granted by the city under this charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Right of regulation. 
All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments to public utility franchises whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing; 
(2)  To require an adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service and rates; 
(4)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor, or successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph. At any time the city may examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and require annual and other reports, including certified reports on local operations by each such public utility; 
(5)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Consent of property owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but, nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminated as provided in Section 4, Article X. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 7. - Other condition. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Stephenville and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the City of Stephenville to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this charter whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise granted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 8. - Franchise records. 
Within six (6) months after this charter takes effect every public utility franchise owner shall file with the city, as may be prescribed by ordinance, certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the City of Stephenville. The city shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 9. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The account shall show the actual capital cost of the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the fund expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other city or governmental department. The council shall annually cause to be made by a public accountant and shall publish a report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section or such data as the council may deem expedient. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 10. - Regulation of rates and service. 
The city council shall have full power, to regulate by ordinance the rates and service of every public utility operating in the City of Stephenville except as such regulations are given by state law to the Public Utility Commission of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE XI - CITY MANAGER 
 
§ 1. - Qualifications, Appointment and Removal; Duties; Compensation; Residency Requirement. 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City. The City Manager is appointed by a 2/3 majority vote of the City Council for an indefinite period of time. The City Manager serves at the will of the City Council. The City Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of the City Manager's administrative ability, experience, and training. The City Manager shall administer the business of the City, and the City Council shall ensure that such administration is efficient. The City Council may by ordinance delegate to the City Manager any additional powers or duties it considers proper for the efficient administration of City affairs. The City Manager shall execute a bond conditioned that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of City Manager. The amount of such bond shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by the City Council. The City Manager need not be a resident of the City at the time of appointment, but shall become a resident of Stephenville within ninety (90) days of acceptance of an offer of employment. Failure to become a resident of the City within the prescribed time will result in a forfeiture of the position and the position shall be declared vacant by the Mayor at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall be authorized to enter into a Contract of Employment with the City Manager and to prescribe such compensation therein as it may fix. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be by at least a 2/3 majority of the full council and shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and responsibility for such suspension or removal in the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Direction and Supervision of Employees, Noninterference By Council; Appointments and Removal of Department Heads. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations as provided by this Charter or otherwise by law, the City Council or its Members shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and no Member of the City Council shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. Neither the City Council nor any of its Members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by the City Manager or by any of the City Manager's subordinates. Except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, the City Manager shall be responsible for, and have the power to appoint, suspend, and/or remove all or any one of the directors of the departments of the City with the consultation of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Specific Powers and Duties. 
The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of the affairs of the City and shall have the power and duty to: 
1)  Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter or by ordinance. 
2)  Prepare and recommend items for inclusion in the official agenda of all City Council meetings and meetings of the Boards and Commissions as established by this Charter or ordinance. 
3)  Prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget and capital program, and administer the budget as adopted by the City Council. 
4)  Be responsible for the proper administration of all City affairs placed in his or her hands. 
5)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed. 
6)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
7)  Keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City, and prepare and submit to the City Council an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the City, including the report of the annual audit required by state law. 
8)  Appoint, suspend, and/or remove employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter. Appointments made by the City Manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative experience and ability, and of training fitness and efficiency of such appointees in the work which they are to administer. 
9)  Attend all City Council meetings and take part in the discussion of any City business. 
10)  Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient; to execute deeds, deeds of trust, easements, releases, contracts, and all other legal instruments on behalf of the City when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
11)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter, or as may be required by the City Council by ordinance or resolution, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
§ 1. - Damage suits, claims, etc. 
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall give the city secretary notice in writing within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the alleged injury or damage, stating specifically in such notice when, where, and how the injury or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible, and giving the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whose testimony such person is relying to establish the injury or damage. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the city for personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of sixty (60) days after the notice hereinbefore described has been filed with the city secretary. 
After the expiration of the sixty (60) days aforementioned, the complainant may have two (2) years in which to bring an action of law. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the city shall be liable in damages therefor, the person or persons claiming such damages shall within thirty (30) days after the death of the injured person give notice as above required in case of personal injury. 
The city council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the city, including suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes. 
Legal process against the city shall be served upon the mayor or mayor pro tem. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit, or proceeding in which the City of Stephenville is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city in any of the state courts; but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings, the same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given as required by law, and the city shall be just as liable as if security of bond had been duly executed. 
Property, real and/or personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 2. - Amendments to charter. 
This charter may be amended at any time in accordance with the provisions prescribed thereto in the general laws of the State of Texas, or any amendment thereto or any amendment that may be made hereafter thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 3. - Effect of charter on existing law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the city government and not in conflict with any provisions of this charter shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended, or repealed by the council after this charter takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 4. - Records open for inspection. 
The city council shall make all records and accounts of the city open for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 5. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by the Secretary of State of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 6. - Separability clause. 
If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 7. - Funds not subject to garnishment. 
No fund of the city or within the custody of the city or any of its officials in any official capacity shall be subject to garnishment and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 8. - Police force. 
The City of Stephenville shall have the power to maintain a city police force, prescribe the duties, powers, and compensation of policemen and regulate their conduct; to appoint watchmen, prescribe their duties, powers, and compensation; to suppress and prevent any riot, affray, disturbance, or disorderly assembly within the city; to prevent, prohibit and suppress immoderate riding and driving in the streets; to police all parks, grounds, speedways, boulevards, and other property or places owned by the city and lying either within or without the city limits and used for municipal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 9. - Nuisances. 
The City of Stephenville shall have the power to define and regulate any nuisance which may be created or occur within five thousand (5,000) feet of the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 10. - [Rules of construction.] 
The use of the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular, and words used in the masculine gender include the feminine also, unless by reasonable construction, it appears that such was not the intention of the language of this Charter. (Ord. 1989-13, § 3, 9-5-1989 (Elec. of 5-6-1989); Ord. No. 2018-O-47 , § 4(Exh. A), 11-15-2018 (Elec. of 11-6-2018))  
§ 11. - Recall of an Elected Official. 
SCOPE OF RECALL 
Any elected City official shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the City of Stephenville on grounds of incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance in office. 
PETITIONS FOR RECALL 
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Stephenville, a petition demanding such questions to be submitted shall first be filed with the City Secretary. If recall is sought for the Mayor or a Council Member the petition must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal to ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters in the City, or sixty five (65%) percent of the votes cast at the last general election for such office, whichever is greater. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his or her name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after signer's name his or her place of residence, giving the name of the street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month, and the year his or her signature was affixed. 
FORM OF RECALL PETITION 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the City of Stephenville, must be distinctly and specifically pointed to the grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there is more than one ground, said petition shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which the officer is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"State of Texas" 
County of ________________ 
I, _____________________ , being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition, and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereon was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be. 
Signature 
Sworn and subscribed before me this ____ day of_________, 2_____. 
Signed _____________________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
VARIOUS PAPERS CONSTITUTING PETITION 
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other paper attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the preceding section of this Chapter may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons, but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective to be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the City Secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the City Secretary who shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to the officer's Stephenville address, by both regular mail and certified mail. 
PRESENTATION OF PETITION TO THE COUNCIL 
Within seven (7) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the City Secretary shall present such petition to the Council of the City of Stephenville. 
PUBLIC HEARING TO BE HELD 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within seven (7) days after such recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit the officer to present the facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the City Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. 
CALLING OF RECALL ELECTION 
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then the City Council shall order an election and set the date for holding such a recall election. The date selected for the recall election shall be in accordance with the Texas Election Code. If after the recall election is established, the officer vacates his or her position, the election shall be cancelled. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas Election Code. 
BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(A)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall _________________ be removed from the office of _______________ by recall?" 
(B)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"Yes" 
"No" 
RESULT OF RECALL ELECTION 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "No," that is against the recall of the person named on the ballot, the officer shall continue in office for the remainder of the officer's unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such election be "Yes," that is for the recall of the person named on the ballot, the officer shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy be filled by the City Council as provided in this Charter. 
RECALL, RESTRICTIONS THEREON 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Stephenville within three (3) months after the officer's election, no more than twice within an officer's term, and not within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall. 
FAILURE OF THE COUNCIL TO CALL AN ELECTION-RECALL 
If all the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed on the City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then any petitioning citizen may file with the appropriate court for a writ of mandamus to force the City to call the election.  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Title of code. 
This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Stephenville, Texas shall be designated as the Code of Stephenville, Texas and may be so cited.  
Sec. 10.02. - Interpretation. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.  
Sec. 10.03. - Application to future ordinances. 
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.  
Sec. 10.04. - Captions. 
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
Sec. 10.05. - Definitions. 
(A)  General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. 
(B)  For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
City, municipal corporation or municipality. The City of Stephenville, Texas. 
City administrator. This term shall include any designee. 
Code, this Code or this Code of Ordinances. This municipal code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections. 
Council. The legislative body of the city. 
County. Erath County, Texas. 
Highway. Any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The act referred to is permissive. 
Month. A calendar month. 
Oath. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
Officer, office, employee, commission or department. An officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Owner. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof. 
Roadway. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall. The act referred to is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. Includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The State of Texas. 
Street. Any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Subchapter. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters. 
Written. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words "year of our lord." 
(1975 Code, § 1-2 (part))  
Sec. 10.06. - Rules of interpretation. 
The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance: 
(A)  And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it. 
(B)  Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy. 
(C)  Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable. 
(D)  General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.  
Sec. 10.07. - Severability. 
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.  
Sec. 10.08. - Reference to other sections. 
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.  
Sec. 10.09. - Reference to offices. 
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.  
Sec. 10.10. - Errors and omissions. 
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.  
Sec. 10.11. - Official time. 
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal business.  
Sec. 10.12. - Reasonable time. 
(A)  In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(B)  The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.  
Sec. 10.13. - Ordinances repealed. 
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.  
Sec. 10.14. - Ordinances unaffected. 
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.  
Sec. 10.15. - Effective date of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.  
Sec. 10.16. - Repeal or modification of ordinance. 
(A)  Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(B)  No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided. 
(C)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.  
Sec. 10.17. - Ordinances which amend or supplement code. 
(A)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division or any portion thereof, those repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of those subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the City Council. 
(B)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Stephenville, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows:…" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(C)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Stephenville, Texas is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:…" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(1975 Code, § 1-4)  
Sec. 10.18. - Section histories; statutory references. 
(A)  As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (1975 Code, § 1-2; Am. Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985) 
(B)  (1)  If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (V.T.C.A. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001; 1975 Code, § 1-2; Am. Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985). 
(2)  If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. 
Example: 
Sec. 31.10 Ordinance violations. 
This city has the authority to impose penalties for ordinance violations. 
(1969 Code, § 1-5; Am. Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1980) 
State Law Reference—General municipality penalty, see V.T.C.A. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001.  
Secs. 10.19—10.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.99. - General penalty. 
(A)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations; 
(2)  A fine not to exceed $2,000.00, if a motor vehicle is used in illegal dumping or an offense under the law or city ordinance violated by the illegal dumping; 
(3)  A fine not to exceed $500.00 in all other cases, provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(B)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the City Administrator or the Chief of Police or their assigns. 
State Law reference— Municipal penalties, see V.T.C.A. Loc. Gov't Code, § 54.001  
CHAPTER 11. - CITY STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 11.01. - City limits. 
The city limits shall be those limits described from time to time. 
(1975 Code, § 2-1) 
Cross reference— City limits, see Charter, Art. I, § 2-5.  
Title 3 - ADMINISTRATION  
CHAPTER 30. - CITY GOVERNMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Council, see Charter, Art. III; Elections, see Charter, Art. IV; Powers, see Charter, Art. II. 
 
Sec. 30.01. - Performance of statutory, Charter duties. 
The Mayor, Council members and all other officers of the city shall have the powers and shall perform the duties as set forth in the statutes of the state and the City Charter. 
(1975 Code, § 2-2)  
Sec. 30.02. - City residence required. 
When the Mayor or a Council member shall move out of the city limits, his/her office shall become vacant. 
(1975 Code, § 2-3)  
Sec. 30.03. - Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS)—Election to participate; adoption by reference. 
(A)  Election to participate in the TMRS. On behalf of the city, the City Commission hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter "TMRS") as provided in V.T.C.A. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted. 
(B)  Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits Fund. The City Council elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by V.T.C.A. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(C)  Adoption by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.  
CHAPTER 31. - CITY EMPLOYEES  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 31.01. - Elections. 
Elections shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state statutes and Charter provisions. 
(1975 Code, § 7-1) 
Cross reference— Elections, see Charter, Art. IV.  
Secs. 31.02—31.09. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 31.10. - Duties. 
(A)  The City Attorney shall prosecute before the Municipal Court, in person or by deputy, all actions in behalf of the city when contested, and defend before the court all actions against any officer, servant or agent of the city on account of his/her official acts. He/she shall prosecute and defend all suits and actions originating and pending in any court of record in this state to which the city is a party, or in which, in the opinion of the Mayor, the interests of the city are brought into controversy, or in which the official acts of any of its officers or agents are involved. 
(B)  He/she shall advise the City Council or its committees and all the officers of the city on such legal questions as may arise in relation to the business of the city, shall draw up any resolution or ordinance that he/she may be called upon to draw up by any committee of the City Council, and shall give any such committee his/her opinion in writing upon any and all questions of law submitted to him/her. 
(1975 Code, § 2-4) 
Cross reference— Appointment, compensation of City Attorney, see Charter, Art. III, § 15.  
Secs. 31.11—31.24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 31.25. - Appointment; responsibilities. 
(A)  The City Council shall appoint an Administrator of the city who shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. 
(B)  The City Administrator shall be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of the city government. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-25 and 2-36; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.26. - Disqualification of council members. 
No member of the City Council, during the time for which he/she is elected and for one year thereafter, shall be appointed City Administrator. 
(1975 Code, § 2-26; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.27. - City administrator chosen by city council. 
The City Administrator shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of his/her administrative training, experience and ability. 
(1975 Code, § 2-27; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.28. - Residence. 
The City Administrator may or may not be a resident of the city when appointed, but he/she shall reside within the corporate limits of the city during his/her tenure in office. 
(1975 Code, § 2-28; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.29. - Term of office; removal. 
The City Administrator shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the City Council by a vote of a majority of the entire City Council. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Administrator shall be final. 
(1975 Code, § 2-29; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.30. - Bond. 
The City Administrator shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the City Council by ordinance, the premium to be paid by the city. 
(1975 Code, § 2-30; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973) 
Cross reference— Employee bond, see Charter, Art. III, § 21.  
Sec. 31.31. - Compensation. 
The City Administrator shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-31; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.32. - Appointment of substitute. 
In case of the absence or disability of the City Administrator, the City Council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. 
(1975 Code, § 2-32; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.33. - City council to deal only with administrator. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Administrator, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Administrator, either publicly or privately. 
(1975 Code, § 2-33; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.34. - Recommendations to council. 
The City Administrator shall recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as he/she may deem necessary or expedient. 
(1975 Code, § 2-34; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.35. - Attendance at council meetings. 
The City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. 
(1975 Code, § 2-35; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.36. - Preparation and administration of budget. 
The City Administrator shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, the annual budget and be responsible for its administration after it is adopted by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-37; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973) 
Cross reference— Budget, see Charter, Art. VIII.  
Sec. 31.37. - Monthly financial report. 
The City Administrator shall make a full written report to the City Council as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget. He/she shall keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 2-38; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973) 
Cross reference— Monthly statements required, see Charter, Art. VII, § 2(4).  
Sec. 31.38. - Purchasing. 
(A)  The City Administrator shall act as or appoint a purchasing agent for the city who shall purchase all merchandise, material and supplies needed by the city, and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be kept and from which same shall be issued as needed. He/she shall adopt such rules and regulations governing requisitions and transactions of business between him/herself as purchasing agent and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as the City Council may approve. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to give opportunity for competition on purchases and sales, except when the nature of the purchase or sale is such that competition is impossible or impracticable. All purchases in excess of $500.00, except purchases of real estate, or rights or easements therein, shall be by contract to the lowest responsible bidder; and all sales in excess of $950.00, except sales of real estate, or rights or easements therein, shall be made to the highest bidder after public notice and the receipt of sealed bids, unless the City Council, by ordinance, determines that it is impossible or impracticable to purchase or sell in such manner. All sealed bids received shall be opened in public and thereafter shall be subject to public inspection. The purchasing agent may reject all bids and readvertise for new bids. The purchasing agent may require successful bidders to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their contract or conditioned upon the payment of the wages and compensation of all laborers employed on work for which a contract is made by the contractor, subcontractor, agent or any other person, or conditioned for both. 
(C)  The purchasing agent shall not let any contract for periods exceeding one year for street lighting, public improvements, labor or supplies. 
(D)  In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the Administrator may, with the consent of the City Council, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such accident or avoiding such public emergency; but immediately afterwards he/she shall file with the Mayor a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(E)  The purchasing policy as presented to the City Council is hereby adopted as the manual for the expenditure of city funds and the appropriation of goods and services for the City, replacing, in its entirety, all other such manuals and policies heretofore adopted by the City. 
The purchasing policy manual is on file in the offices of the City. 
(1975 Code, § 2-39; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-40 , § 1, passed 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 31.39. - Appointment and removal of city employees; restriction on city council. 
(A)  The City Administrator shall have the authority to appoint and remove all city employees. The appointment of all employees under the direct supervision of the City Administrator shall require approval by the City Council. The removal of the same employees shall be after consultation with the City Council. 
(B)  The City Administrator may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in their respective department. 
(C)  Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for the City Council or any of its members to attempt to dictate the appointment or removal of any person to office or employment by the City Administrator. 
(1975 Code, § 2-40; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-16A, passed 9-1-1998)  
Sec. 31.40. - Salaries for city employees. 
The City Administrator shall recommend to the City Council the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the city. It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass ordinances or resolutions, from time to time, fixing the rates of compensation. 
(1975 Code, § 2-41; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.41. - Duties of department heads. 
All ordinances of the city prescribing the duties of department heads shall remain in full force and effect, except insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this subchapter, in which case the provisions of this subchapter shall govern. 
(1975 Code, § 2-42; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.42. - Enforcement of laws, ordinances. 
The City Administrator shall see that all laws and ordinances of the city are enforced. 
(1975 Code, § 2-43; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.43. - Public utility franchises. 
The City Administrator shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city and its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof shall call such fact to the attention of the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-44; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973) 
Cross reference— Franchises, see Charter, Art. X; Table of Special Ordinances, Table I.  
Sec. 31.44. - Civil defense. 
The City Administrator shall act as Civil Defense Coordinator for the city and will keep the City Council advised in civil defense matters. He/she shall make recommendations to the City Council for expenditures and grant applications in the area of civil defense. 
(1975 Code, § 2-45; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
Sec. 31.45. - Performance of other duties. 
The City Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-46; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1973)  
CHAPTER 32. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
ARTICLE I. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.01. - Membership. 
There is hereby created a seven member board which shall advise the City Council on policy matters affecting the city's airport facility, and such board shall be known as the Airport Advisory Board. At least five members of the Board must be residents of the city. Each of the seven members shall be appointed for two year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Should vacancies occur on the Board, the vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, except such terms shall only be for the remainder of such unexpired term. The City Council shall approve the appointment of new Board members prior to January 1, since the term of office will run from January 1 to December 31. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-111, 2-112, 2-113, 2-115 and 2-116; Am. Ord. passed 12-4-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-22, passed 11-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.02. - Powers and duties. 
The Airport Advisory Board shall from time to time make such general studies of airport construction and operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and adequate to the needs of the city and of the air transportation industry; it shall make recommendations to the City Council in respect to construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and operation of the airport. It shall call the Manager's attention to any failure by personnel of the airport to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the City Council; and it shall, acting in an advisory capacity, work toward the general improvement of the airport and the advancement of the city as an air transportation center. 
(1975 Code, § 2-119; Am. Ord. passed 12-4-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-22, passed 11-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.03. - Procedure; quorum. 
(A)  Procedure. "Roberts Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the proceedings of the Board; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law. 
(B)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the Board, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those present. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(1975 Code, § 2-118; Am. Ord. passed 12-4-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-22, passed 11-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.04. - Meetings; attendance. 
(A)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least quarterly in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law. 
(B)  Attendance. Two absences from meetings of the advisory board in a 12-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
(Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-44 , § 1, passed 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 32.05. - Conflicting interests. 
No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air, or in any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. 
(1975 Code, § 2-114; Am. Ord. passed 12-4-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-22, passed 11-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.06. - Compensation. 
All members of the Airport Advisory Board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the Board, when authorized by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-117; Am. Ord. passed 12-4-1973; Am. Ord. 1998-22, passed 11-3-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-29, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.07. - Term limits. 
A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-043, § 1, passed 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 32.08—32.19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.20. - Membership. 
There is hereby created a seven member board which shall advise the City Council on policy matters affecting the city's parks and recreational facilities, and such board shall be known as the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. At least five members of the Board must be residents of the city. Each of the seven members shall be appointed for two year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Should vacancies occur on the Board, the vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, except such terms shall only be for the remainder of such unexpired term. The City Council shall approve the appointment of new Board members prior to January 1, since the term of office will run from January 1 to December 31. 
(1975 Code, § 2-130; Am. Ord. 1995-10, passed 3-7-1995; Am. Ord. 2005-27, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.21. - Powers and duties. 
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council on policy matters concerning the planning, acquisition, operation and use of parks, playgrounds and open spaces; recommend policies on recreational programs; and perform such functions as may be duly delegated to it from time to time by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-133; Am. Ord. 1995-10, passed 3-7-1995; Am. Ord. 2005-27, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.22. - Procedure; quorum. 
(A)  Procedure. "Roberts Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the proceedings of the Board; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law. 
(B)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the Board, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those present. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(1975 Code, § 2-132; Am. Ord. 1995-10, passed 3-7-1995; Am. Ord. 2005-27, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.23. - Meetings; attendance. 
(A)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least quarterly in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law. 
(B)  Attendance. Two absences from meetings of the advisory board in a 12-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-131, 2-134; Am. Ord. 1995-10, passed 3-7-1995; Am. Ord. 2005-27, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-44 , § 2, passed 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 32.24. - Term limits. 
A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-043, § 2, passed 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 32.25—32.34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.35. - Membership. 
There is hereby created a seven-member board which shall advise the City Council on policy matters affecting the Stephenville Public Library, and such board shall be known as the Library Board. At least five members of the Board must be residents of the city. Each of the seven members shall be appointed for two-year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Two members of the Twentieth Century Club shall serve on the Library Board, and the Twentieth Century Club will designate these two members for appointment to the Board. Should vacancies occur on the Board, the vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, except such terms shall only be for the remainder of such unexpired term. The City Council shall approve the appointment of new Board members prior to January 1, since the term of office will run from January 1 to December 31. 
(1975 Code, § 2-145; Am. Ord. 1997-14, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-28, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.36. - Powers and duties. 
The Library Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council on policy matters concerning the planning, acquisition, operation and use of library and recommend policies on library programs; and perform such functions as may be duly delegated to it from time to time by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-146; Am. Ord. 1997-14, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-28, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.37. - Procedure; quorum. 
(A)  Procedure. "Roberts Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the proceedings of the Board; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law. 
(B)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the Board, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those present. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(1975 Code, § 2-147; Am. Ord. 1997-14, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-28, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.38. - Meetings; attendance. 
(A)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least quarterly in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law, being V.T.C.A. Gov't Code §§ 551.001 et seq. 
(B)  Attendance. Two absences from meetings of the advisory board in a 12-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-148 and 2-149; Am. Ord. 1997-14, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-28, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-44 , § 3, passed 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 32.39. - Term limits. 
A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-043, § 2, passed 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 32.40—32.49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SENIOR CITIZENS' ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.50. - Membership. 
There is hereby created a seven-member board which shall advise the City Council on policy matters affecting the Stephenville Senior Citizens Program of the Parks and Recreation Department, and that board shall be known as the Senior Citizens' Advisory Board. At least four members of the Board must be residents of the city. Each of the seven members shall be appointed for two-year terms and until their successor are appointed and qualified, Should vacancies occur on the Board, the vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, except such terms shall only be for the remainder of such unexpired term. The City Council shall approve the appointment of new Board members prior to January 1, since the term of office will run from January 1 to December 31. 
(1975 Code, § 2-160; Am. Ord. 1997-15, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-30, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. 2015-O-18, passed 12-1-2015)  
Sec. 32.51. - Powers and duties. 
The Senior Citizens' Advisory Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council on policy matters concerning the planning, acquisition, operation and use of the city Senior Citizens' Center and recommend policies on programs affecting senior citizens, and perform such functions as may be duly delegated to it from time to time by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 2-161; Am. Ord. 1997-15, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-30, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.52. - Procedure; quorum. 
(A)  Procedure. "Roberts Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the proceedings of the Board; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law. 
(B)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the Board, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those present. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(1975 Code, § 2-162; Am. Ord. 1997-15, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-30, passed 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 32.53. - Meetings; attendance. 
(A)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least quarterly in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law, being V.T.C.A. Gov't Code §§ 551.001 et seq. 
(B)  Attendance. Two absences from meetings of the advisory board in a 12-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-163 and 2-164; Am. Ord. 1997-15, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 2005-30, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-44 , § 4, passed 11-6-2018)  
Sec. 32.54. - Term limits. 
A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-043, § 2, passed 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 32.55—32.64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TOURISM AND VISITORS BUREAU ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32.65. - Membership. 
There is hereby created a seven-member board which shall advise the City Council on policy matters affecting the use and expenditure of Hotel Occupancy Tax funds, and such board shall be known as the Tourism and Visitors Bureau Advisory Board. All members of the Board must have a vested interest in the attraction of tourism and visitors to the city of Stephenville. Each of the seven members shall be appointed for two year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Should vacancies occur on the Board, the vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments, except such terms shall only be for the remainder of such unexpired term. The City Council shall approve the appointment of new Board members prior to January 1, since the term of office will run from January 1 to December 31. 
The Board shall consist of one representative from retail, one representative from restaurants, one representative from hotels, and one representative from Tarleton State University; all other members shall be chosen at the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-39 , passed 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 32.66. - Powers and duties. 
The Tourism and Visitors Bureau Advisory Board shall advise the City Council on matters affecting tourism and visitor services; expenditure of Hotel Occupancy Tax funds; development and implementation of marketing strategies. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-39 , passed 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 32.67. - Procedure; quorum. 
(A)  Procedure. "Roberts Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the proceedings of the Board; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law. 
(B)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the Board, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those present. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-39 , passed 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 32.68. - Meetings; attendance. 
(A)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least monthly in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law. 
(B)  Attendance. Three consecutive absences from meetings of the commission shall be considered a voluntary resignation. In addition, four absences in any twelve-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-178 and 2-179; Am. Ord. 1998-5, passed 2-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-31, passed 12-6-2005; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-39 , passed 10-2-2018; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-44 , § 5, passed 11-6-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-41 , passed 12-3-2019)  
Sec. 32.69. - Compensation. 
All members of the Tourism and Visitors Bureau Advisory Board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the Board, when authorized by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-39 , passed 10-2-2018)  
Sec. 32.70. - Term limits. 
A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-043, § 2, passed 11-6-2018)  
Secs. 32.71—32.79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-15 , § 1, passed December 6, 2016, repealed art. VI, §§ 32.80—32.83. Former art. VI pertained to the Western Heritage Board and derived from Ord. 2001-20, passed 10-2-2001; and Ord. 2005-32, passed 12-6-2005. 
 
Secs. 32.80—32.94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-17, passed December 13, 2016, repealed art. VII, §§ 32-95—32-98. Former art. VII pertained to the Water Conservation Committee and derived from Ord. 2002-10, passed 5-7-2002. 
 
Secs. 32.95—32.98. - Reserved.  
CHAPTER 34. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 34.01. - Organization. 
There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city, which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law. 
(A)  The City Administrator shall act as Emergency Management Coordinator for the city. 
(B)  The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director. 
(C)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the Director in the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the Emergency Management Plan. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-1; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.02. - Powers and duties of emergency management director. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the following: 
(A)  Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(B)  Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management Plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the City Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such a plan; 
(C)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Secretary; 
(D)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the City Secretary; 
(E)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(F)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(G)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(H)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the Emergency Management Plan; 
(I)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(J)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(K)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(L)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein; and 
(M)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A. Gov't Code, Ch. 418. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-2; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.03. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The Plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the Plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management Plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-3; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.04. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the Mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an Interjurisdictional Emergency Management Plan and in the appointment of a County Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-4; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.05. - Conflicts with existing ordinances; limitations. 
(A)  At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(B)  This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.06. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his/her successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-6; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.07. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council unless such person does so during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-7; Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991)  
Sec. 34.08. - National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
In compliance with the February 28, 2003 Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD), and in order to meet the pre-condition required for receipt of federal grants, contracts and activities related to the management and preparedness for certain disaster and hazard situations, the City of Stephenville hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the standard for incident management to provide a consistent approach to effective management of situations involving natural or man-made disasters and/or acts of terrorism. 
(Ord. 2007-11, passed 6-5-07)  
Sec. 34.09. - Offenses. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(C)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this code. 
(1975 Code, § 8 ½-8 (a)-(c); Am. Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-2-1991) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
CHAPTER 35. - MUNICIPAL RECORDS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 35.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Department head. The officer who by ordinance order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Municipal records. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 35.08. 
Records management. The application of management techniques for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record-keeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee. The Committee established in section 35.05. 
Records management officer. The person designated in section 35.04(A) of this chapter. 
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 35.06 of this chapter. 
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-81 and 2-82; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.02. - Records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 35.01 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his/her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he/she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(1975 Code, § 2-83; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.03. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code, §§ 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(1975 Code, § 2-84; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.04. - Designation of records management officer; duties. 
(A)  The City Secretary, and the successive holders of the office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his/her name with the Director and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(B)  In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the records management officer shall do the following: 
(1)  Administer the Records Management Program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record-keeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by onsite consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the Records Management Program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the Records Management Plan and their duties in the Records Management Program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city on the implementation of the Records Management Plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) above; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program or the Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code, §§ 201.001 et seq. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-85 and 2-88; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991) 
State Law reference— Records Management Officer, state law duties, see V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 203.023.  
Sec. 35.05. - Establishment of records management committee. 
A Records Management Committee consisting of the City Administrator, Director of Finance, Assistant City Attorney, the Director of Personnel and the Mayor is hereby established. The Committee shall do the following: 
(A)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the Records Management Program; 
(B)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(C)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(D)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(E)  Actively support and promote the Records Management Program throughout the city. 
(1975 Code, § 2-86; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.06. - Records management plan. 
(A)  The records management officer and the Records Management Committee shall develop a Records Management Plan for the city for submission to the City Council. The Plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of record-keeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The Plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his/her duties prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively. 
(B)  Once approved by the City Council the Records Management Plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city, and records shall be created, maintained, stored or microfilmed. 
(C)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or record-keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter and the Records Management Plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the Records Management Program of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 2-87; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.07. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads shall do the following: 
(A)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this chapter; 
(B)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his/her staff are responsible; and 
(C)  Maintain the records in his/her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program of the city and the requirements of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 2-89; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.08. - Designation of records liaison officers; duties. 
(A)  Each department head shall designate a member of his/her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the Records Management Program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the Records Management Program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his/her department. 
(B)  In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, records liaison officers shall do as follows: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the Records Management Program. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-90 and 2-91; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.09. - Records control schedules. 
(A)  (1)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the Records Management Plan may require. 
(2)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the record-keeping procedures and needs of the department and the Records Management Program of the city. 
(3)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and a majority vote of the Records Management Committee. 
(4)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the Director and Librarian. 
(B)  (1)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 35.06 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the Records Management Plan. 
(2)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit or the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(3)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the Records Management Committee. 
(1975 Code, §§ 2-92 and 2-93; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.10. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule, and the records management officer has submitted to, and received back from, the Director and Librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(1975 Code, § 2-94; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Sec. 35.11. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 35.06, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer, policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the Records Management Plan developed under section 35.06. 
(1975 Code, § 2-95; Am. Ord. 1991-3, passed 3-5-1991)  
Secs. 35.12—35.120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REPEAT OPEN RECORD REQUESTORS 
 
Sec. 35.121. - Time limits. 
(A)  In accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 552.275, the City Council establishes a limit of 15 hours as the amount of time that employees are required to devote without charge to produce public information for inspection or duplication, or providing copies of public information to or on behalf of any one requestor in any given monthly period commencing on the 1 st date of each month, without recovering the city's costs attributable to that personnel time. 
(B)  In accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 552.275, the City Council establishes a limit of 36 hours as the amount of time that employees are required to devote without charge to produce public information for inspection or duplication, or providing copies of public information to or on behalf of any one requestor in any given twelve-month period commencing on October 1, without recovering the city's costs attributable to that personnel time. 
(Ord. , § 1, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 35.122. - Written estimate of personnel time spent on requests. 
(A)  The City Secretary or the City Secretary's designee shall provide the requestor with a written statement of the amount of personnel time spent complying with each request and the cumulative amount of time spent complying with requests from that requestor during the applicable twelve month period. The time spent preparing the written statement of total time spent may not be included. 
(B)  When the time spent on responding to a particular requestor's requests equals or exceeds the time limit imposed by section 35.121, the City Secretary or the City Secretary's designee shall provide the requestor with a written estimate of the total cost, including materials, personnel time, and overhead expenses necessary to comply with the request. The estimate must be provided on or before the tenth day after the date on which the public information was requested. The amount of the cost shall be established by rules prescribed by the attorney general. 
(C)  If the City Secretary or the City Secretary's designee determines that additional time is required to prepare the written estimate of costs required by section 35.122(B) and provides the requestor with a written statement of that determination, the City Secretary or the City Secretary's designee must provide the written estimate of costs required by section 35.122(B) as soon as practicable, but on or before the tenth day after the date the City provides the written statement that additional time is required. 
(Ord. 2018-O-14 , § 1, 4-3-2018)  
Secs. 35.123—35.132. - Reserved.  
Sec. 35.133. - Requestor response to estimate of costs. 
(A)  After the City Secretary or the City Secretary's designee has provided the requestor with the written estimate of costs under section 35-122, the requestor must respond within ten days of receiving the estimate by submitting a written statement in which the requestor commits to pay the lesser of: 
(1)  The actual costs incurred in complying with the requestor's request, including the cost of materials and personnel time and overhead; or 
(2)  The amount stated in the written statement provided. 
(B)  If the requestor fails or refuses to submit the written statement of commitment to pay, the requestor shall be considered to have withdrawn the requestor's pending request for public information. 
(Ord. 2018-O-14 , § 1, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 35.134. - Requests in the name of a minor. 
Any time spent complying with a request in the name of a minor is to be included in the calculation of the cumulative amount of time spent complying with a request for public information by a parent, guardian, or other person who has control of the minor under a court order and with whom the minor resides, unless that parent, guardian or other person establishes that another person submitted that request in the name of the minor. 
(Ord. 2018-O-14 , § 1, 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 35.135. - Exemptions. 
(A)  This chapter does not apply if the requestor is an individual who, for a substantial portion of the individual's livelihood or for substantial financial gain, gathers, compiles, prepares, collects, photographs, records, writes, edits, reports, investigates, processes, or publishes news or information for and is seeking the information for: 
(1)  A radio or television broadcast station that holds a license issued by the Federal Communications Commission; or 
(2)  A newspaper that is qualified under V.T.C.A. Government Code § 2051.044 to publish legal notices or is a free newspaper of general circulation and that is published at least once a week and available and of interest to the general public in connection with the dissemination of news; or 
(3)  A newspaper of general circulation that is published on the Internet by a news medium engaged in the business of disseminating news or general information to the general public; or 
(4)  A magazine that is published at least once a week or on the Internet by a news medium engaged in the business of disseminating news or information to the general public. 
(B)  This article does not apply if the requestor is a representative of a publicly funded legal services organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(a), Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, by being listed as an exempt entity under Section 501(c)(3) of that code. 
(C)  This article does not apply if the requestor is an elected official of the United States, this state, or a political subdivision of this state. 
(Ord. 2018-O-14 , § 1, 4-3-2018)  
CHAPTER 36. - TAXATION AND FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Billiard tax, see § 111.11; Taxation, see Charter, Art. IX. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 36.01. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
The license and occupation tax ordinances of the city are specifically saved from repeal. 
(1975 Code, § 17-1)  
Sec. 36.02. - Occupation tax. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person pursuing any occupation taxed by the general laws of the state, an annual occupation tax in the amount of one-half of the amount levied by the state on such occupations. Except where advance payment is prohibited by law, the tax shall be paid annually in advance. 
(1975 Code, § 17-2)  
Sec. 36.03. - Delinquent taxes. 
The Tax Collector of the city shall make and deliver to the City Council on or before July 1 of each year a delinquent tax roll showing the names of all delinquent taxpayers on the tax rolls of the city, the property taxed and the amount of the tax, penalty and interest due by each taxpayer. When such delinquent taxes are paid, the Collector shall collect from each delinquent the sum of $1.00 as costs for each year's delinquent tax, which shall be paid into the city treasury along with the taxes, penalties and interest collected. The Tax Collector shall charge and collect the sum of $1.00 for each tax certificate prepared by him/her, which shall be paid over to the city treasury in the same manner as delinquent taxes. The interest on such delinquent taxes, and the penalty therefor, shall be the same as set forth in the state statutes relative thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 17-3) 
State Law reference— Taxation generally, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Title 122, Vol. 20; Title 122A, Vol. 20A.  
Sec. 36.04. - Telecommunication services sales and use tax exemption repealed. 
The exemption from the application from municipal sales and use tax as provided by V.T.C.A. Tax Code Art. 321.210(a) for telecommunications services sold within the city is hereby repealed, and such tax shall be imposed and collected on such services sold within the city. 
(1975 Code, § 17-4; Am. Ord. 1988-20, passed 9-6-1988)  
Sec. 36.05. - Taxation of goods-in-transit. 
Goods-in-transit, as defined by V.T.C.A. Tax Code § 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1 enacted by the 82nd Texas Legislature in its First Special Session, shall remain subject to taxation by the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
(Ord. 2007-23, passed 12-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-23, passed 10-4-2011)  
Secs. 36.06—32.14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 36.15. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space or bed space, but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel. Any building or buildings, trailer, railroad Pullman car not being utilized for the transportation of travelers, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, railroad Pullman cars parked on a siding or otherwise used for sleeping accommodations not involving the transportation of travelers, space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents," as that term is hereinafter defined and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. As defined herein "hotel" shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or college dormitories. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in the hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident. An occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms, sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Tax collector. The Tax Collector of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 17-16; Am. Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980)  
Sec. 36.16. - Tax levied; rate; exception. 
(A)  There are now in effect ordinances passed by the City Council which levy a hotel occupancy tax of four percent of the consideration paid upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax being four percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. There is hereby levied an additional tax of three percent upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such additional tax to be equal to three percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. This additional tax raises the hotel occupancy tax to seven percent, and the previous levy of the tax of four percent is in no way affected by this additional three percent. The levy of this additional three percent tax shall become effective on January 1, 1989. Until December 31, 1988, the hotel occupancy tax to be paid shall be four percent. Beginning January 1, 1989, the hotel occupancy tax shall be seven percent, and all provisions made in the prior hotel occupancy tax ordinances and those herein set out shall be on the basis of a tax at the rate of seven percent. 
(B)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(C)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed hereunder for the city. 
(1975 Code, § 17-17; Am. Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980; Am. Ord. 1988-23, passed 10-4-1988)  
Sec. 36.17. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 36.16 for the city. 
(1975 Code, § 17-18; Am. Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980)  
Sec. 36.18. - Quarterly reports; payment of tax. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 36.17 to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the Tax Collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the Tax Collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the Tax Collector of the city at the time of payment of said tax a copy of the quarterly report filed with the State Comptroller in connection with the State of Texas hotel occupancy tax. 
(Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980)  
Sec. 36.19. - Powers of tax collector. 
The Tax Collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this ordinance and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980)  
Sec. 36.20. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
If any person required by the provisions of this subchapter to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as required herein, and pay to the Tax Collector the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such report or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by fine not to exceed $200.00, and shall pay to the Tax Collector the tax due, together with a penalty of five percent of the tax due for each 30 days that the same is not timely filed. 
(Ord. passed 7-2-1974; Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1980)  
Secs. 36.21—36.30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN 
 
Sec. 36.31. - Adoption of plan. 
There is hereby established a Capital Improvements Plan that lists all Capital Improvement Projects that are approved for the current fiscal year and for the five years following the current fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-02 , passed 3-1-2016)  
Sec. 36.32. - Definition. 
Capital Improvement Project shall mean a new or expanded physical facility, as opposed to equipment or services that prudent management defines as routine maintenance or repair or operating budget items financed out of current revenue resources. The term shall include new construction of physical facilities intended for long-term usefulness and permanence; renovation, remodeling, major repair, or major maintenance of an existing facility; a major landscape improvement; land or one-time major equipment purchase; utility, street, or public park modification that affects numerous residences, businesses, or citizens; or other improvement that enhances the usefulness, productivity, or life expectancy of a new or existing city facility. Any question regarding the identity of a particular project as a Capital Improvements Project shall be decided by majority vote of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-02 , passed 3-1-2016)  
Sec. 36.33. - Implementation of the plan. 
The provisions for implementation of this plan shall be set out in the City of Stephenville Financial Policy Statements and Financial Management Policy, which provides for an annual review by the city council of said policy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-O-02 , passed 3-1-2016)  
CHAPTER 37. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 37.01. - Municipal court created and designated; jurisdiction. 
(A)  In accordance with the provisions of the City Charter and the applicable state law, there is hereby created a municipal court for the city. 
(B)  The municipal court shall have and exercise the jurisdiction which is conferred upon all municipal courts by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-19, passed 6-4-2019)  
Secs. 37.02—37.10. - Reserved  
Sec. 37.11. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(A)  Pursuant to the authority of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. Art. 102.0172, there is hereby created and established the Stephenville Municipal Court Technology Fund (hereafter referred to as "court technology fund"). 
(B)  All defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court for the city shall be required to pay a technology fee not to exceed $4.00 as a cost of said court. 
(C)  For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, a person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case; 
(4)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the technology fee as a cost of court and shall remit those funds to the for deposit in a fund to be designated as the municipal court technology fund; 
(5)  The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by and under the direction of the city council. The fund established by this section may be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court including: 
(a)  Computer systems; 
(b)  Computer networks; 
(c)  Computer hardware; 
(d)  Computer software; 
(e)  Imaging systems; 
(f)  Electronic kiosks; 
(g)  Electronic ticket writers; and 
(h)  Docket management systems. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-19, passed 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 37.12. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(A)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "fund") pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 102.017. 
(B)  The city municipal court (the "municipal court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(C)  A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if: 
(1)  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(D)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the city treasury. All fees so collected and paid over to the city treasury shall be segregated in the fund. 
(E)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the city municipal court. "Security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items described in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 102.017(d). 
(F)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-19, passed 6-4-2019)  
Title 5 - PUBLIC WORKS  
CHAPTER 50. - SEWER AND WATER SERVICE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 50.01. - Definitions. 
(A)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Act. The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
Approval authority. The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate Regional Administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative" shall mean the following: 
(a)  The President, Secretary, Treasurer or a Vice-President of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(b)  The Manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the Manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, an "authorized representative" shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an "authorized representative" shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or his/her designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1)—(3) above may designate another authorized representative" if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts per million by weight (milligrams per liter), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20°C. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial dischargers. (Located in 40 CFR Ch. 1N.) 
COD. The value of the test for Chemical Oxygen Demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater." 
Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Control authority. The department designated by the city to supervise the operation of its publicly-owned treatment works and that is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or any duly authorized representative of that designated department. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or water used as a coolant in cooling towers where the only pollutant is thermal. 
Discharge. The introduction or addition of any waste, wastewater or other substance into the POTW. 
Discharger. Any person who discharges or introduces anything other than normal domestic sewage into the POTW. The term includes owners and/or occupants of the premises connected to and discharging waste or wastewater into the POTW. 
Domestic sewage. Waterborne wastes normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions free from storm and surface waters and industrial wastes. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator of the EPA or other duly authorized official of EPA. 
Fats, oils and greases (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources containing multiple-carbon-chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Generator. Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
Grease. Fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, petroleum products, oil and any other material which is extractable by hexane or freon solvent from an acidified sample and which is not volatilized during evaporation of the solvent. 
Grease trap or interceptor. A device by which the grease content of sewage may be cooled and congealed so that it may be skimmed from the surface. A "grease trap or interceptor" is a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also referred to herein as "grease traps/interceptors." 
Grease trap self-cleaning operators. Operators authorized by the POTW to self-clean grease traps/interceptors at the operator's place of business. 
Grease trap waste. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from a de-watering process. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of industrial waste into a POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Industrial discharger. Any person who discharges or introduces an industrial waste into a POTW. 
Industrial waste. Waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or food-processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these, with water or domestic sewage. (The term is generally synonymous with nondomestic waste.) 
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal. 
(2)  Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title 11, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Liquid waste hauler. Any person who transports wastewater beyond the site of origin within the city. 
Maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
mg/L. Milligrams per liter. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342) which regulates discharges to waters of the state. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided the following: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(b)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; and 
(c)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has done any of the following: 
(a)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program the following: 
1.  Any replacement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(b)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Normal domestic sewage. Domestic sewage in which the average concentration of suspended solids and five-day BOD are at 225 parts per million (milligrams per liter) each, or lower. 
Owner or occupant. Any person using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to and discharging sewage into the POTW, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, water rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the water distribution system of the city, or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected. 
Parts per million. A weight-to-weight ratio also expressed as milligrams per liter; the parts per million value, multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million of water. 
Pass through. The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES or TNRCC permit or any discharge permit issued by the state. 
Permit or discharge permit. A wastewater discharge permit issued to a significant industrial discharger to allow a discharge into the POTW. 
pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water, defined as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in 40 CFR 136. 
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes and the characteristics of the wastewater (including pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxidation Demand (COD) toxicity and odor). 
POTW or publicly-owned treatment works. A treatment works owned by a state or municipality, as defined by Section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality, as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, that has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a discharger by this chapter, by state statute or regulation or by a categorical pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Properly shredded garbage. Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and interest and which is controlled by public authority. 
Separator or oil separator. A receptacle designed to remove oils and grease from wastewater by separation, usually by simple flotation or by chemical addition where the oils or greases are soluble or emulsified. 
Sewage. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, institutions and/or industrial facilities, together with such ground, surface and storm water as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged or permitted to enter the POTW. 
Sewage service charge. The charge made on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage. 
Sewer or sanitary sewer. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Significant industrial discharger. All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Ch. 1N; and any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream, which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
Slugload. Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
State. The State of Texas, including the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission (TNRCC) or any duly-authorized agency thereof having jurisdiction over waters of the state, sewage collection or treatment or municipal sewage sludge disposal. 
Storm sewer or storm drain. A pipe or conduit for conveying storm and surface waters and drainage and from which domestic sewage and industrial waste is excluded. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Surcharge. The charge, in addition to the sewage service charge, which is made on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage. 
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be expressed in parts per million by weight (milligrams per liter) and made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The state agency of that title, and its predecessor and successor agencies or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the director or other duly authorized official of that agency. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, Section 307(a), or other legislation. 
Transporter. A person registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.142. 
Upset. Any exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily fails to comply with the standards established in this chapter or with the discharger's permit, due to factors beyond its reasonable control of the discharger, excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation thereof. 
User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into city's wastewater system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and/or institutions, together with such ground, surface and storm water as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged, treated, stored and/or disposed of. 
Water of the state. The water of the ordinary flow, underflow and tides of every flowing river, natural stream and lake, and of every bay or arm of the Gulf of Mexico, and the storm water, flood water and rainwater of every river, natural stream, canyon, ravine, depression and watershed in the state. 
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Work day. When used in conjunction with the determination of a significant industrial discharger, the term means any day, or portion thereof, when the discharger is providing any service or producing its product or any part of its product line, or otherwise generating nondomestic wastewaters that may be discharged to the POTW. All other use of this term shall mean any day a nondomestic wastewater discharge occurs. 
(B)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings. 
BOD—Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand. 
EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
gpd—Gallons Per Day. 
L—Liter. 
mg—Milligrams. 
mg/L—Milligrams per Liter. 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O&M—Operation and Maintenance. 
POTW—Publicly-Owned Treatment Works. 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC—Standard Industrial Classifications. 
SWDA—Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.). 
TSS—Total Suspended Solids. 
USC—United States Code. 
(1975 Code, § 19-11; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998; Am. Ord. 2013-03, passed 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 50.2. - Policy, purposes and applicable regulations. 
(A)  This chapter provides for prohibitions on discharges of certain substances into the POTW of the city from all sources, domestic, commercial or industrial. A further purpose of this chapter is to set forth uniform requirements for industrial dischargers into the POTW and to enable the Control Authority to protect the public health in conformity with all applicable state and federal laws relating thereto. 
(B)  The objectives of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the normal operation of the POTW or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim the wastewater and to dispose of, recycle or reclaim the sludge generated by the POTW; 
(4)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
(C)  The regulation of discharges into the POTW under this chapter shall be accomplished through the issuance of permits, as specified herein, and by monitoring and inspection of facilities, according to this chapter. 
(D)  Parts of this chapter are enacted pursuant to regulations established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). All categorical pretreatment standards, lists of toxic pollutants, industrial categories and other standards and categories which have been promulgated by the EPA are incorporated as a part of this chapter, as are EPA regulations regarding sewage pretreatment established pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The city shall maintain current standards and regulations which shall be available for inspection and copying. 
(E)  The city shall have the authority to promulgate such administrative regulations as are from time to time necessary for the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. Public notice of any such proposed regulations shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 14 days prior to promulgation. After such notice, the city shall give interested persons an opportunity to submit written data, views or arguments, with or without opportunity for oral presentation. After consideration of the relevant matter presented, in conjunction with any regulation adopted, the city shall prepare a concise general statement of the basis and purpose of the regulation. 
(F)  The city has developed and implemented procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements of a pretreatment program, including random sampling and analysis of the effluent from industrial users and conducting surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. Each significant industrial user will be inspected and samples collected and analyzed at least once a year. The city will also evaluate, at least once every year during the annual inspection, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. 
(1975 Code, § 19-12; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.3. - Confidential information. 
(A)  All information and data submitted by a discharger to the Control Authority may be submitted to the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the regulations promulgated by the EPA governing the POTW. Such information shall be considered subject to public disclosure; provided, however, that the discharger may request that information not be subject to public disclosure, in accordance with 40 CFR 2, as follows: 
(1)  A discharger may assert a business confidentiality claim covering part of all of the information, in a manner described below, and that information covered by such a claim will be disclosed only by means of the procedure set forth below; and 
(2)  If no claim of business confidentiality is asserted, all information will be subject to public disclosure without further notice to the discharger. 
(B)  A discharger which is submitting information to the Control Authority may assert a business confidentiality claim covering the information by placing on (or attaching to) the information, at the time it is submitted to the Control Authority, a cover sheet, stamped or typed legend or other suitable form of notice employing language such as "trade secret," "proprietary" or "company confidential." Allegedly confidential portions of otherwise nonconfidential documents should be clearly identified by the discharger and may be submitted separately to facilitate identification and handling by the Control Authority. If the discharger desires confidential treatment only until a certain date or until the occurrence of a certain event, the notice should so state. 
(C)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the disclosure of information and data regarding the nature and content of a discharger's effluent, the frequency of discharge or a standard or limitation to be met by discharger, and this information shall be available to the public with no restrictions. 
(1975 Code, § 19-22; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.4. - Removal credits. 
Where applicable, the Control Authority may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this chapter to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(1975 Code, § 19-35(A); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.5. - Net/gross calculations. 
A discharger whose only source of intake water is the city water service may apply to the Control Authority to adjust categorical pretreatment standards and/or pretreatment requirements in this chapter to reflect the presence of pollutants in the discharger's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(1975 Code, § 19-35(B); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.6. - Preservation of records. 
(A)  All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by and on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. 
(B)  All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Control Authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(1975 Code, § 19-35(C); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.7. - Right of revision. 
The Control Authority reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more or less stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 50.02. 
(1975 Code, § 19-35(E); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Secs. 50.08—50.19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WASTEWATER DISPOSAL; PRETREATMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 50.20. - Admission of industrial wastes into public sewers. 
(A)  Approval required. Review and acceptance of the Control Authority, pursuant to section 50.68, shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the POTW of any wastewaters having the following: 
(1)  A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 225 parts per million; or 
(2)  Suspended solid containing greater than 225 parts per million. 
(B)  Pretreatment. The Control Authority may require a discharger to install, at the discharger's expense, preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be necessary to prevent the following: pass through; interference; a violation of the discharger's categorical pretreatment standards; any general or specific discharge prohibition contained in this chapter; any adverse effect on the health and safety of personnel maintaining and operating the POTW; and any unreasonable adverse effect on the POTW. 
(C)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in amounts that might obstruct or otherwise interfere with the operation of the POTW, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwellings. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Control Authority and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Owners shall keep complete records of all cleaning and maintenance of interceptors. A record copy of the invoice for any cleaning or maintenance is to be forwarded to the Control Authority by the disposal facility. If necessary, the Control Authority may establish and require specific interceptor cleaning frequencies for individual owners to be in compliance. 
(1975 Code, § 19-13; Am. Ord. passed 4-3-79; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.21. - Prohibited discharges. 
(A)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, any waste, wastewater or other substance which will cause interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. 
(B)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances, waste or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering city personnel; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, and the like) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals; 
(5)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with section 50.51; 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life; 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the Control Authority in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Control Authority; 
(13)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Control Authority in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin is limited to 100 mg/L; 
(18)  Any cyanide greater than 2.06 parts per million, as CN (Total); 
(19)  Any chromium greater than 20.9 parts per million as Cr (Total); 
(20)  Any arsenic greater than 0.041 parts per million; 
(21)  Any copper greater than 2.00 parts per million; 
(22)  Any nickel greater than 11.89 parts per million; 
(23)  Any cadmium greater than 1.47 parts per million; 
(24)  Any zinc greater than 3.38 parts per million; 
(25)  Any lead greater than 4.57 parts per million; 
(26)  Any mercury greater than 0.0002 part per million; 
(27)  Any selenium greater than 0.58 part per million; or 
(28)  Any silver greater than 1.02 parts per million. 
(C)  Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. 
(D)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, down spouts, yard drains, yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other such unpolluted drainage water shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Control Authority. 
(E)  No wastewater may be discharged into any storm sewer within the city. 
(F)  No wastewater may be discharged into any waters of the state within the city, unless expressly authorized by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission and the EPA. 
(G)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into the POTW any wastewater or other wastes containing free or emulsified oil and grease, or combinations thereof, exceeding on analysis an average of 100 parts per million (833 pounds per million gallons) of either or both, if in the opinion of the Control Authority it appears probable that such wastes will do the following: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment; 
(3)  Not be amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving water without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; or 
(4)  Have deleterious effect on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities. 
(H)  If the Control Authority determines that any person is discharging, or causing to be discharged, to the POTW any wastewater or other substance in violation of the prohibitions in this section, the Control Authority may take enforcement action pursuant to sections 50.80 through 50.84. 
(1975 Code, § 19-14; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.22. - Special rules for industrial discharges. 
(A)  Compliance with standards. 
(1)  Upon the promulgation of the categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. 
(2)  State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this or any other applicable chapter. 
(3)  No discharger shall increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the pretreatment requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  The Control Authority may impose mass limitations on dischargers where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate. 
(B)  Slugloads or accidental discharges. 
(1)  Definition. For purposes of this division (B), a slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. The results of such activities shall be available to the Approval Authority upon request. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate the prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; and 
(d)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(2)  Prevention of accidental discharges. Each discharger shall provide prudent protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. When applicable, detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Control Authority for review, and shall be approved by the Control Authority before construction of the facility. Each existing discharger as designated by the Control Authority shall complete its plan and submit same to the Control Authority within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter. No designated discharger proposing to connect or contribute any wastewater to the POTW after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge protection procedures have been approved by the Control Authority. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the Control Authority shall not relieve the discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Notice of accidental discharges or "slugloads." 
(a)  Dischargers shall notify the Control Authority orally as soon as practicable but not later than within 24 hours following the occurrence of a "slugload" or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. 
(b)  A written report shall also be provided within five days of the occurrence. The written report shall contain a description of the noncompliance and its cause; the period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, and if the noncompliance has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the noncompliance. The Control Authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(c)  Notification shall not relieve the discharger of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the discharger of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. 
(4)  Liability due to accidental discharges or "slugloads". Any discharger who discharges "slugloads" or prohibited materials shall be liable, pursuant to Sec. 50.89, for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW caused thereby, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the Control Authority on account thereof under state and federal law. 
(5)  Instructions to employees. Each employer shall instruct all applicable employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures including the proper telephone number and/or extension number of the Control Authority to be notified. 
(C)  Bypass. 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(b)  Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which cause them to become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  (a)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the date of the bypass if possible. 
(b)  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  (a)  Bypass is prohibited and the POTW may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless the following occurred: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and/or 
3.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of this division (C). 
(b)  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (4)(a) of this division (C). 
(1975 Code, § 19-15; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.23. - Monitoring facilities. 
(A)  Unless expressly exempted by the Control Authority, all significant industrial dischargers shall provide, at their own expense, monitoring facilities prior to approval of a permit application, to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement at each discharge point. Each monitoring facility shall be located on the discharger's premises; except, in the case where such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the discharger, the Control Authority may approve the placement of monitoring facilities in the public street or sidewalk area. All monitoring equipment and facilities shall be maintained in safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. 
(B)  Failure to provide proper monitoring facilities shall be grounds for denial of a permit application. 
(1975 Code, § 19-18; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.24. - Inspections and sampling. 
(A)  The Control Authority may inspect the facilities of any discharger to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The discharger shall allow the Control Authority or its representatives to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all reasonable times, for the purposes of inspection, sampling or examination of records. Any employee, agent or other representative of the Control Authority who enters private property shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection, and if the property has management in residence, shall notify management or the person then in charge of his/her presence and shall exhibit proper credentials. The Control Authority shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are reasonably necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, metering and/or measuring operations. 
(B)  Any discharges of wastewater or other waste into the POTW shall be subject to inspection and/or sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the Control Authority. Sample shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the wastewater or waste under operating conditions. Upon specific request, the Control Authority shall provide the discharger with a split set of all discharge samples taken. The laboratory methods used in the examination of the waste shall be those set forth in 40 CFR 136. Regular inspections and/or sampling shall be conducted at such times and on such schedules as may be established by the Control Authority. Should a discharger desire that a scheduled inspection and/or sampling be conducted at some time other than that scheduled by the Control Authority, such inspection and/or sampling may be conducted by the Control Authority at the expense of the discharger. 
(C)  Unscheduled inspections may be conducted whenever deemed by the Control Authority to be reasonably necessary to ensure that the terms of this chapter are complied with. 
(D)  The failure or refusal of a discharger to allow the access required by this section shall be grounds for the disconnection of water and/or sewer service to the discharger's facility, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter applicable to enforcement and/or termination of service. 
(1975 Code, § 19-19; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.25. - Flow measurement. 
(A)  The water consumption during the previous month, as determined from the meter records of the city water department, shall be the basis for computing the sewage flow from any discharger, unless actual sewage flow is measured by a recording meter of a type approved by the Control Authority. The discharger shall install and maintain the recording meter in proper condition to accurately measure the flow. Upon failure to do so, the meter consumption shall be the basis for computing the sewage flow. 
(B)  When water is contained in a product or is evaporated or is discharged as unpolluted wastewater in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage (in compliance with this chapter and all state and federal law), an application may be made for a reduction in the computed volume of waste discharged to the POTW, provided supporting data satisfactory to the Control Authority is furnished. Such data shall include a flow diagram and other indication of the destination of water supply and/or wastewater, supported by data from meters installed on such process piping at the expense of the discharger. 
(C)  Any discharger who procures any part or all of his/her water supply from a source or sources other than the city, any of which is discharged into the POTW, shall install and maintain at his/her expense an effluent meter and/or other flow measuring device of a type approved by the Control Authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer flow. Such meters or measuring devices shall be read monthly. 
(1975 Code, § 19-20; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.26. - Reporting requirements. 
(A)  Baseline report. Within 90 days following the effective date for any applicable categorical pretreatment standard or prior to commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new significant industrial discharger, any significant industrial discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the Control Authority a report, indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report from existing significant industrial dischargers shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and certified by a qualified professional. 
(B)  Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by a significant industrial discharger with an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new significant industrial discharger, any significant industrial discharger subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the Control Authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(C)  Periodic compliance reports. Any significant industrial discharger is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or requested by the Control Authority shall submit to the Control Authority, during the months of June and December of each year, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited and regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow specified in the discharger's permit. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the Control Authority may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The Control Authority, taking into consideration such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles or other extenuating factors, may authorize the submission or the reports on months other than those specified above. 
(D)  Reports shall contain results of analysis and sampling. 
(1)  Reports of significant industrial dischargers shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow rate, the nature and concentration of the constituents or the production and mass of the constituents, where required by the Control Authority. The frequency of monitoring by the discharger shall be as prescribed in the applicable categorical pretreatment standard or in this chapter, or more frequently as specified by the Control Authority. Sampling shall be done in accordance with 40 CFR 136. 
(2)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Control Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if the following occur. 
(a)  The Control Authority performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month. 
(b)  The Control Authority performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(E)  Application of reporting requirements. The reporting requirements specified in this section as applicable to significant industrial dischargers who are subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall also apply to any other significant industrial discharger upon whom the Control Authority imposes such reporting requirements. 
(1975 Code, § 19-21; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.27. - Grease regulations. 
(A)  Applicability and prohibitions. 
(1)  This section is patterned from the Model Standards for a Grease Ordinance - House Bill 1979-78th Legislative Session. 
(2)  This section shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in section 50.01, whose waste discharge contains or may contain grease, oil, sand or other harmful pollutants originating from processes, including but not limited to, food preparation and serving, vehicle and equipment washing, machine shops and garages, carpet cleaning and water extraction, steam cleaning and chemical cleaning facilities, or any facility with a liquid waste holding tank. 
(3)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(4)  Facilities generating fats, oils or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation or food service shall install, use and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required for compliance with this section. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(5)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(B)  Definitions. This section shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in section 50.01. 
(C)  Grease traps, interceptors, separators and holding tanks. 
(1)  Users required to maintain pretreatment devices. 
(a)  Grease traps, interceptors, separators or holding tanks shall be provided for the proper handling of wastes containing grease, oil, sand and/or other harmful pollutants that may interfere with the operation and maintenance of the POTW, and shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  All restaurants, institutions, cafeterias or other establishments preparing or serving food shall be required to install and maintain a grease trap for the efficient removal of oil and grease from the waste stream. 
1.  The design and installation of such devices shall be subject to review and approval by the control authority. 
2.  Designs shall include sample ports. 
a.  The control authority may require any nondomestic user to install a suitable sampling port in the private sewer, to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the wastes and flows. 
b.  Sampling ports shall be readily accessible to the control authority at all times. 
(c)  All existing vehicle and equipment wash areas shall be equipped with interceptors for the removal of sand and other solids. Where an existing vehicle and equipment wash area is shown to discharge excessive oil and grease, the Superintendent may require installation of a separator. New vehicle and equipment wash facilities or any existing facility that has closed and proposes to reopen shall be required to provide interceptors and separators for the removal of oils, grease, sand and/or other pollutants before discharging to the sewerage system. The design and installation of such devices shall be subject to review and approval by the control authority. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the user/operator to furnish, operate and maintain such pretreatment devices as necessary to produce an effluent in compliance with this section or other applicable ordinances. 
(e)  Holding tanks shall be provided by the user/operator for automotive or other such waste oils and other waste prohibited from being discharged into the sanitary sewer. Such holding tanks shall be constructed to prevent leakage and splashing during operation and cleaning. Such tanks shall be maintained to preclude odor and other nuisances, and shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer or in any other way allowed to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Existing facilities. 
(a)  Existing facilities required by this section or other applicable ordinance to maintain a grease trap, interceptor or separator not equipped with an adequately sized treatment unit shall, within 18 months of May 15, 2013, the effective date of this section, install an adequately sized grease trap, interceptor or separator in accordance with the specifications of this section. 
(b)  Existing facilities required by this section or other applicable ordinance to maintain a grease trap, interceptor or separator not equipped with the required pretreatment device for the type of business shall, within 12 months of May 15, 2013, the effective date of this section, install an adequately sized grease trap, interceptor or separator in accordance with the specifications of this section. 
(c)  In any circumstance where, in the opinion of the control authority, the existing grease trap, separator or interceptor, or the absence of a grease trap, separator or interceptor, poses a serious threat or an ongoing problem to the sanitary sewer, is a public nuisance, or poses a threat to public health or to the environment, the control authority may require the grease trap interceptor or separator be installed or replaced on a more stringent compliance schedule. 
(d)  If a food establishment or any other facility requiring a grease trap, interceptor or separator shall cease operation and shall be required to come into compliance, then such establishment or facility shall be required to comply with this article before reopening. 
(D)  Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Installation. 
(a)  New facilities. Newly proposed or constructed food processing or food service facilities, or existing facilities that will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to occupancy. 
(b)  Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with this section, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW. 
(c)  Waste disposal. All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at an appropriate facility in accordance with federal, state or local regulations. 
(2)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. 
(b)  Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck, in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.143. 
(3)  Self-cleaning. 
(a)  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap or grease traps located inside a building, provided: 
(1)  The grease trap is no more than 50 gallons in liquid/operating capacity; 
(2)  Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g., absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash); 
(3)  The local solid waste authority allows such practices; 
(4)  Grease trap waste is placed in a leakproof, sealable container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and 
(5)  Detailed records on these activities are maintained. 
(b)  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed "Request for Grease Trap Seff-Cleaning Authorization" request to the POTW for approval. The written request shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Business name and street address; 
(2)  Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title and phone number; 
(3)  Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and 
(4)  Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
(c)  To ensure compliance with this section, self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements, procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced; 
(2)  Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor; 
(3)  Waste disposal method used; 
(4)  Gallons of grease removed and disposed of; 
(5)  Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and 
(6)  Signature of the operator after each cleaning, certifying that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all applicable parts are in operable condition. 
(d)  Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action, including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program. 
(4)  Cleaning schedules. 
(a)  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in the discharge. 
(b)  Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
1.  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or 
2.  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
3.  There is a history of non-compliance. 
(c)  Any person or business who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request, in writing, for an exception to the 90-day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
1.  The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG or other parameters as determined by the POTW; or 
2.  Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases. 
(d)  In any event, a grease trap and/or grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned and inspected at least once every 180 days. 
(5)  Manifest requirements. 
(a)  Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record-keeping purposes. 
(b)  Persons who generate, collect and/or transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
1.  Name, address, telephone and commission registration number of transporter; 
2.  Name, signature, address and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
3.  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
4.  Name(s) and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting and depositing the waste; 
5.  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
6.  Identification (permit or site registration number, location and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
7.  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received; 
8.  The volume of the grease waste received; and 
9.  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
(c)  Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
1.  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and shall be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
2.  The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
3.  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
4.  One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
5.  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 calendar days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
6.  One part of the manifest shall go to the local authority. 
(d)  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and shall be readily available for review by the POTW. 
(6)  Alternative treatment. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, causes, permits or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents and emulsifiers are materials that allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene and other solvents. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of division (D)(6)(a) above that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
(c)  Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person requesting use of bioremediation media has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing, appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used, has verified that: 
1.  The media is a pure live bacterial product that is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids and/or water temperatures of 160°F (71°C). 
2.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
3.  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer. 
4.  The BOD, COD and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD and TSS that would be discharged if the product were not being used, and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11. 
(d)  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in division (D)(6)(c) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid in the opinion of the POTW. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH and other pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests that have been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and which are defined in 40 CFR 136 or 30 Texas Administrative Code § 319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
(E)  Schedule of penalties. 
(1)  If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line, the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service. 
(Ord. 2013-03, passed 4-2-2013)  
Secs. 50.28—50.39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 50.40. - Permit required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial discharger to discharge to the POTW any wastewater without a permit issued by the Control Authority in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  All significant industrial dischargers proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant industrial dischargers connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a discharge permit within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(A) and (B); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.41. - Application. 
All significant industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the Control Authority an application in the form prescribed by the Control Authority. Existing significant industrial dischargers shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, and proposed new significant industrial dischargers shall apply at least 60 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. No significant industrial discharger shall be permitted to discharge if it fails to submit a completed discharge permit application within the specified time. In support of the application, the discharger shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(A)  Name, address and location, (if different from the address); 
(B)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(C)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in sections 50.20 and 50.21 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; 
(D)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(E)  Daily maximum, daily average and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
(F)  Site plans, floor plans, plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(G)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW; 
(H)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment requirements, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to meet applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(I)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment requirements; the shortest time schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment requirement. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements (for example, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the like); 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months; and 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the Control Authority including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months and 14 days elapse between such progress reports to the Control Authority; 
(J)  Any other information as may be deemed by the Control Authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit application; and 
(K)  The person signing the application shall make the following certification: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(C); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.42. - Action on permit application. 
The Control Authority will evaluate the completed application and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information within 60 days. After evaluation of the completed application and acceptance of the data furnished, the Control Authority shall issue or deny a discharge permit. If the permit is issued, it shall be subject to terms and conditions provided herein. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days of the reasons for such denial. If denial is based on the Control Authority's determination that the applicant cannot meet the pretreatment requirements specified in this chapter, the Control Authority may specify that additional pretreatment operations will be required of the applicant in compliance with section 50.41(I). 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(D); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.43. - Conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, industrial waste surcharges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(A)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(B)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(C)  Development and implementation of accidental discharge prevention and slug control plans pursuant to section 50.22(B)(1); 
(D)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
(E)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(F)  Location of approved discharge points; 
(G)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, laboratory analysis method and reporting schedule; 
(H)  Compliance schedules; 
(I)  Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports differing from those prescribed by this chapter; 
(J)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Control Authority and affording the Control Authority access thereto; 
(K)  Requirements for notification of the Control Authority of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW; 
(L)  Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental or slug discharges as per section 50.22(B)(3); 
(M)  The duration of the permit, which shall not extend beyond the expiration date of the city's NPDES permit; and 
(N)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Control Authority to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(E); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.44. - Modifications. 
(A)  The Control Authority may modify the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit; 
(3)  A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge in order to implement the prohibitions in section 50.21 or in order to avoid any other violation of this chapter; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the Control Authority's collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from federal categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; 
(9)  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator; or 
(10)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws or rules and regulations. 
(B)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
(C)  Any request by the permittee for a modification of its permit shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by all relevant data, documentation, explanations and other pertinent information. 
(D)  The Control Authority shall provide personal notice to the permittee, and published notice if public interest is affected, of any proposed permit modification at least 14 days prior to decision on the proposed modification. 
(E)  The Control Authority shall provide the permittee and any requesting interested persons with notice of the final modification decision. 
(F)  Appeal of permit modification decisions may be taken pursuant to the procedures specified for permit appeals in section 50.45(B). 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(F); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.45. - Issuance and appeal procedures. 
(A)  Public notification. The Control Authority shall provide personal notice to the permittee and published notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of intent to issue a discharge permit at least 30 days prior to issuance. The notice shall indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an address where written comments may be submitted. 
(B)  Permit appeals. The Control Authority shall provide all requesting interested persons with notice of final permit decisions. Upon notice by the Control Authority, any person, including the industrial user, may petition for reconsideration of the terms of the permit within 30 days of the notice. 
(1)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate any permit provision objected to, the reason for the objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. 
(2)  The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the Control Authority unless the Control Authority expressly so indicates. 
(3)  The Control Authority shall respond in writing to any petition for reconsideration within 30 days. 
(4)  In its response, the Control Authority shall indicate is decision whether to affirm, vacate or modify the terms of the permit issued. 
(5)  The Control Authority's action upon any petition for reconsideration shall be considered final for purposes of any judicial review. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(G); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.46. - Transfer of permit. 
Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the Control Authority. 
(A)  The permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the Control Authority. 
(B)  The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which does the following: 
(1)  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(H); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.47. - Termination of permit. 
Pretreatment permits may be terminated pursuant to sections 50.80 through 50.84 for the following reasons: 
(A)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(B)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(C)  Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(D)  Failure to meet pretreatment requirements; 
(E)  Failure to pay penalties imposed pursuant to section 50.999; 
(F)  Failure to pay sewer charges; or 
(G)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(I); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.48. - Reissuance of permit. 
The discharger shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the discharger's existing permit. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(J); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.49. - Continuation of expired permits. 
An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if the following occur: 
(A)  The discharger has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the discharger's existing permit; or 
(B)  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the discharger. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(K); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.50. - Petition for relief. 
(A)  Any discharger under a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may petition the Control Authority to find the following: 
(1)  The discharger no longer meets any of the criteria to be a significant industrial discharger as defined in section 50.01; 
(2)  The discharger has not met any of those criteria for the immediately preceding three years; and 
(3)  Therefore, the permitting requirements of this subchapter should no longer apply to the discharger. 
(B)  The petitioning discharger shall produce all information relevant to the requested findings. 
(C)  The Control Authority shall afford reasonable opportunity for a hearing on any relevant factual issues upon request of the petitioning discharger. 
(D)  If the Control Authority finds that the discharger does not meet any of the criteria to be a significant industrial discharger as defined in section 50.01 and that the discharger has not met any of those criteria for the immediately preceding three years, the Control Authority shall cancel any existing permit issued to the discharger, and the discharger shall be relieved of any further obligation to comply therewith. 
(E)  No such permit cancellation shall affect any later determination that a discharger subsequently meets the criteria for a significant industrial discharger. 
(1975 Code, § 19-16(L); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.51. - Liquid waste hauler permit. 
(A)  No person shall drain, flush or clean out any tanks or basins containing chemical liquid wastes, septic tank wastes, oil and grease trap wastes or any other type of domestic or nondomestic liquid wastes within the city unless the person is issued a permit by the Control Authority, authorizing such acts or services. The permit shall also be required of all persons disposing of such waste within the city, regardless of point of origin. 
(B)  No such liquid waste hauler shall discharge of wastewater or any other waste into the POTW in violation of the standards, limitations and other requirements specified in this chapter. 
(C)  Any disposal site within the city, and any method of disposal, must be approved by the Control Authority. Copies of trip tickets shall be maintained and made available for inspection at any reasonable time. 
(D)  Any liquid waste hauler who is a significant industrial discharger shall also obtain a discharge permit pursuant to sections 50.40 through 50.50. 
(1975 Code, § 19-17; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Secs. 50.52—50.64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING; CHARGES 
 
Sec. 50.65. - Billing. 
Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this chapter shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges will be paid at the same time that the water, sewer and sanitation charges of the persons become due. The Control Authority shall specify in each bill the determination of the amount due for all surcharges. Payment for water, sewer and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of sewer service charges and surcharges. 
(1975 Code, § 19-33; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.66. - Failure to pay bills. 
If a discharger's payment of its monthly bills for water and sewer services, including any industrial waste surcharges, is more than 60 days overdue, the Control Authority may disconnect all connections to the water and sanitary sewer mains to the city. The same penalties and charges now or hereafter provided for by the ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water service when due shall be applicable in a like manner in case of failure to pay the established surcharge for industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer mains as established in section 50.85. 
(1975 Code, § 19-34; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.67. - Monitoring and pretreatment charges. 
The Control Authority may make such charges, known as monitoring and pretreatment charges, as are reasonable for services rendered in administering the programs outlined in this chapter. Such charges shall be equitable as between users of the POTW system. The Control Authority shall provide, upon request, documentation and justification for all calculations in determining the charges. The charges may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Permitting industrial facilities; 
(B)  Inspection; 
(C)  Sample analysis; 
(D)  Monitoring; and 
(E)  Enforcement. 
(1975 Code, § 19-35(D); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.68. - Industrial waste surcharge. 
Persons discharging wastes or wastewaters which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited in section 50.21, other than excessive BOD or suspended solids, but having an average concentration during a 24-hour period of suspended solids or BOD content in excess of normal domestic sewage, as defined in section 50.01 shall be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the requirements of normal domestic sewage; however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if all the following requirements are met: 
(A)  The wastes will not cause damage to the collection system; and 
(B)  The wastes shall not cause interference to the treatment process. 
(C)  The donor of wastes enters into a contractual agreement with the city providing for a surcharge over and above published water and sewer rates. The basis for surcharge on industrial waste shall be established by separate ordinance for waste load measurements exceeding normal domestic sewage limits set forth in the definition in section 50.01, such rate to continue until changed by regulation or an amendment of this chapter. The above described surcharge shall be calculated by the following: 
BOD Surcharge, $/day = (Rate/lb)(million gallons per day)(BOD mg/L minus 225 mg/L)(8.34 lb/gal). 
TSS Surcharge, $/day = (Rate/lb)(million gallons per day)(TSS mg/L minus 225 mg/L)(8.34 lb/gal). 
(D)  Monitoring for surcharge determination(s) may be conducted by the city on a random basis and shall consist of time or flow-weighted 24 composite samples. Monitoring frequency and application of monitoring results shall be as determined by the city or, where applicable, as specified in industrial user permits. 
(1975 Code, § 19-24; Am. Ord. 1990-18, passed 12-4-90; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Secs. 50.69—50.79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 50.80. - Revocation of permit. 
In accordance with the procedures in sections 50.80 through 50.84 of this subchapter, the Control Authority may revoke the permit of any discharger which does the following: 
(A)  Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(B)  Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; 
(C)  Refuses to allow reasonable and timely access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the Control Authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(D)  Fails to fulfill the conditions of its permit; 
(E)  Fails to meet pretreatment requirements; 
(F)  Fails to pay penalties imposed pursuant to section 50.999 of this chapter; 
(G)  Fails to pay bills for sewer services; or 
(H)  Fails to meet compliance schedules. 
(1975 Code, § 19-25(A); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.81. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the Control Authority finds that any discharger has violated or is violating this chapter or its discharge permit, the Control Authority may serve or cause to be served upon the discharger a written notice, either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, the discharger shall respond in person or in writing to the Control Authority, stating its position with respect to the notice of violation. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to discuss the occurrence of the violation or violations alleged and, where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 19-25(B); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.82. - Show cause hearing. 
(A)  Where any violation of permit or ordinance is not corrected by mean of administrative adjustment as described in section 50.81, the Control Authority may order any violating discharger to show cause, before the Control Authority or its duly authorized representative, why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by personal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Control Authority, or its designee, regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the discharger to show cause before the Authority, or its designee, why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized representative of the discharger. The Director of the Control Authority may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or he/she may designate any employee of the city or any specially appointed attorney or engineer to do the following: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
(2)  Take the evidence; and 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Control Authority for action thereon. 
(B)  At any hearing held pursuant to sections 50.80 through 50.84, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 19-25(C); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.83. - Action following hearing. 
After the Control Authority has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the discharger responsible for any violation found to have been committed, directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service is to be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued, including revocation or suspension of any discharge permit. 
(1975 Code, § 19-25(D); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.84. - Right to appeal. 
Following the entry of the order by the Control Authority with respect to the conduct of a discharger, the discharger may file an appeal in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction challenging the Control Authority's order. 
(1975 Code, § 19-25(E); Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.85. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean the following: 
(A)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or monthly average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(B)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the monthly average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(C)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public); 
(D)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(E)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(F)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(G)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(H)  Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(1975 Code, § 19-23; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.86. - Emergency suspension of service and/or discharge permits. 
(A)  The Control Authority may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Control Authority, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Also, the Control Authority may suspend wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit whenever acids and chemicals damaging the sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of such structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage. 
(B)  Any discharger notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or its wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the offending discharge. In the event of a failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Control Authority shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate disconnection of the discharger's sewer and/or water service connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals or the environment. 
(C)  In the case of emergency disconnection of service, the Control Authority shall make reasonable attempts to notify the discharger or user of the premises where such offending discharge is generated before disconnecting the water or sewer service line. The party whose service has been disconnected shall have an opportunity for a hearing on the issue of the offending discharge and the disconnection as soon as possible after the disconnection has taken place. 
(D)  The Control Authority shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment and/or water service upon proof of the elimination of the offending discharge. A detailed written statement by the discharger describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Control Authority within 15 days of the date of the occurrence. The city water and/or wastewater service shall be reconnected only at the discharger's expense. 
(1975 Code, § 19-26; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.87. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges wastewater or other wastes into the city's POTW contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1975 Code, § 19-27; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.88. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(1975 Code, § 19-28; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 50.999.  
Sec. 50.89. - Recovery of costs incurred by control authority. 
Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this chapter or causing damage to or impairing the city's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the discharger for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. 
(1975 Code, § 19-29; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Sec. 50.90. - Acts of God defense. 
The Act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense (V.T.C.A. Water Code § 7.251) in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(A)  Defense. An industrial user who wishes to establish the Act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, or other catastrophe; and 
(2)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW (Public Owned Treatment Works) and the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance (if this information if provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
(a)  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; 
(b)  The time period of the event, including exact dates and time or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
(c)  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(B)  Burden of proof. If any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the Act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe. 
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 2-3-04)  
Sec. 50.91. - Variances. 
A discharger may apply to the city for a variance from any discharge limitation specified in section 50.21. The city may grant the variance if the discharge limitation does not prevent and is not designed to prevent the following: pass through; interference; a violation of the discharger's categorical pretreatment standards; any adverse damage to the health and safety of personnel maintaining and operating the POTW; or any exceedance of the criteria for water quality developed by EPA pursuant to section 304 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1314. 
(1975 Code, § 19-31; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
Secs. 50.92—50.998. - Reserved.  
Sec. 50.999. - Penalty. 
(A)  If any person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violates any of the provisions of this chapter or of this code, he/she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which such a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(B)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall, for each offense, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(C)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation against any person found to have committed any offense described in divisions (A) and (B) above. 
(1975 Code, § 19-32; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998)  
CHAPTER 51. - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Adoption of International Plumbing Code, see § 150.03 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 51.01. - Opening water meter box. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized city employee to open a city water meter box, such city water meter box being the closed box which houses the meter measuring the water to each city water user and consumer. 
(1975 Code, § 19-1; Am. Ord. 1996-13, passed 5-7-1996; Am. Ord. 1998-11, passed 5-5-1998; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 51.99  
Secs. 51.02—51.09. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
 
Sec. 51.10. - Policy; purpose; intent. 
(A)  In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation and fire protection and to protect and preserve public health, welfare and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(B)  Water uses regulated or prohibited under this Drought Contingency Plan (the Plan) are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 51.99 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.11. - Public education. 
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the Plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the Plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases, radio announcements, cable television public announcement channels and utility bill notices. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.12. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
The service area of the city is located within the Brazos Region G Planning Group, and the city has provided a copy of this Plan to the Brazos Region G Regional Planning Group. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.13. - Authorization. 
The Mayor, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this Plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The Mayor, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this Plan. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.14. - Application. 
The provisions of this Plan shall apply to all persons, customers and property utilizing water provided by city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the Plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.15. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens. 
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants and office buildings. 
Conservation. Those practices, techniques and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer. Any person, company or organization using water supplied by city. 
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, athletic fields, parks and rights-of-way and medians. 
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, including the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this Plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in an outside fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); or 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire fighting. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.16. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(A)  The Mayor, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the Plan. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of publication in local newspaper, notice on water bills, announcements on radio stations and cable television public announcement channels. 
(B)  The triggering criteria described below are based on water supply conditions during past droughts. 
(1)  Stage 1 - Mild Water Shortage Conditions. 
(a)  Requirements for initiation. At the second City Council meeting of April each year, the Mayor shall evaluate the weather conditions and if necessary initiate Stage 1-Mild Water Shortage conditions beginning May 1 and that stage will continue until it is rescinded or until other stages become necessary. However, if weather conditions change and water demand dictates, the Mayor can initiate Stage 1 at any time. 
(b)  Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the Plan may be rescinded by the Mayor. 
(2)  Stage 2 - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions. 
(a)  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential water uses for Stage 2 of this Plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds four million gallons per day for five consecutive days or 4.8 million gallons per day on any single day. 
(b)  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the Plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of ten consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative. 
(3)  Stage 3 - Severe Water Shortage Conditions. 
(a)  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on nonessential water uses for Stage 3 of this Plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds four million gallons per day for five consecutive days or 4.8 million gallons on a single day and/or continually falling treated water reservoir levels which do not refill overnight. 
(b)  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the Plan may be rescinded when weather conditions have changed and all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of ten consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative. 
(4)  Stage 4 - Emergency Water Shortage Conditions. 
(a)  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 4 of this Plan when the Mayor, or his/her designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
1.  Major water line breaks or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
2.  Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source. 
(b)  Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the Plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven consecutive days. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.17. - Drought response stages. 
The Mayor, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 51.16, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe or emergency condition exists and shall implement the following actions upon publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(A)  Stage 1 - Mild Water Shortage Conditions. 
(1)  Goal. Reduce daily water demand to less than four million gallons per day. 
(2)  Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of fire hydrants and water mains (except as necessary in repair of broken water lines) and will only irrigate landscape areas on designated watering days. 
(3)  Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons. 
(a)  Customers are requested to voluntarily conserve water and limit irrigation of landscaped areas to two days per week. The days of the week are left up to the customers. 
(b)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited, except on designated watering days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
(c)  Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days. 
(d)  Operation of any outside ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
(e)  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from city. 
(f)  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees and fairways and athletic fields is allowed on designated watering days. However, if the golf courses or athletic fields utilize a water source other than that provided by city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(g)  The following uses of water are prohibited: 
1.  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
2.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
3.  Use of water for dust control; 
4.  Flushing street gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any street gutter or street or parking lot; 
5.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
6.  The serving of water by restaurants or other businesses without the request of the customer. 
(B)  Stage 2 - Moderate Water Shortage Conditions. 
(1)  Goal. Reduce daily water demand to less than four million gallons per day. 
(2)  Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of fire hydrants and water mains (except as necessary in repair of broken water lines) and reduce irrigation of public landscaped areas to once every seven days. 
(3)  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stage 1 shall remain in effect during Stage 2 except the following: 
(a)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be allowed on all days of the week during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., except the days of Monday and Thursday. No irrigation of landscaped areas shall be allowed on Mondays or Thursdays; 
(b)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables; 
(c)  Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.; 
(d)  Operation of any outside ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system; 
(e)  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare; except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from city; 
(f)  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees and fairways, and athletic fields, is allowed on designated watering days. However, if the golf course or athletic fields utilize a water source other than that provided by city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations; and 
(g)  The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited: 
1.  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
2.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
3.  Use of water for dust control; 
4.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
5.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
6.  The serving of water by restaurants or other businesses without the request of the customer. 
(C)  Stage 3 - Severe Water Shortage Conditions. 
(1)  Goal. Reduce daily water demand to less than four million gallons per day. 
(2)  Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of fire hydrants and water mains (except as necessary in repair of broken water lines) and irrigation of landscape areas will be limited to once every ten days. Use of water for Fire Department practices will be discontinued. 
(3)  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 1 and 2 shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except: 
(a)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation. The use of permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems and hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. The use of any other method is prohibited at all times. 
(b)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  The filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools and jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
(d)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
(e)  No applications for new, additional, expanded or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed or approved. 
(D)  Stage 4 - Emergency Water Shortage Conditions. 
(1)  Goal. Achieve a 50 percent reduction in daily water demand. 
(2)  Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of fire hydrants and water mains (except as necessary in repair of broken water lines) and all other nonessential water uses, including water for Fire Department practices. 
(3)  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 1, 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4 except: 
(a)  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited; and 
(b)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 51.99  
Sec. 51.18. - Enforcement. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this Plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the Mayor, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this Plan. 
(B)  Any person who violates this Plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this Plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this Plan, the Mayor shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city that the same action shall not be repeated while this Plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(C)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. 
(Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.19. - Variances. 
(A)  The Mayor, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this Plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this Plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the Plan is in effect; or 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(B)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this subchapter shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days after the Plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the Mayor, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s); 
(2)  Purpose of water use; 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the Plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the Plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this subchapter; 
(5)  Description of the relief requested; 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this Plan and the compliance date; and 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(C)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the Mayor or his/her designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance; and 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the Plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(D)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this Plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Secs. 51.20—51.29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 51.30. - Customer service inspection. 
A customer service inspection certification as required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290, § 290.46, shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to new construction or any existing service when the city has reason to believe that cross-connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist; or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private plumbing facilities. The existence of a serious threat to the integrity of the public water supply shall be considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service. 
(Ord. 1999-30, passed 10-5-1999; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.31. - Backflow assembly testing and installation. 
(A)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a recognized backflow assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against high health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention device tester. Backflow assembly testing and installation shall be completed as required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290, § 290.44h. 
(B)  It shall be the duty of the customer at any premise where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a certified inspection and operational tests conducted annually. In those instances where the city deems the hazard to be deleterious to human health, customer service inspection certifications may be required semiannually. Inspections and tests shall be at this expense of the customer or customer representative and shall be performed by a certified backflow technician. 
(C)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the city within five days of the test, repairs or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(D)  No device or assembly shall be removed from use, relocated, or other device or assembly substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the city finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention assembly complying with requirements of this section and the current adopted Plumbing Code of the city. 
(E)  A test report must be completed by the recognized backflow prevention assembly tester for each assembly tested. The signed and dated original must be submitted to the city, Community Development Division, within five days of test. 
(F)  A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must have completed a Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) approved course on cross connection control and backflow prevention and pass an examination administered by the TCEQ or its designated agent. 
(Ord. 1999-30, passed 10-5-1999; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Secs. 51.32—51.39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 51.40. - Definition; objective. 
(A)  Definition. In the V.T.C.A. Water Code, water conservation is defined as follows: 
(1)  The development of water resources; and 
(2)  Those practices, techniques, and technologies that will reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses. 
(B)  Objective. Based upon these concepts of water conservation, Stephenville's objective is to develop a Water Conservation Plan that increases water use efficiency, thereby reducing water demands, without adversely affecting population and the economic growth potential of its customers. 
(Tex. Water Code § 17.001(23)(A), (B); Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.41. - Goals. 
(A)  (1)  The objective of Stephenville's Water Conservation Plan is to promote and publicize water conservation methods that will enable Stephenville to meet its goal of reducing the 2009-2013 five-year average annual per capita water use of 104 gallons per person per day (gpcd) by approximately one and one half percent, or 1.56 gpcd to 102.4 gpcd by 2019, and by three percent to 100.9 gpcd by 2024. 
(2)  This municipal per capita water use statistic includes water used within the home for drinking, toilet flushing, bathing, food preparation, dishwashing, laundry, cleaning, and outdoor uses at home, including landscape irrigation, car washing, and outside cleaning. In addition to the water used at homes, the municipal per capita water use statistic includes a person's share of water used in the workplace for toilet flushing, drinking, cleaning, and lawn irrigation of commercial properties. Outside the home uses also include the water used in commercial establishments such as restaurants, laundries, and car washes. Institutional water use, such as water used in schools, churches, recreation centers, and water used by cities for fire protection, sanitation, and public recreation, is also included in the municipal per capita water use statistic. However, the municipal per capita water use statistic does not include use of any water for industrial purposes. The annual per capita water use statistic includes the municipal per capita water use as well as the water used for industrial purposes. 
(B)  Stephenville plans to accomplish its water conservation goal through the water conservation methods listed and described in this Plan. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed 4-1-14)  
Sec. 51.42. - Methods. 
Stephenville's Water Conservation Plan includes the following water conservation methods, which are described in the sections that follow: 
(A)  Statute; 
(B)  Public Information and Education; 
(C)  Universal Metering and Record Management; 
(D)  Meter Testing, Repair, and Replacement; 
(E)  Leak Detection, Repair, and Minimization of Conveyance Losses; 
(F)  Rate Structure; 
(G)  Low-Flow Plumbing Fixtures; 
(H)  Water-Conserving Landscaping Education; 
(I)  Additional Water Conservation Strategies; 
(J)  Wholesale Water Contracts; 
(K)  Implementation, Enforcement, Coordination with the Regional Water Planning Group (RWPG); and 
(L)  Updating of the Plan. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.43. - Statute. 
(A)  Because landscape watering is believed to be responsible for up to 50% of summer water usage, the reduction of lawn and garden watering will help control peak demands, extend the city's water supplies, maximize the use of existing treatment and capacity systems and reduce the potential for summer watering restrictions. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business or other entity other than establishments primarily engaged in (1) growing nursery products, nursery stock, shrubbery, bulbs, fruit stock, sod, and similar vegetation, under cover or in open fields and/or (2) growing short rotation woody trees with a growth and harvest cycle of ten years or less for pulp or tree stock as defined by the North American Industry Classification System, at any time of the year to: 
(1)  Operate an automated in-ground irrigation system on any day of the week between 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Landscape watering is permitted any time with a hand-held hose, soaker hose, bucket, watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system. A spray type irrigation system may be used any time for the purposes of cooling golf course tee or putting surfaces with run cycles of less than five minutes. 
(2)  Wash any motor vehicle at any location other than a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop unless the hose is equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle. Such nozzle shall stop the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator. 
(3)  Install a new irrigation system unless designed by a licensed professional recognized by the state to design water conserving irrigation systems. Each new system shall utilize zonal irrigation, drip irrigation, subsurface irrigation or other water conserving features as appropriate. When application for the irrigation permit is requested by other than a licensed irrigation specialist or landscape architect, the irrigation system plans shall be made available to city building officials. 
(B)  A waiver of the above division may be granted for the irrigation of new landscaping plants whereby watering would be permitted to maintain adequate growth until plants are established, but not to exceed a 30-day time period. Waivers for other activities may be granted on a case-by-case basis. Waivers will not be available when criteria triggering a drought response have been or are initiated. Any person desiring a waiver must make application to the city Public Works Department and pay a $50.00 nonrefundable fee. The applicant must agree to pay a water rate that is three times the current rate for all consumption over 12 CCF (1 CCF=748 gallons, therefore 12 CCF=8,976 gallons) as registered by residential meters and for all consumption as registered by water only meters or commercial meters. Persons desiring a waiver for new landscapes shall exclusively utilize water-use-efficient trees, shrubs, ground covers, ornamental plants and turf; and are to utilize water wise horticultural practices, including proper soil preparation and the use of mulch, compost and zonal irrigation systems. Helpful information regarding plants and practices may be found on links from the city web pages. 
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-08, passed 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 51.44. - Public information and education. 
(A)  Stephenville's program of public information and education will be expanded to inform water users of the importance of water conservation, and will provide information to water users as to how this can be accomplished in the home, at work, and in public places where individuals use water. Public information and education can work in two ways to accomplish water conservation. 
(1)  One way is to inform water users of how to manage and operate existing and new fixtures and appliances so that less water is used. 
(a)  The procedures to be used include: 
1.  Pamphlets on water conservation issued to new water customers; 
2.  Toilet leak detection kits issued to new water customers; 
3.  Announcements concerning water conservation on the city's news channel; 
4.  Printed water conservation tips on monthly water bills throughout the year; 
5.  Additional water conservation information posted on the city web page as well as links to: 
A.  Texas Smartscape; www.txsmartscape.com; 
B.  Texas Water Development Board (TWDB); www.twdb.state.tx.us; 
C.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ); www.tceq.state.tx.us; 
6.  City of Stephenville Water Conservation Committee Optimist Park Water Wise Garden. 
(b)  The public information will include ideas and practices such as: 
1.  Washing full loads of clothes and dishes; 
2.  Using a bucket of water instead of a flowing hose to wash cars and windows; 
3.  Turning the water off while brushing teeth or washing hands; and 
4.  Watering lawns, gardens, and shrubs during evening (as opposed to daytime) hours. 
(2)  The second way public information and education can work to conserve water is to inform and convince water users to: 
(a)  Obtain and use water-efficient plumbing fixtures and appliances; 
(b)  Adopt low water-use landscaping plans and plants; 
(c)  Find and repair leaks; and 
(d)  Take advantage of water conservation incentives where available. 
(B)  Stephenville will use the resources of the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), the American Water Works Association, and the American Public Works Association to assist in obtaining publications and materials for the public education program. Individual pamphlets and flyers provided from these entities will be selected for specialized water-conservation needs as they arise. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.45. - Universal metering and record management. 
(A)  The city employs metering devices on all source water diversions. The meters are capable of measuring the amount of water diverted/pumped to within plus or minus five percent. In addition, the city currently meters all water supply connections, using meters that are capable of measuring accurately within plus or minus five percent. In addition, a regularly scheduled maintenance program of meter repair and replacement will be performed in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Production (master) meters will be tested annually; 
(2)  Meters larger than one inch will be tested annually; and 
(3)  Meters one inch or smaller will be tested or replaced once every ten years. 
(B)  Additionally, computerized water billing reveals above normal water usage at individual connections, allowing staff to identify inaccurate or leaking meters. Meters identified in this manner are investigated, followed by testing, repairs, or replacement as needed. All zero consumption accounts are checked to determine if water is actually being consumed and not recorded. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.46. - Meter testing, repair, and replacement. 
(A)  The city employs metering devices on all source water diversions. The meters are capable of measuring the amount of water diverted/pumped to within plus or minus five percent. In addition, the city currently meters all water supply connections, using meters that are capable of measuring accurately within plus or minus five percent. In addition, a regularly scheduled maintenance program of meter repair and replacement will be performed in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Production (master) meters will be tested annually; 
(2)  Meters larger than one inch will be tested annually; and 
(3)  Meters one inch or smaller will be tested or replaced once every ten years. 
(B)  Additionally, computerized water billing reveals above normal water usage at individual connections, allowing staff to identify inaccurate or leaking meters. Meters identified in this manner are investigated, followed by testing, repairs, or replacement as needed. All zero consumption accounts are checked to determine if water is actually being consumed and not recorded. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.47. - Leak detection, repair, and minimization of conveyance losses. 
Stephenville operates and maintains the water transmission system within the city. In order to maintain water delivery service and to reduce and control unaccounted for water, Stephenville staff routinely visually inspect the transmission system to identify abnormal conditions indicating leaks. The staff is equipped to respond and repair equipment and pipeline breaks or employ contract assistance as required. As a result of these measures, unaccounted-for water is about 8.90 percent. The goal is to reduce unaccounted-for water to 15 percent or below. The TCEQ (formerly TNRCC) considers unaccounted-for water uses of 15 percent or less acceptable for communities serving more than 5,000 people. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.48. - Rate structure. 
Stephenville has a non-promotional rate structure for water service. The city's current water rates should be verified through the most current fee schedule. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.49. - Low-flow plumbing fixtures. 
(A)  The use of water-efficient plumbing fixtures such as toilets, showerheads, and faucets in new construction, and in replacement of existing plumbing fixtures as maintenance and repair are required can also lower water consumption. Water-efficient plumbing fixtures are designed for low quantities of flow per unit of use. In 1991 the Texas Legislature passed Senate Bill 587 (V.T.C.A. Health & Safety Code, §§ 372.001 et seq.), establishing minimum standards for plumbing fixtures sold within Texas. The water-efficient "Plumbing Fixture Act" became effective on January 1, 1992 and allowed for wholesalers and retailers to clear existing inventories of pre-standards plumbing fixtures until January 1, 1993. The standards, as specified by Senate Bill 587, are shown in the table below. 
Minimum Standards for Plumbing Fixtures 
Fixture 	Standard 
Wall-mounted flushometer toilets 	2.00 gallons per flush 
All other toilets 	1.60 gallons per flush 
Shower heads 	2.75 gallons per minute at 80 psi 
Urinals 	1.00 gallon per flush 
Faucet aerators 	2.20 gallons per minute at 80 psi 
Drinking water fountains 	Shall be self-closing 
 
(B)  The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) has promulgated rules requiring the labeling of both plumbing fixtures and water-using appliances sold in Texas. The labels must specify the rates of flow for plumbing fixtures and lawn sprinklers, and the amounts of water use per cycle for clothes washers and dishwashers. 
(C)  The TWDB estimates that the installation of the new plumbing fixtures in dwellings, offices, and public spaces could reduce per capita water use by about 22 gallons per day. The estimated conservation effect is shown in the table below. The TWDB estimates that the installation of the low-flow plumbing fixtures in new construction and in replacement of fixtures in existing structures will phase in most of this conservation effect by the year 2020. 
Estimated Water Savings Associated with New Plumbing Fixtures 
Fixture 	Water Savings (gpcd) 
Low-flow toilets (1.6 gallons per flush) 	14 
Shower heads 	5.5 
Urinals 	2.1 
Faucet aerators 	0.3 
Drinking water fountains 	0.1 
Total 	22 
 
(D)  In addition to the conservation potential of new plumbing fixtures, a degree of conservation can be accomplished by using more efficient water-using appliances (e.g., dishwashers and washing machines), modifying lawn and landscaping plans to use grasses and plants that require less water, improved leak detection, and educating the public on personal water conservation techniques. Stephenville will make related information available through its public information and education program. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.50. - Water-conserving landscaping. 
(A)  Water-conserving landscaping is a development concept that encourages residents to adopt low-water-using landscaping principles and methods for use around the home. The same concepts can be applied to other landscaped areas as well, including parks and other public places. 
(B)  One popular method of reducing water use for landscape irrigation is to encourage residents to use xeriscaping techniques for landscaping. There are seven generally adopted principles when planning a xeriscaped yard: 
(1)  Planning and design. During this step an appropriate plan is developed considering such variables as climate, existing vegetation, intended use of the space, and topographic features. 
(2)  Soil analysis. Examine the soil types covering the whole site. 
(3)  Appropriate plant selection. Plants should be selected which are native to the area or are adaptive to the site. 
(4)  Practical turf areas. Plan where turf areas should be located and consider increasing the area of decks, porous paving, paths, and mulched planting beds to reduce turf. 
(5)  Efficient irrigation. Landscaped areas should only be watered as needed and then usually during the early morning or late evening to avoid water lost due to evaporation, keeping in mind some plant species may experience mold and/or fungus growth if watered at night. 
(6)  Use of mulches. A three- to four-inch layer of mulch should cover all exposed soil areas and be replenished twice a year. 
(7)  Appropriate maintenance. Keep the yard well maintained to reduce the use of fertilizer, chemicals, and water. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.51. - Additional conservation strategies. 
The city will select any combination of the following strategies, in addition to those strategies listed above, if they are necessary to achieve the stated water conservation goals of this Water Conservation Plan. The TCEQ may also require that any of the following strategies be implemented by the city if the TCEQ determines that the strategy is necessary to achieve the goals of this Water Conservation Plan. The additional strategies that may be implemented are: 
(A)  Revision of water rates to promote increased water conservation; 
(B)  Additional programs to encourage the retrofit of water-conserving plumbing fixtures in existing structures; 
(C)  Wastewater reuse and/or recycling of wastewater and/or greywater; 
(D)  A program for pressure control and/or reduction in the distribution system and/or for customer connections; 
(E)  Any other conservation practice, method, or technique which the city shows to be appropriate to achieving the stated goal or goals of this Water Conservation Plan. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.52. - Wholesale water contracts. 
For every wholesale water contract entered into or renewed after official adoption of this Water Conservation Plan, including any contract extensions, the wholesale water customer must develop and implement a water conservation plan or water conservation measures according to TCEQ guidelines. If the customer intends to resell the water, then the contract between the initial supplier and customer must provide that the contract for the resale of the water must have water conservation requirements so that each successive customer in the resale of the water will be required to implement water conservation measures in accordance with TCEQ guidelines. (Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Sec. 51.53. - Implementation, enforcement, coordination with the regional water planning group; updating of the plan. 
(A)  The city Director of Public Works will act as the Administrator of the water conservation program. The Administrator will oversee the execution and implementation of all elements of the program. The Administrator is responsible for maintaining adequate records for program verification. 
(B)  The Stephenville City Council has approved, by resolution, the Water Conservation Plan. A copy of the resolution is included in Appendix B attached to the approving ordinance. Implementation of the plan, excluding the statute described in section 51.43, shall be on a voluntary basis, supported by the public information and education program. 
(C)  Stephenville is located within the Region G Regional Water Planning Area. In accordance with the TCEQ rules, Stephenville has provided a copy of this Water Conservation Plan to the Region G Regional Water Planning Group. A copy of the transmittal letter is included in Appendix C attached to the approving ordinance. 
(D)  The Administrator will monitor the progress of the Water Conservation Plan, using information from water utility records and staff. Additionally, the Administrator will be responsible for submission of an annual report to the TCEQ and TWDB on the progress, and any changes to, the Water Conservation Plan. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
Secs. 51.54—51.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 51.99 - Penalty. 
(A)  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be punished as set forth in section 10.99. 
(B)  (1)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of sections 51.10 through 51.19, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the Mayor, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of sections 51.10 through 51.19. 
(2)  Any person who violates sections 51.10 through 51.19 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $500.00. Each day that one or more of the provisions is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of these sections, the Mayor shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city that the same action shall not be repeated while the Drought Contingency Plan is in effect. Compliance with this Plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(3)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
APPENDIX A. - DISCUSSION OF WATER CONSERVATION GOALS 
The technical potential for reducing per capita water use is the range in potential water savings that can be achieved by implementing specific water conservation measures. The bottom of the range represents the potential savings under an "advanced" conservation scenario. The conservation measures include: 
Reducing unaccounted-for water uses; 
Reducing indoor water use due to water-conserving plumbing fixtures; 
Reducing seasonal water use; and 
Reducing water use through public education programs. 
Guidelines for calculating the technical potential water savings for each of these conservation measures are given below. 
1.  Reducing unaccounted-for water uses. The TCEQ (formerly TNRCC) considers unaccounted-for water uses of 15 percent or less acceptable for communities serving more than 5,000 people. Smaller, older systems that have a larger service area may legitimately experience larger losses. Losses above 15 percent may be an area of concern, and provide a conservation potential. 
2.  Reducing indoor water use due to water-conserving plumbing fixtures. The TCEQ uses 20.5 gpcpd as the most reliable figure upon which to base potential water savings, which represents the "most likely" conservation scenario. This figure is based upon the estimate that by 2050, 90 percent of pre-1990 homes, and all new homes will have been equipped with water conserving plumbing fixtures. 
The figures used for the "advanced" conservation scenario, 21.7 gpcpd is an estimate of the average savings that would result from a home equipped exclusively with water conserving plumbing fixtures. This figure is considered "advanced" because in a typical city, 100 percent of the homes are not exclusively equipped with water-conserving fixtures. 
3.  Reducing seasonal water use. The Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) has calculated seasonal use as a percentage of average annual per capita use for East Texas (20 percent), West Texas (25 percent), and state wide average of 22.5 percent. Seasonal water use is calculated by multiplying the average annual per capita use in gpcpd by the appropriate percentage. 
The technical potential for reduction in seasonal use is then calculated by multiplying the seasonal use by seven percent for the "most likely" conservation scenario, and by 20 percent for the "advanced" scenario. 
4.  Reducing water use through public education programs. The technical potential for water conservation from public education programs is estimated to be from two percent of the average annual per capita use for the "most likely" conservation scenario to five percent for the "advanced" scenario, according to the "Water Conservation Handbook," published in 1993 by the American Water Works Association. 
To calculate the total technical potential for reducing municipal per capita water use, add the individual technical potential amounts. 
Summary of Technical Potential Calculations 
Conservation Measure 	Calculation Procedure 	Result (gpcd) 
Reducing unaccounted-for uses 	(Dry-year demand (134 gpcd)) x (Unaccounted-for percentage if more than 15%, minus 15%) 	0 to 0.15 
Reducing indoor water use due to water-efficient plumbing fixtures 	20.5 gpcd ("rule of thumb") to 21.7 gpcd (advanced) 	20.5 to 21.7 
Reducing seasonal water use 	Seasonal use (Avg. use (134 gpcd) x 22.5%) x 7% and 20%) 	2.1 to 6.0 
Reducing water use through public education programs 	Average use (134 gpcd) x 2% and 5% 	2.7 to 6.7 
	Total Technical Potential Savings	25.3 to 34.6 
 
To calculate the long-run planning goal, subtract these totals from the dry-year water demand. 
Estimation of the technical potential for reducing per capita water use (gpcd). 
	Conservation Scenario Most Likely 
Reduction in unaccounted-for uses: 	0.0 to 0.15 
Reduction in indoor water use due to water-conserving plumbing fixtures: 	20.5 
 
	Conservation Scenario Most Likely 
Reduction in seasonal use: 	2.1 to 6.0 
Reduction in water use due to public education programs: 	2.7 to 6.7 
TOTAL TECHNICAL POTENTIAL FOR REDUCING PER CAPITA WATER USE: 	25.3 to 33.3 
 
* Subtract these totals from the dry-year per capita use to calculate the long-run planning goal. 
Planning Goal 
The planning goal equals the dry-year per capita water use minus the total technical potentials calculated above. 
Planning goal (in gpcd): 	109 to 101 
Goal to be achieved by year: 	2012 to 2017 
 
Needed reduction in per capita use to meet the 5-year planning goal 
Current per capita use: 	134 
Planning goal: 	109 
Difference between current use and goal: 	25 
 
(Represents needed reduction in per capita use to meet goal) 
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
APPENDIX B. - UTILITY DATA SHEET 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
UTILITY PROFILE & WATER CONSERVATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL WATER USE BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIERS 
This form is provided to assist entities in water conservation plan development for municipal water use by a retail public water supplier. Information from this form should be included within a water conservation plan for municipal use. If you need assistance in completing this form or in developing your plan, please contact the conservation staff of the Resource Protection Team in the Water Supply Division at (512) 239-4691. 
Name of Entity: 	City of Stephenville 
Address & Zip: 	298 West Washington 76401 
Telephone Number: 	(254) 918-1223 Fax: (254) 918-1207 
Form Completed By: 	Nick Williams, P.E. 
Title: 	Director of Public Works 
Signature Date: 	07-20-07 
Name and Phone Number of Person/Department responsible for implementing a water conservation program: 	Public Works Department / 254-918-1223 
 
UTILITY PROFILE 
I.  POPULATION AND CUSTOMER DATA 
A.  Population and Service Area Data 
1.  Attach a copy of your service-area map and, if applicable, a copy of your Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN). 
2.  Service area size (square miles): 11.97 
3.  Current population of service area: 16,900 
4.  Current population served: 
a.  Water 16,900. 
b.  Wastewater 16,731. 
5.  Population served by water utility for the previous five years: 
6.  Projected population for service area in the following decades: 
Year 	Population 	Year 	Population 
2002 	15,097 	2010 	18,638 
2003 	15,665 	2020 	21,103 
2004 	15,884 	2030 	23,311 
2005 	16,300 	2040 	25,120 
2006 	16,882 	2050 	26,143 
 
7.  List source/method for the calculation of current and projected population: 
Current: (#5) North Central Texas Council of Govt. & City Planning Dept. 
Projected: (#6) HDR Engineering Long Range Water Supply Study, January 1999 

B.  Active Connections 
1.  Current number of active connections. Check whether multi-family service is counted as Residential ___ or Commercial  X  
Treated water users: 	Metered 	Not-metered 	Total 
Residential 	4,605 		4,605 
Commercial 	709 		709 
Industrial 	9 		9 
Other 	116 		116 
 
2.  List the net number of new connections per year for most recent three years: 
Year 	2006 	2005 	2004 
Residential 	-69 	-3 	+167 
Commercial 	-39 	+17 	+7 
 
Year 	2006 	2005 	2004 
Industrial 	-2 	+1 	-1 
Other (Multi-Family) 	+13 	0 	+1 
 
C.  High Volume Customers 
List annual water use for the five highest volume customers (indicate if treated or raw water delivery) 
	Customer 	Use (1,000 gal./yr.) 	Treated/Raw Water 
(1) 	Tarleton State Univ. 	48,292 	Treated 
(2) 	Harris Meth. Hospt. 	11,550 	Treated 
(3) 	Stephenville Laundry 	6,752 	Treated 
(4) 	Charter Prop. Mgmt. 	5,614 	Treated 
(5) 	FMC Corporation 	4,535 	Treated 
 
II.  WATER USE DATA FOR SERVICE AREA 
A.  Water Accounting Data 
1.  Amount of water use for previous five years (in 1,000 gal.): 
Please indicate: Diverted Water ___________ 
Treated Water   X   
Year 	2006 	2005 	2004 	2003 	2002 
January 	54,063 	49,456 	53,324 	52,427 	58,660 
February 	59,027 	44,604 	50,748 	47,043 	51,360 
March 	49,430 	49,448 	55,189 	52,274 	58,082 
April 	56,635 	61,751 	57,746 	60,039 	61,544 
May 	68,330 	64,771 	59761 	62,429 	62,827 
June 	75,315 	78,975 	55,209 	60,325 	73,758 
July 	89,447 	82,296 	76,077 	93,020 	81,123 
August 	99,437 	73,282 	74,792 	102,100 	98,551 
September 	105,162 	78,274 	73,539 	72,700 	81,845 
October 	71,389 	68,475 	61,623 	65,996 	63,907 
November 	66,349 	58,389 	52,530 	55,575 	53,374 
December 	55,411 	54,063 	50,212 	52,100 	52,586 
Total 	852,019 	763,784 	720,750 	776,028 	799,617 
 
Indicate how the above figures were determined (e.g., from a master meter located at the point of a diversion from the source or located at a point where raw water enters the treatment plant, or from water sales). 
Master meter for raw water located at treatment plants 
2.  Amount of water (in 1,000 gallons) delivered (sold) as recorded by the following account types for the past five years. 
Year 	Residential 	Commercial 	Industrial 	Wholesale 	Other 	Total Sold 
2002 	363,394 	215,827 	9,357 		61,812 	650,930 
2003 	368,020 	199,530 	6,329 		72,158 	646,037 
2004 	322,752 	218,575 	9,418 		63,668 	614,413 
2005 	376,402 	225,821 	11,321 		64,569 	768,113 
2006 	442,601 	252,607 	14,046 		66,835 	776,189 
 
3.  List previous five years records for water loss (the difference between water diverted (or treated) and water delivered (or sold) 
Year 	Amount (gal.) 	% 
2002 	148.648 M 	18.59 
2003 	129.991 M 	16.75 
2004 	106.337 M 	14.75 
2005 	85.671 M 	11.22 
2006 	75.830 M 	08.90 
 
4.  Municipal water use for previous five years: 
Year 	Population 	Total Water Diverted or Pumped for Treatment (1,000 gal.) 
2002 	15,097 	799,617 
2003 	15,665 	776,028 
2004 	15,884 	720,750 
2005 	16,300 	763,784 
2006 	16,882 	852,019 
 
B.  Projected Water Demands: 
If applicable, attach projected water supply demands for the next ten years using information such as population trends, historical water use, and economic growth in the service area over the next ten years and any additional water supply requirement from such growth. 
III.  WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM DATA 
A.  Water Supply Sources: 
List all current water supply sources and the amounts authorized with each: 
	Source 	Amount Authorized 
Surface Water: 	_____ 	_____acre-feet 
Groundwater: 	30 Wells 	N/A acre-feet 
Contracts: 	_____ 	_____acre-feet 
Other: 	_____ 	_____acre-feet 
 
B.  Treatment and Distribution System 
1.  Design daily capacity of system: 6.46 MGD 
2.  Storage Capacity: Elevated 1.25 MGD, Ground 4.25 MGD 
3.  If surface water, do you recycle filter backwash to the head of the plant? 
Yes_______No______. If yes, approximately  N/A  MGD. 
4.  Please attach a description of the water system. Include the number of treatment plants, wells, and storage tanks. If possible, include a sketch of the system layout. 
IV.  WASTEWATER SYSTEM DATA 
A.  Wastewater System Data: 
1.  Design capacity of wastewater treatment plant(s): 9.00 MGD 
2.  Is treated effluent used for irrigation on-site  X  , off-site, ______plant, washdown______, or chlorination/dechlorination  X  ? 
If yes, approximately ______gallons per month. 
3.  Briefly describe the wastewater system(s) of the area serviced by the water utility. Describe how treated wastewater is disposed of. Where applicable, identify treatment plant(s) with the TCEQ name and number, the operator, owner, and, if wastewater is discharged, the receiving stream. If possible, attach a sketch or map which locates the plant(s) and discharge points or disposal sites. 
B.  Wastewater Data for Service Area: 
1.  Percent of water service area served by wastewater system: 99% 
2.  Monthly volume treated for previous three years (in 1,000 gallons): 
Year 	2006 	2005 	2004 
January 	38,128 	45,975 	37,258 
February 	39,912 	47,666 	40,195 
March 	45,645 	53,499 	24,877 
April 	44,011 	43,043 	53,654 
May 	40,912 	40,720 	46,168 
June 	40,684 	37,126 	54,912 
July 	35,665 	31,002 	39,089 
August 	42,833 	39,963 	40,491 
September 	44,064 	36,839 	39,450 
October 	43,060 	40,185 	42,300 
November 	38,379 	35,480 	51,619 
December 	37,313 	35,026 	46,158 
Total 	490,606 	486,534 	534,171 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER CONSERVATION PLANS FOR MUNICIPAL WATER USE BY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIERS 
In addition to the utility profile, a water conservation plan for municipal use by a public water supplier must include, at minimum, additional information as required by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, § 288.2. Note: If the water conservation plan does not provide information for each requirement, an explanation must be included as to why the requirement is not applicable. 
Specific, Quantified 5 & 10-Year Targets 
The water conservation plan must include specific, quantified five-year and ten-year targets for water savings to include goals for water loss programs and goals for municipal use in gallons per capita per day (see Appendix A). Note that the goals established by a public water supplier under this subparagraph are not enforceable. 
Metering Devices 
The water conservation plan must include a statement about the water supplier's metering device(s), within an accuracy of plus or minus 5.0% in order to measure and account for the amount of water diverted from the source of supply. 
Universal Metering 
The water conservation plan must include a program for universal metering of both customer and public uses of water, for meter testing and repair, and for periodic meter replacement. 
Unaccounted-For Water Use 
The water conservation plan must include measures to determine and control unaccounted-for uses of water (for example, periodic visual inspections along distribution lines; annual or monthly audit of the water system to determine illegal connections; abandoned services; etc.). 
Continuing Public Education & Information 
The water conservation plan must include a description of the program of continuing public education and information regarding water conservation by the water supplier. 
Non-Promotional Water Rate Structure 
The water supplier must have a water rate structure which is not "promotional," i.e., a rate structure which is cost-based and which does not encourage the excessive use of water. This rate structure must be listed in the water conservation plan. 
Reservoir Systems Operations Plan 
The water conservation plan must include a reservoir systems operations plan, if applicable, providing for the coordinated operation of reservoirs owned by the applicant within a common watershed or river basin in order to optimize available water supplies. 
Enforcement Procedure & Plan Adoption 
The water conservation plan must include a means of implementation and enforcement which shall be evidenced by 1) a copy of the ordinance, resolution, or tariff indicating official adoption of the water conservation plan by the water supplier; and 2) a description of the authority by which the water supplier will implement and enforce the conservation plan. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2007- 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN FOR THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS, DEFINING THE UTILITY DESCRIPTION, SERVICE AREA DESCRIPTION, AND WATER USE INFORMATION; PROVIDING FOR A WATER CONSERVATION PLAN AND SETTING OUT WATER CONSERVATION GOALS AND METHODS; AND PROVIDING FOR A DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN; AND FIXING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SUCH PLAN. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE; 
That the Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan for the City of Stephenville, Texas, is hereby adopted as follows: 
 
Coordination with the Regional Water Planning Group(s) 
The water conservation plan must include documentation of coordination with the regional water planning group(s) for the service area of the public water supplier in order to ensure consistency with the appropriate approved regional water plans. 
Example statement to be included within the water conservation plan: 
The service area of the ______________(name of water supplier) is located within the ____________(name of regional water planning area or areas) and ____________(name of water supplier) has provided a copy of this water conservation plan to the ____________(name of regional water planning group or groups). 
"Sec. 51.12 COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUPS. 
The service area of the city is located within the Brazos Region G Planning Group, and the city has provided a copy of this Plan to the Brazos Region G Regional Planning Group. 
(Ord. 1999-8, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-19, passed 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 4-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003)" 
Additional Requirements: 
(Required of suppliers serving a population of 5,000 or more or a projected population of 5,000 or more within ten years) 
1.  Program for Leak Detection, Repair, and Water Loss Accounting. The plan must include a description of the program of leak detection, repair, and water loss accounting for the water transmission, delivery, and distribution system in order to control unaccounted-for uses of water. 
See Section 51.47 below: 
Sec. 51.47. Leak detection, repair, and minimization of conveyance losses. 
Stephenville operates and maintains the water transmission system within the city. In order to maintain water delivery service and to reduce and control unaccounted-for water, Stephenville staff routinely visually inspect the transmission system to identify abnormal conditions indicating leaks. The staff is equipped to respond and repair equipment and pipeline breaks or employ contract assistance as required. As a result of these measures, unaccounted-for water is about 8.90%. The goal is to reduce unaccounted-for water to 15% or below. The TCEQ (formerly TNRCC) considers unaccounted-for water uses of 15% or less acceptable for communities serving more than 5,000 people. 
(Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-26-2003) 
Plan Review and Update 
Beginning May 1, 2005, a public water supplier for municipal use shall review and update its water conservation plan, as appropriate, based on an assessment of previous five-year and ten-year targets and any other new or updated information. The public water supplier for municipal use shall review and update the next revision of its water conservation plan not later than May 1, 2009, and every five years after that date to coincide with the regional water planning group. The revised plan must also include an implementation report. 
Best Management Practices Guide 
On November 2004, the Texas Water Development Board's (TWDB) Report 362 was completed by the Water Conservation Implementation Task Force. Report 362 is the Water Conservation Best Management Practices (BMP) Guide. The BMP Guide is a voluntary list of management practices that water users may implement in addition to the required components of Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 288. The BMP Guide is available on the TWDB's website at the link below or by calling (512) 463-7847. 
http://www.twdb.state.tx.us/assistance/conservation/TaskForceDocs/WCITFBMPGuide.pdf 
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
APPENDIX B-1. - DEFINITIONS OF COMMONLY USED TERMS 
CONSERVATION. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses. 
INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of a lower order of value into forms having greater usability and commercial value, commercial fish production, and the development of power by means other than hydroelectric, but does not include agricultural use. 
IRRIGATION. The agricultural use of water for the irrigation of crops, trees, and pastureland, including, but not limited to, golf courses and parks which do not receive water through a municipal distribution system. 
MUNICIPAL PER CAPITA WATER USE. The sum total of water diverted into a water supply system for residential, commercial, and public and institutional uses divided by actual population served. 
MUNICIPAL USE. The use of potable water within or outside a municipality and its environs whether supplied by a person, privately owned utility, political subdivision, or other entity as well as the use of sewage effluent for certain purposes, including the use of treated water for domestic purposes, fighting fires, sprinkling streets, flushing sewers and drains, watering parks and parkways, and recreational purposes, including public and private swimming pools, the use of potable water in industrial and commercial enterprises supplied by a municipal distribution system without special construction to meet its demands, and for the watering of lawns and family gardens. 
MUNICIPAL USE IN GALLONS PER CAPITA PER DAY. The total average daily amount of water diverted or pumped for treatment for potable use by a public water supply system. The calculation is made by dividing the water diverted or pumped for treatment for potable use by population served. Indirect reuse volumes shall be credited against total diversion volumes for the purpose of calculating gallons per capita per day for targets and goals. 
POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. An individual or entity that supplies water to the public for human consumption. 
REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUP. A group established by the Texas Water Development Board to prepare a regional water plan under Texas Water Code, § 16.053. 
RETAIL PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. An individual or entity that for compensation supplies water to the public for human consumption. The term does not include an individual or entity that supplies water to itself or its employees or tenants when that water is not resold to or used by others. 
REUSE. The authorized use for one or more beneficial purposes of use of water that remains unconsumed after the water is used for the original purpose of use and before that water is either disposed of or discharged or otherwise allowed to flow into a watercourse, lake, or other body of state-owned water. 
WATER CONSERVATION PLAN. A strategy or combination of strategies for reducing the volume of water withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste of water, for maintaining or improving the efficiency in the use of water, for increasing the recycling and reuse of water, and for preventing the pollution of water. A water conservation plan may be a separate document identified as such or may be contained within another water management document(s). 
WATER LOSS. The difference between water diverted or treated and water delivered (sold). Water loss can result from: 
(1)  Inaccurate or incomplete record keeping; 
(2)  Meter error; 
(3)  Un-metered uses such as firefighting, line flushing, and water for public buildings and water treatment plants; 
(4)  Leaks; and 
(5)  Water theft and unauthorized use. 
WHOLESALE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. An individual or entity that for compensation supplies water to another for resale to the public for human consumption. The term does not include an individual or entity that supplies water to itself or its employees or tenants as an incident of that employee service or tenancy when that water is not resold to or used by others, or an individual or entity that conveys water to another individual or entity, but does not own the right to the water which is conveyed, whether or not for a delivery fee. 
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 2-5-2008)  
CHAPTER 52. - DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 52.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
City. The City of Stephenville. 
Commercial property. All developed properties within the city that are not used for residential or institutional purposes. 
Developed property. Any parcel, other than single-family property, that contains impervious area (i.e., any commercial property, multi-family property, and institutional property containing impervious area). 
Director. The City Administrator's designee. 
Drainage. Bridges, catch basins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, ditches, flumes, pipes, pumps, and appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water away, collect, store, or treat the water, or divert the water into natural or artificial watercourses. 
ERU (equivalent residential unit). A unit of measure used to calculate the stormwater utility fee and based on the average lot area for ERU property within the city. A 6,000 square foot lot area shall constitute one ERU. 
Facilities. The property, either real, personal, or mixed, that is used in providing drainage and included in the system. 
Impervious area or impervious surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. Impervious areas include, but are not limited to, compacted soils, buildings, pavement, parking lots, and private ingress/egress roadways. 
Institutional property. Governmental property, or property privately owned but for a governmental-type use, including, without limitation, public or private schools, colleges, churches, community centers, hospitals, sanitariums, lodges or civic clubs, nursing homes, assisted living communities, and retirement homes. 
Multi-family property. Any property platted or used for five or more residences. 
Parcel. One or more lots or tracts, or portions of lots or tracts, that are contiguous and under single ownership. 
Single-family property. Any property platted, zoned or used for single-family residential development upon which a single-family home has been constructed. 
Stormwater drainage revenue bonds. Any obligations issued to finance the costs of facilities that are payable and secured by a lien on and pledge of stormwater utility fees. 
Stormwater utility fee. The drainage charge, including any interest and penalties paid by a benefitted or served property for stormwater drainage services provided by the system including, but not limited to, the items described as "cost of service" in V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 402.044(2),(the "Act"). 
System. The drainage owned or controlled in whole or in part by the city, including the city's existing drainage facilities, materials, and supplies, and dedicated to the service of benefitted property, including provisions for additions, extensions, and improvements thereto and replacements thereof, excluding from the foregoing, however, to the extent now or hereafter provided by law, facilities of any kind which are declared by the City Council, prior to the acquisition or construction thereof by the city, not to be a part of the system and which are acquired or constructed by or on behalf of the city with the proceeds from the issuance of special facilities bonds in a manner now or hereafter authorized by law. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.02. - Establishment of stormwater utility fee. 
(A)  A stormwater utility fee is hereby imposed on each parcel within the city for services and facilities provided by the system. 
(B)  For purposes of imposing the stormwater utility fee, all parcels within the city are classified into the following two customer categories: 
(1)  Single-family property; and 
(2)  Commercial, multi-family, and industrial property. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.03. - Calculation of stormwater utility fees. 
(A)  Equivalent residential units (ERUs). The following formulas shall be used to calculate the number of ERU's for any parcel of property. An ERU shall equal 6,000 square feet of land area. When calculating ERU's, the final figure shall be rounded to the nearest ERU. 
Property Type 	Number of ERUs 
Single-family residential property including RES, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH land use codes 	One ERU per single-family unit 
Commercial and all other properties 	Land area (in square feet) divided by 6,000 square feet times a runoff factor of 1.7 
Agricultural properties 	Exempt by state statute 
 
(B)  Rates. The following ERU rates are hereby established and shall be used to calculate the total monthly stormwater utility fee for all property located in the city. 
(1)  Single-family residential properties. 
Square Feet of Lot 	Fee 
Equal to or less than 5,000 square feet 	$2 per single-family property 
Greater than 5,000 square feet and less than 21,780 feet 	$3 per single-family property 
Equal to or greater than 21,780 feet 	$4 per single-family property 
 
(2)  Commercial and all other properties. 
ERUs 	Fee 
37621 	$3 (minimum) 
Over 1 	$3 times the number of ERUs for the property 
 
(C)  Revision of rates. The City Council may review the foregoing schedules of fees at any time and may, by ordinance, increase or decrease said fees within the schedule upon a determination that said increase or decrease is warranted. 
(D)  Rates in accordance with Act. The City Council hereby finds and determines that the Stormwater Utility Fee has been established in accordance with the provisions of the Act, including but not limited to, V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 402.047. 
(E)  Credits. Any property that is directly served by and under the same ownership as an approved private detention or retention facility may apply for a credit in the stormwater charge. The Director may adjust the stormwater charge for such properties according to the actual mitigative effect of the facility on the city's annual maintenance and operation costs, provided that: 
(1)  The owner remains responsible for all costs of non-structural maintenance of the facility; 
(2)  The facility was constructed and is maintained in compliance with the city drainage standards and specifications; 
(3)  The owner obtained the proper permits from the city; and 
(4)  The credit can not reduce the stormwater charge below an equivalent service unit per lot or parcel. 
(F)  The Director shall have the right to inspect the detention facility at any reasonable time to determine if it is in compliance with the approved design and continues to be capable of functioning properly. If the facility's performance is affected because it fails to meet the proper operating standards, has been altered, or is in disrepair, the property owner(s) shall pay the monthly stormwater charge at the normal rate, without benefit of reduction, until such time that it is brought into total compliance. Any property served by a private detention facility which is maintained by the city shall be charged normal monthly stormwater charge rates. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.04. - Billing and payment; penalties. 
(A)  Billing procedure. Stormwater utility fees for all developed property shall be billed monthly with the city's other public utility billings, and shall be identified separately on the bill as a stormwater utility fee. 
(B)  Due date. Bills are due when rendered, and if not paid within 15 days thereafter, become delinquent and the city shall have the right to apply penalties for failure to pay as described in division (D) below. 
(C)  Date received. Bills shall be considered as received by the customer and/or owner, whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid. 
(D)  Penalties for failure to pay. 
(1)  A list of delinquent charges against properties shall be compiled as of January 1 of each year. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law or in the Act, if an account becomes delinquent, the city shall have the right to: 
(a)  Apply interest on any delinquent account at the rate of 10% simple interest per annum on the unpaid balance due per month; 
(b)  Fix a lien against the property and assess a penalty in the amount of $15.00 to cover the administrative costs of fixing a lien on benefitted property; and/or 
(c)  Discontinue any utility services provided by the city. 
(E)  Notice of imposition of stormwater utility fees. Notice of the imposition of stormwater utility fees shall be mailed to all owners and customers of the stormwater utility. Such notice shall state that stormwater utility fees will be billed to the customer of other city utility billings, and that failure of a customer and/or owner to pay such fees may result in the imposition of a lien for stormwater utility fees, with interest and penalty on the benefitted or served property, and/or discontinuance of utility service. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.05. - Appeals. 
(A)  Appeal of stormwater utility fees to the Director. Subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, any owner or customer who has paid stormwater utility fees and who believes the calculation or determination of the stormwater utility fee to be incorrect may appeal the fee to the Director. The Director shall evaluate all appeals based on the amount of impervious area on the parcel. 
(1)  The appeal shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
(2)  The Director shall review an appeal made: 
(a)  During the first fiscal year that the Stormwater Utility Fee is imposed, within four months from the date the Director receives the appeal. An adjustment resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the beginning of billings, but shall not exceed one year; and/or 
(b)  After the first fiscal year that the stormwater utility fee is imposed, within 30 days from the date the Director receives the appeal. An adjustment resulting from such a request shall be prospective, and, at the discretion of the Director, may also be retroactive for no longer than three months prior to the receipt of the request. 
(3)  The owner or customer requesting an adjustment may be required, at the owner's or customer's cost, to provide supplemental information to the Director, including, but not limited to, survey data approved by a state registered professional land surveyor, engineering reports approved by a state registered professional engineer, or other documentation the Director deems necessary. Failure to provide requested information may result in the denial of the adjustment request. 
(4)  The Director shall grant or deny an adjustment request in writing. In making a determination to grant an adjustment request, the Director shall consider the potential for any adverse impact to the holders of any outstanding stormwater drainage revenue bonds. 
(B)  Appeal of lien. Before imposing a lien for delinquent drainage charges, the city shall send notice to the record owner of the benefitted property of the amount of the charges owed and any penalties or interest accrued, and of the owner's right to appeal the placement of the lien. Within ten working days of the postmark of the notice sent to the property owner, the owner may appeal the decision to impose the lien on the property to the Director. The Director shall direct that the lien not be filed if the owner shows that no bill for the above mentioned services encumbered by the lien or liens is owed, and shall give the owner written notice of the Director's decision. The Director may modify the lien to reflect the true amount of delinquency in payment for services to the property if the owner demonstrates that a lesser bill is owed. Whenever a person pays all principal, interest and charges of a valid lien filed pursuant to this chapter, the Director shall execute a release of that lien and surrender it to the paying party. The paying party shall be responsible for the filing of that release. 
(C)  Appeal to the City Council. Upon receipt of a written statement from the Director denying a request to adjust the stormwater utility fees or refusing to direct that a lien not be filed, the owner or customer who initially filed the appeal may, within thirty days after receiving the statement from the director, apply in writing to the City Council for review of the denial. 
(1)  The City Council shall complete this review within 60 days of receipt of said request for review. The City Council shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in this section. 
(2)  The City Council's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.06. - Program responsibility. 
(A)  Duty of Director. It shall be the duty of the Director to administer the system. The Director shall keep an accurate record of all properties benefitted or served by the system and shall make changes in accordance with the rates and fees established in this chapter. 
(B)  Review by City Council. If, after at least five years of substantially continuous operation of the system, the City Council determines that the system should be discontinued, the powers under the Act should be revoked, and the provision for municipal drainage should be made by other revenues, the City Council may adopt an ordinance to that effect after providing notice and a public hearing as required by the Act. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.07. - Stormwater utility fund. 
(A)  There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility Fund which may consist of one or more accounts. All stormwater utility fees shall be deposited as collected and received into this fund, and shall be used exclusively for the drainage services as stated in V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 402.044(2), which includes, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance of the system; 
(2)  Administrative costs associated with the management of the system; 
(3)  Payment of the debt service requirements on any outstanding stormwater drainage debt obligations, including any fees and expenses incidental thereto; 
(4)  Engineering consultant fees; and 
(5)  Consultant studies necessary for updating the Stormwater Drainage Master Plan. 
(B)  The income derived from the operation of the system must be segregated and completely identifiable from other city accounts. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Sec. 52.08. - Exemptions. 
The following entities or persons shall be exempt from this chapter: Any property to which a mandatory exemption under V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 402.044(2) applies, including, without limitation: 
(A)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
(B)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city for maintenance; and 
(C)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the municipality in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 8-6-2002)  
Title 7 - TRAFFIC CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General rule of uniformity, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code § 542.201; Limitations on local authorities, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code § 542.203; Powers of local authorities, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code § 542.202; Uniform Traffic Act, see generally the Texas Transportation Code 
 
CHAPTER 70. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 70.01. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
All ordinances of the city regulating motor vehicles and traffic are hereby specifically saved from repeal. All such ordinances shall not be repealed or affected by the adoption of the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances. 
(1975 Code, § 13-1)  
Sec. 70.02. - Adoption of state statutes. 
State statutes regulating motor vehicles and traffic are hereby adopted by reference, as such statutes shall be amended from time to time. 
(1975 Code, § 13-2) 
State Law reference— Uniform Traffic Act, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code §§ 541.001 et seq.  
Sec. 70.03. - Vehicle Storage Facility Act not applicable. 
The Vehicle Storage Facility Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6687-9a, and the rules adopted under this subchapter, do not apply inside the limits of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 13-2.1; Am. Ord. 1986-10, 6-3-1986)  
Secs. 70-04—70-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 70.15. - Conformity with state law. 
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Volumes I and II (hereafter called the manual). All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law and this subchapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(1975 Code, § 13-42; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975) 
State Law reference— State Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code §§ 544.001 et seq.  
Sec. 70.16. - Compliance with traffic-control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signals or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this subchapter, the manual and any ordinance directing that such traffic-control device, sign or signal shall be installed or erected unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 13-43; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 70.17. - Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles. 
(A)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term authorized emergency vehicle is defined by state law, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(B)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do the following: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title or any ordinance; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he/she does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(C)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(D)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(1975 Code, § 13-44; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975)  
Sec. 70.18. - Unauthorized traffic-control devices prohibited; declared a nuisance. 
(A)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized signs, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts or directs the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(B)  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(C)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(D)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice. 
(1975 Code, § 13-45; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 70.19. - Tampering with official traffic-control devices. 
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 13-46; Am. Ord. 12-2-1975) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 70.20. - Installation; filing of report required. 
(A)  The City Council of the city shall by ordinance direct that the Chief of Police shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley signs, signals and markings, or cause the same to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with this subchapter and consistent with the manual. The traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific device, sign or signal can be procured. 
(B)  Whenever the Chief of Police has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, signal or sign at any location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his/her direction, in obedience to this subchapter, the manual or another ordinance directing the erection of such device, signal or sign shall thereafter file a report with the City Secretary in writing and signed officially by the Chief of Police, stating the type of traffic-control device, sign or signal, and when and where the same was erected or installed. The City Secretary shall file and maintain such report of the Chief of Police among the official papers of the office of the City Secretary. 
(1975 Code, § 13-47; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975)  
Sec. 70.21. - Proof of violations of provisions. 
It being unlawful for any person other than the Chief of Police, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this subchapter or any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the Chief of Police pursuant to the authority of this subchapter and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal or marking. 
(1975 Code, § 13-48; Am. Ord. of 12-2-1975)  
ARTICLE III. - PENALTY 
 
Sec. 70.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in this title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is otherwise provided in this code of ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of the laws of the state. 
(B)  Each day a violation of this code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 71. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 71.01. - Willful, wanton operation endangering others. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the public square of the city, in the city park or upon any street or public way of the city in willful or wanton disregard of the rights and safety of others, regardless of the speed at which it may be operated. 
(1975 Code, § 13-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 71.02. - Compliance with signs, signals required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person while driving any vehicle to violate the directions on any stop sign or signal, any turn sign or signal, any slowdown sign or signal or any parking sign or signal in the streets of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 13-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 71.03. - Stop at stop sign required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over or past any stop sign or signal in the city without first stopping such vehicle. 
(1975 Code, § 13-5) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 71.04. - Speed limits. 
(A)  Generally; in city park; in city square. 
(1)  The term motor vehicle, as used in this section, shall mean any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter or vehicle of any character which is propelled by a motor. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street within the corporate limits of the city at a greater rate of speed than 30 miles per hour, unless a different speed limit has been fixed by state regulations, or by city ordinance. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle in the city park at a greater rate of speed than ten miles per hour. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle on the public square in the city at a greater rate of speed than 20 miles per hour. 
(B)  School zones. 
(1)  The Chief of Police is authorized to designate all school zones. The maximum prima facie speed limit for any person to operate or drive any vehicle in or through an area designated as a school zone shall be 20 miles per hour. The 20 miles-per-hour shall be in effect during certain designated hours when school is in session. The area shall be marked by signs showing the 20 miles-per-hour speed limit to be in effect during the designated hours or when warning lights flash. 
(2)  Whenever the Chief of Police has erected and installed signs for the designated school zones, or has caused the same to be done under his/her direction, the Chief of Police shall thereafter file a report with the City Secretary in writing and signed officially by the Chief of Police, stating the location of the school zones. The City Secretary shall file and maintain the report of the Chief of Police among the official papers of the office of the City Secretary. 
(C)  Specific streets. Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A. Transp. Code §§ 545.356, 542.202 and 542.203, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are determined and declared to be reasonable and safe; and the speed limits are fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, described as follows. 
Street 	Location 	Speed Limit 
FM 205 	Intersection of US 281 east 0.257 miles to the intersection of US 377 	40 mph 
FM 205 	Intersection of US 377 east 0.300 miles to the city limit 	55 mph 
FM 988 	MP 0.000 to MP 2.025 
2.025 miles 	45 mph 
FM 988 	MP 2.024 east 0.831 miles to MP 1.193 	55 mph 
FM 988 	MP 1.193 east 1.193 miles to MP 1.000 	45 mph 
Frey Street 	400 feet west of the intersection of Frey Street and Rowland Street to the intersection of FM 988 and Frey Street 	40 mph 
Harbin Drive 	FM 988 to US 377/67 	40 mph 
Lingleville Hwy (HWY 8) 	MP 18.621 east 2.504 miles to MP 21.125 	40 mph 
Lingleville Hwy (HWY 8) 	MP 21.125 east 1.003 miles to MP 22.128 	50 mph 
North Dale Street 	1600 block through the 2300 block 	30 mph 
South Lillian Street 	1400 South Lillian Street to city limits South Lillian Street 	45 mph 
Wolfe Nursery Road 	From Washington Street to Frey Street 	30 mph 
Wolfe Nursery Road 	From Frey Street to Northwest Loop 	40 mph 
 
(1975 Code, § 13-6; Am. Ord. 6-2-81; Am. Ord. 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 1998-7, 4-7-1998; Am. Ord. 1999-12, 6-15-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-13, 6-15-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-14, 6-15-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-15, 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-16, 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-18, 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2004-15, 7-6-2004; Am. Ord. 2008-17, 8-5-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-24, 10-7-2008; Am. Ord. 2015-12, 7-7-2015) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 71.05. - Restrictions on driving trucks on certain streets. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any truck of a size larger than a pickup truck through the city along any portion of Washington Street from the Bosque River Bridge on the east to where Washington Street intersects the western city limit line, unless such person has a stop to make for business purposes within the city. 
(B)  No person shall be guilty of violating this section until he/she has been given a warning in regard thereto by some official, police officer or employee of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 13-11; Am. Ord. 11-6-62) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99. 
Cross reference— Truck routes, see Ch. 74, Sched. I  
Sec. 71.06. - Driving over fire hose. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to step upon or drive upon or across any fire hose of the Fire Department of the city while such hose is being used in fighting fire, while being used in a fire drill or practice by the Fire Department or while being used in any way in connection with fighting fire or with a fire drill or practice, or in preparation therefor, by the Fire Department. 
(1975 Code, § 13-12) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99; Fire Prevention and Protection, see ch. 91.  
Sec. 71.07. - Hike and bike trails. 
(A)  There is hereby established a hike and bike trail on property owned by or on land under the control of the city, the course and location of the hike and bike trail to be designated by the Supervisor of the city parks. 
(B)  The hike and bike trail shall be designated and marked by appropriate signs erected along the course of the trail. 
(C)  This hike and bike trail shall be for the exclusive use of pedestrians and those riding bicycles or any other type of cycle propelled by the person operating same. 
(D)  The hike and bike trail shall not be used by any person operating motor vehicles such as an automobile, motorcycle, motorbike or any type of motor propelled vehicle. 
(1975 Code, § 13-13; Am. Ord. 5-3-1977) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 71.08. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-11, passed September 5, 2017, repealed § 71.08. Former § 71.08 pertained to use of wireless communication device for electronic messaging while operating a motor vehicle is prohibited and derived from Ord. 2010-07, passed April 6, 2010.  
CHAPTER 72. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parking schedules, see Ch. 75 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 72.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons. 
Commercial motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, or pickup truck. 
Curb. The lateral lines of a roadway, whether constructed above grade or not, which are not intended for vehicular travel. 
Loading zone. A space or section of the curb and adjacent street set aside for the exclusive use of loading or unloading persons, merchandise, supplies and materials. 
Median strip. That area or portion of a divided street, road, or highway within the city separating the two roadways of said street, road, or highway and shall be held to include the curb, if any, at the outer edge of said area. 
Operator. Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, including a railroad train or vehicle being towed. 
Park, parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or merchandise. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, towed or self-propelled, on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational or sporting purposes. This includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor homes, converted trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers. 
Standard of time. All hours mentioned in this chapter refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time as commonly known, except during any future time if any standard of time is established or proclaimed by the United States for an area including Stephenville, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as it remains in effect. 
Street. Any public street or avenue located in the city and established for the use of vehicles. 
Vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street or highway. 
(1975 Code, § 13-50; Am. Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.02. - Authority of chief of police. 
(A)  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and temporarily designate no parking on city streets or portions thereof to alleviate problems caused by hazardous conditions or heavy traffic conditions. Streets or portions thereof that have been designated for no parking shall have appropriate signs posted. 
(B)  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to temporarily suspend parking restrictions on city streets or portions thereof as appropriate for special events or circumstances. The signs designating a parking restriction shall be covered during the time the parking restriction is suspended. 
(Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.03. - Double parking. 
A person shall not double park, stand or stop a vehicle at any point on the streets or alleys of the city. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.04. - Maximum parking time. 
A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street or alley in the city for a period of time longer than 72 hours; or the time period stated on signs posted by authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.05. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon any public street, alley, or public property for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale; or 
(2)  Washing, greasing, cleaning, polishing, waxing, changing oil or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or 
(3)  Selling or exhibiting property of any nature. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.06. - Parking of certain vehicles. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any truck tractor, road tractor, truck trailer, semi-trailer, any other commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one ton according to the manufacturer's classification, or any vehicles exceeding 25 feet in length, upon any public street or public right-of-way within any part of the city. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such areas for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(B)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle (if the vehicle is a truck tractor, road tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer, bus, motor home, mobile home or any commercial motor vehicle, as said terms are defined in section 72.01 of this chapter or the Transportation Code), upon a public street, alley, parkway, boulevard measuring 45 feet or less in width, or public property. This section shall not authorize the parking of mobile homes in any location, public or private, unless pursuant to a permitted use authorized by the Zoning Ordinance or regulations of the Building Official. This section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and repair equipment; trucks, equipment, trailers, and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; buses when taking on or discharging passengers; other vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading zone; municipal vehicles in the course of performance of city business; individually owned trailers engaged in the delivery loading of items; contractors engaged in actual construction or repairs; or when it is lawful to park a commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of accepting or delivering transportable goods. 
(C)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the vehicle had a mechanical defect, making it unsafe to proceed further, in which event it shall be lawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.07. - Parking near driveways. 
(A)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle within three feet of the curved portion of any driveway without the effective consent of the owner of the property on which the driveway is located. 
(B)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle in front of a public or private driveway, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.08. - Parking of vehicle with expired license plates or inspection sticker. 
A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on a public street or alley when the vehicle does not have lawfully affixed thereto both a valid license plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.09. - Parking on a parking lot. 
A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on a parking lot: 
(1)  So as to block access to any parking aisle designated by striping; or 
(2)  So as to block vehicular movement in driveways within a parking lot; or 
(3)  Within an area designated as a Fire Lane. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.10. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
(A)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle that is unattended upon any street or highway, or on public or private property accessible to the public, with the engine running or key in the ignition. It is an exception if the unattended vehicle is parked in a private, single-family, residential driveway, or that an unattended vehicle in any off-street location is rendered un-drivable by an anti-theft device with no key in the ignition. 
(B)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle that is unattended on a grade upon any street or highway without turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.11. - Parking on sidewalks. 
(A)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on a sidewalk. 
(B)  A person shall not stop, stand, or park a bicycle on a sidewalk if the bicycle impedes the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic on the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.12. - Prohibited uses of motor vehicles in parking area. 
No person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area may: 
(1)  Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden stop or rapidly accelerate said motor vehicle or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no reasonable necessity for the protection of a person or property in such manner calculated to disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities; or 
(2)  Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.13. - Authority for police towing. 
(A)  A police officer of the City of Stephenville is hereby authorized to move a vehicle, require the driver or other person in charge of a vehicle to move the same or have the vehicle removed by an approved towing service to the nearest place of safety or to the premises of said towing service, or the police department impound lot under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When any vehicle is otherwise legally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway; 
(3)  When any vehicle is found upon a street and a report has been previously made that the vehicle has been stolen or a complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been embezzled, or there are reasonable grounds to believe the vehicle is stolen; 
(4)  When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned; 
(5)  When a vehicle upon a street is so wrecked or disabled and: 
(a)  Because of the wreck or disability its normal operation is impossible or impractical; or 
(b)  The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody or are not in the immediate vicinity of the wrecked or disabled vehicle; 
(6)  When any such officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is by this Code or other law required to take the person arrested immediately before a magistrate and it is unsafe to leave the vehicle unattended at the scene; 
(7)  Whenever any such officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street, or public or private property in violation of any state law or local ordinance; 
(8)  When the owner or operator consents; 
(9)  When, in the opinion of a police officer, said vehicle constitutes a hazard or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency; 
(10)  When, in the opinion of a police officer, the safety of said vehicle is imperiled by reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance; 
(11)  When any vehicle is found to be a junked vehicle; 
(12)  Where otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 72.14. - Penalty. 
(A)  A person commits an offense by violating any provision of this subchapter, performing an act prohibited by this subchapter, or failing to perform a duty that is required by this subchapter. 
(B)  A violation of this subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine as provided for in state statute. Where no specific penalty is provided for an offense, an offense under this subchapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law, unless a higher fine is otherwise allowed by law. 
(C)  If the definition of an offense does not prescribe a culpable mental state, then a culpable mental state is not required. 
(D)  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2012-30, 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-27, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-14, 7-7-2015)  
ARTICLE II. - LOADING ZONES 
 
Sec. 72.15. - Marking of loading zones. 
Loading zones for handling of passengers and heavy or bulky merchandise, supplies and materials shall be laid out and marked with a sign with the words "Loading Zone," posted to designate the loading zone. 
(1975 Code, § 13-72; Am. Ord. 1999-5, 3-2-1999)  
Sec. 72.16. - Time limit for loading zone. 
(A)  When using loading zones for the loading and unloading of heavy or bulky merchandise, supplies and materials, all loading and unloading shall be performed in an expeditious manner and no vehicle may remain in a loading zone either for a period of time longer than necessary to expeditiously load or unload the same, or while the operator thereof is soliciting or engaged otherwise than in the loading and unloading of the vehicle; provided, that a reasonable time shall be allowed for giving or securing a delivery receipt. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to stand or park a vehicle in a loading zone for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers for a period in excess of two minutes. 
(1975 Code, § 13-74) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 72.17. - Hours for loading zones. 
The provisions of section 72.16 shall apply on all days and during all hours, except that the Mayor is authorized to cause to be painted on the curb and/or adjacent street surface of any loading zone the words: "Loading Zone. Reserved ___ a.m. to ___ p.m." and insert therein the numbers indicating the hours so reserved. Such reserved hours shall be in effect only so long as the words and figures indicating the hours of reservation are legible. 
(1975 Code, § 13-75)  
Sec. 72.18. - Use of parking spaces for loading and unloading. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or park such vehicle in a parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, supplies and materials, except when the place of business where such merchandise is to be loaded or unloaded does not have either a usable entrance from an adjoining alley or an officially designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business, the operator of a vehicle may, without making a deposit in a meter or meters, use not to exceed two parking spaces for loading or unloading at such place of business for the length of time necessary to expeditiously load or unload such merchandise, and give or secure a delivery receipt therefor; but it shall be unlawful for any operator to use more than two parking spaces for such loading or unloading or for a longer period of time than is necessary to expeditiously load or unload such merchandise and give or secure a delivery receipt therefor. 
(1975 Code, § 13-76) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 72.19. - Special loading zones established. 
(A)  Loading zones may be established in prohibited parking areas adjacent to businesses situated on either Washington or Graham Street where there are no alleys adequate for loading and unloading goods and merchandise by application of any owner of a business requiring a loading zone for such purposes. The application shall be made to the Chief of Police and the loading zone shall be designated if he/she finds it is necessary for loading and unloading purposes. Should any application be denied by the Chief of Police, the applicant shall have the right to appeal from the ruling of the Chief of Police to the City Council which shall hear and determine such application. Any zone so designated shall be used only for loading or unloading purposes. 
(B)  A loading zone is established on the south curb of the 1100 block of West Tarleton Street at its intersection with McIlhaney Street, then east 70 feet. 
(C)  The west curb of the 100 and 200 blocks of South Paddock Street from West Washington Street to West McNeill Street is hereby declared to be and is hereby designated as a loading and unloading zone from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(D)  The east curb of the 100 and 200 blocks of South Baxter Street, from West Washington Street to West McNeill Street, is hereby declared to be and is hereby designated as a loading and unloading zone from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(1975 Code, § 13-80; Am. Ord. 10-3-1961; Am. Ord. 1992-1, 1-22-1992; Am. Ord. 1993-31, 10-5-1993; Am. Ord. 1994-16, 11-1-1994)  
CHAPTER 73. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND OTHER STREET USES 
 
Sec. 73.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Parade. A procession of pedestrians, vehicles and animals, or any combination thereof, along or upon a street or other right-of-way, park or other public place. The term shall also include a race or competition of any kind. 
Sidewalk. The portion of a street between the curblines, or lateral lines of the roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians, which area may or may not be improved by use of concrete, cement, asphalt or other material. 
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Street activity or activities. A dance, party, assemblage or any type of activity which is held in or makes use of a street or other right-of-way. 
Unit. Any motorized vehicle, (or group of vehicles), individual (or group of individuals) or animals participating in a parade. The city will have discretion in determining whether more than one vehicle, individual or animal may be grouped so as to constitute a unit for the purpose of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 13-101; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.02. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(A)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or other street activity without first applying for and obtaining from the city a permit for that parade or street activity. 
(B)  The requirement to obtain a permit shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in school-sponsored activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A city-sponsored event; or 
(4)  Sidewalk processions which observe and comply with traffic regulations and traffic-control devices, utilizing that portion of a sidewalk nearest the street, but at no time more than one-half of the sidewalk. 
(C)  In the event any of the exempted conditions as described in division (B) above require closing of public streets or sidewalks, an application shall be required but the permit will be waived. 
(1975 Code, § 13-102; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 73.03. - Permit classifications; fees. 
(A)  A Class "A" permit shall be required for all parades with less than 50 units. 
(B)  A Class "B" permit shall be required for all parades with 50 or more units. 
(C)  A Class "C" permit shall be required for motorcades or parades otherwise not classified as "A" or "B". Marches will be included in this category. 
(D)  Permit fees will be assessed as set forth by resolution. 
(1975 Code, § 13-103; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.04. - Permit request. 
A person seeking issuance of a permit for a parade or other street activity shall file a request with the Chief of Police, as prescribed herein. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days before the proposed parade date for a Class A or Class C permit and not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days for a Class B permit. 
(2)  Contents. The request for a permit shall set forth the information on the parade permit application which is on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(1975 Code, § 13-104; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.05. - Permit requirements. 
(A)  Conditions or restrictions. In granting a permit, the Chief of Police may place reasonable conditions or restrictions upon the grant of the permit. At the time the applicant is notified of the Chief of Police's decision, he/she shall also be notified of the conditions or restrictions. 
(B)  Cost. 
(1)  Upon the issuance of the permit, a deposit will be assessed the applicant as set forth by resolution. In the event the city determines, upon a review of the application, that a parade may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel, equipment or facilities, the city shall notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant and the city shall agree upon an estimate of the actual costs for additional city personnel and other costs which shall be incurred as a result of the holding of the parade. 
(2)  The deposit, less the costs for additional city personnel, will be returned to the applicant within five working days. 
(C)  Waivers. All permits shall be conditioned upon the execution of a waiver of liability and assumption of risk form by the applicant and other persons as specifically set out in the Chief of Police's decision notification. Additionally, the permittee may be required to execute a hold harmless agreement with the city. 
(1975 Code, § 13-105; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.06. - Permit standards. 
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the request and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he/she finds the following: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade or activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or activity will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas, or disrupt normal police and fire protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade or activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance; 
(4)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(5)  Notification has been given to the Texas Department of Transportation of the temporary closure of a highway and alternate routing of traffic has been coordinated with the department; and 
(6)  If the starting point and/or disbanding area are located on private property, the applicant shall submit written permission for the holding of the activity from the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative. 
(1975 Code, § 13-106; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.07. - Notice of decisions. 
The Chief of Police shall act upon the request for a permit within seven days after the filing thereof including the disapproval of the request or the placing of certain conditions upon the granting of the permit; he/she shall mail to the applicant within seven days after the date upon which the request was filed a notice of his/her action which sets out the reasons for the action. 
(1975 Code, § 13-107; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.08. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or restriction(s) placed on the application to the City Council Public Health and Safety Committee. The appeal shall be taken within three days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after notice of rejection or notice of issuance subject to certain conditions by filing a written notice of appeal with the Chief of Police. This notice of appeal shall contain a statement indicating what the person objects to and the reason for the objection. Appeal from reimbursing the city for the expenses incurred will not be allowed. The committee shall act upon the appeal within seven days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after its receipt, unless the person filing the appeals waives this requirement. 
(1975 Code, § 13-108; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.09. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  City Attorney; 
(2)  Fire Chief; 
(3)  City Administrator; 
(4)  Director of Street Department; 
(5)  City Secretary; and 
(6)  City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 13-109; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.10. - Permit regulations. 
Each permit shall state the conditions and regulations as set out on the parade permit filed in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(1975 Code, § 13-110; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
Sec. 73.11. - Public conduct during parades or street activity. 
(A)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade or any other permitted activity. 
(B)  Driving through parades. Excepting emergency vehicles, no driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(C)  Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Street Department shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street not posted in violation of this chapter. 
(D)  Initiation of a parade. The Chief of Police or his/her representative shall take over control of the movement of the parade. All bands or marching units shall be required to maintain a forward progress. No alcohol will be allowed in the staging, or on a unit, or by participants on the parade route. Failure to observe these requirements shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and the Chief of Police is empowered to remove this unit from the parade immediately. 
(1975 Code, § 13-111; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995; Am. Ord. 2014-17, 7-1-2014) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 73.12. - Fire safety. 
Parade floats must comply with the Section 1104 of the Fire Code, as follows: 
SECTION 1104. PARADE FLOATS. 
1104.1 Decorative material. All decorative materials used in the construction of parade floats shall be fire resistive or flume retardant when: 
1.  The float is constructed on a motorized vehicle in which the operator of such vehicle is concealed, obstructed or in any way hindered from escaping the operator area, or 
2.  The float is constructed so that any occupants or passengers are restricted or hindered from escaping the float. 
1104.2 Fire protection. All parade floats referred to in Section 1104.1 shall be provided with at least one approved portable fire extinguisher of at least 2-A:10-B:C rating, located so that it is readily accessible to the occupants of the float. 
Floats that are constructed on a motorized vehicle in which the operator is concealed, obstructed or in any way hindered from escaping the operator area, shall be provided with an additional extinguisher of at least 2-A:10-B:C rating, located so that it is readily accessible to the operator. 
(1975 Code, § 13-112; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 70.99.  
Sec. 73.13. - Revocation of permit. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued hereunder where any condition for issuance as set forth in the notice of decision from the Chief of Police or any provision of this chapter is violated. 
(1975 Code, § 13-113; Am. Ord. 1994-13, 10-4-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-6, 2-7-1995)  
CHAPTER 74. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 74.01. - Schedule 1. Truck routes. 
(A)  Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle which is described as a truck tractor, pole trailer, semi-trailer or trailer as described as follows: 
(1)  Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach, or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
(2)  Semi-trailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(3)  Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(4)  Truck tractor. Every vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Local commercial vehicle. Any commercial vehicle whose origin and/or destination is within the city, and any locally operated commercial vehicle. 
Through commercial vehicle. Any commercial vehicle whose origin and destination is other than the city. 
Truck routes. A street, road or highway designated by the City Council upon which it shall be lawful for all through commercial vehicles and local commercial vehicles to travel. 
(B)  Truck routes. The following streets, roads and highways are hereby designated commercial vehicle truck routes for through routes within the city limits: 
(1)  State Highway 281—Entire extent within corporate limits. 
(2)  State Highway 377—Entire extent within corporate limits. 
(3)  State Highway 67—Entire extent within corporate limits. 
(4)  Highway 8—Entire extent within corporate limits. 
(5)  FM Loop 988—Intersection with Highway 8 to intersection with State Highway 67/377. 
(6)  East Washington (Spur 195)—State Highway 281 to east city limits. 
(7)  FM 914—State Highway 67/377 to city limits. 
(8)  State Highway 108 North from State Highway 8 to the corporate limits and south from State Highway 377 to corporate limits. 
(9)  Farm to Market Road 205 entire extent within corporate limits. 
(C)  Truck delivery routes. This term shall mean the operation of a commercial vehicle on a city street for the purpose of loading, unloading or weighing at a location off a designed truck route and return to the nearest truck route. 
(1)  Bates Street—From Highway 8 to end of roadway. 
(2)  Race Street—Highway 8 to Vanderbilt Street. 
(3)  Paddock Street—Highway 8 to Sloan Street. 
(4)  Vanderbilt Street—Race Street to Paddock Street. 
(5)  Floral Street—East Washington to Tarleton Street. 
(6)  Washington Street—State Highway 281 to State Highway 67/377. 
(7)  Graham Street—State Highway 67/377 to Highway 8. 
(8)  Green Street—Floral Street to Graham Street. 
(9)  Hurbert Street—Race Street to Columbia Street. 
(10)  Frey Street—Graham Street to Paddock Street. 
(D)  Regulations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a through commercial vehicle upon any street, boulevard, alley or avenue within the limits of the city, except that such commercial vehicle may travel or be operated upon any street, boulevard or avenue designated as a truck route. 
(2)  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any local commercial vehicle upon any street except those streets designated as truck delivery routes. 
(b)  A local commercial vehicle may leave a truck delivery route for the purpose of delivery or picking up materials or goods at a location not on a truck delivery route but then return to nearest truck delivery route or truck route to exit the location. 
(c)  If additional deliveries or pickups are required the vehicle doesn't need to return to the truck route after each individual delivery but shall return to the truck route upon completion of the deliveries/pickups. 
(3)  Local commercial vehicles may exit delivery routes either direction as long as it intersects with a through route or truck delivery route. The only exception is turning at the Court House square from Graham to Washington or Washington to Graham Streets. 
(E)  Signs. 
(1)  The city will erect truck signs on all streets within the corporate limits of the city other than state maintained roadways. 
(2)  The Texas Department of Transportation will erect such signs as they deemed necessary on all state roadways which are maintained by their agency. 
(F)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $200.00. 
(1975 Code, §§ 13-88 and 13-89; Am. Ord. 6-3-75; Am. Ord. 1998-23, 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 1999-6, 4-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-4, 1-18-2000)  
CHAPTER 75. - PARKING SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 75.01. - Schedule I. Restricted parking. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any motor vehicle upon the following streets: 
Street 	Location 	Time 
Columbia Avenue, South 	East side of the 100 block 	30-minute parking, Monday-Friday (M-F) 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Graham Avenue 	Westerly side of South Graham Avenue from its intersection with the south line of College Street to its intersection with the north line of Long Street 	All 
Graham Avenue 	Westerly side of North Graham Avenue from its intersection with the south line of Green Street to its intersection with the north line of Washington Street 	All 
Graham Avenue 	West side from the north city limit line to the south city limit line; parking of vehicles adjacent to the courthouse on the public square shall not be affected by this provision 	All 
Frey Street 	North side, and part of south side, from the intersection of the street with Harbin Drive on the east and running westerly along the north line of the street a distance of 1,975 feet to its intersection with Dale Avenue and from the intersection of the street with Harbin Drive on the east and running westerly along the south line of the street for a distance of 1,200 feet 	All 
St. Felix Avenue 	From its intersection with West Tarleton Street to its intersection with the north line of West Washington Street which has a distance of 480.3 feet and which runs across West Turner Street and on the west side of St. Felix Avenue from its intersection with the south line of West Tarleton Street a distance of 94.6 feet and on the west side of St. Felix Avenue from its intersection with West Turner Street at the northeast corner of Lot 28 of Block F-39 of Groesbeck and McClelland Addition a distance of 75 feet 	All 
Tarleton Street 	North side from its intersection with North Belknap Avenue to its intersection with North Ollie Avenue 	All 
Washington Street, East 	Intersection of East Washington Street with the east city limit line on the north and south lines of the street a distance of 858 feet running westerly from the city limit line 	All 
Washington Street, West 	Between its intersection with Baxter Street and the east line of Central Ward school grounds, lying south of Washington Street and east of Baxter Street 	All 
Washington Street, West 	South side thereon from the east city limit line to the west city limit line; parking of vehicles adjacent to the courthouse on the public square shall not be affected by this provision 	All 
 
(B)  If any person violates any of the provisions of this schedule, that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day of each said violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(1975 Code, §§ 13-7 through 13-9.5; Am. Ord. 10-3-61; Am. Ord. 11-5-63; Am. Ord. 4-6-82; Am. Ord. 1-3-1984; Am. Ord. 1986-11, 6-3-1986; Am. Ord. 1987-4, 2-3-1987; Am. Ord. 1988-19, 9-6-1988; Am. Ord. 1995-26, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 2000-3, 1-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2010-06, 3-2-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-28, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-O-17, 12-1-2015; Am. Ord. 2018-O-19 , 5-1-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-48 , passed 12-4-2018)  
Sec. 75.02. - Schedule II. No parking zones. 
(A)  No parking zones are established on the city streets as follows. 
Street 	Location 	Times 
Airport Road 	North side 	All 
Alexander Road 	Both sides of the road from the north line of South Loop to the south line of West Washington Street 100 through 800 blocks 	All 
Ash Street 	North Side of 1300 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Ash Street 	South Side of 1300 block 	All 
Barton Avenue, South 	West side of 200 through 300 blocks 	All 
Baxter Street 	East side of 200 through 300 blocks 	All 
Belknap Avenue, South 	East side of 100 block 	All 
Belknap Avenue, South 	Both sides of 200 through 300 blocks 	All 
Belknap Avenue, North 	Both sides of 400 block 	All 
Belknap Avenue, North 	East side of 500 through 800 blocks 	All 
Belknap Avenue, North 	West side for a distance of 75 feet south of Frey Street 	All 
Buck Street 	Both sides of 300 block 	All 
Cain Avenue 	Both sides of 600 through 800 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Centennial Lane 	Both sides 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
City Park 	Both Sides of road established on direct south side of rec. hall 	All 
Cleveland Street 	Both sides of 900 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Clinton Avenue, North 	East side of 600 through 800 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Clinton Avenue, North 	West side of 600 through 800 blocks 	All 
Clinton Avenue, North 	East side of 700 block from its intersection with Jones Street on the south and running north along the east line of the street to its intersection with Shirley Street 	All 
College Street, East 	North side of 300 block 	All 
College Street, West 	North side of 100 block 	All 
College Street, West 	South side of 300 block 	All 
College Street, West 	North side of 600 through 700 blocks 	All 
College Street, West 	South side of 600 through 700 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Collins Street, West 	Both sides of 100 block 	All 
Columbia Avenue, North 	West side of 200 through 300 blocks 	All 
Columbia Avenue, North 	Both sides of 400 block 	All 
Columbia Avenue, North 	North and east sides of 500 block 	All 
Dale Avenue, North 	East side of the 100 through 400 blocks 	All 
Elk Ridge Drive 	North side of 900 through 1200 blocks 	All 
Frey Street, West 	North curb line of the 2600 block of the street and being west 425 feet from the intersection of Frey Street and Dale Avenue 	7am to 4pm 
Frey Street, West 	400 feet west of its intersection with Rowland Street to its intersection with FM 988 	All 
Frey Street, West 	North side, from its intersection with North Belknap to its intersection with North Harbin 	All 
Frey Street, West 	South side from Lillian Avenue to Harbin Drive 	All 
Garfield Avenue 	Both sides of the 800 block 	All 
Garfield Avenue 	West side of 900 through 1000 blocks 	All 
Garfield Avenue 	East side of 900 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Garfield Avenue 	East side of 1000 block 	All 
Garfield Avenue 	West side of 1200 through 1300 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Garfield Avenue 	East side of 1200 through 1300 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Graham Avenue, North 	East side of 100 block 	All 
Graham Avenue, South 	Both sides of 100 block 	All 
Graham Avenue, South 	East side of 200 block 	All 
Green Street 	Both sides of the 1000 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Harbin Drive, North 	East side from its intersection with Sloan until its intersection with Frey Street 	All 
Harbin Drive, South 	Between Washington Street and South Loop 	All 
Jones Street 	North side of 1000 block 	All 
Jones Street 	South side of 1000 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Jones Street 	Both sides of 900 block 	All 
Jones Street 	North side 1100 to 1200 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Jones Street 	North side 1200 to East property line 1327 	All 
Jones Street 	East property line 1327 to West property line of 1327 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Jones Street 	West of property line 1327 through 1400 block 	All 
Jones Street 	South side 1100 to 1140 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Jones Street 	South side West of 1140 through 1400 block 	All 
Lillian Avenue, North 	Both sides 800 block 	All 
Lillian Avenue, North 	East side of 900 through 1000 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Lillian Avenue, North 	West side of 900 through 1000 blocks 	All 
Long Street, West 	Both sides of 100 block 	All 
Long Street, West 	North side, from its intersection with Belknap to its intersection with Alexander Road 	All 
Mason Street 	North side of the 100 block from Graham Avenue to Belknap Avenue 	All 
McIlhaney Avenue, North 	Both sides of 100 through 300 blocks 	All 
McIlhaney Avenue, North 	East side of 400 through 500 blocks 	All 
McIlhaney Avenue, South 	East side of 100 block at its intersection with Washington Street, then 80 feet south 	All 
McIlhaney Avenue, South 	Both sides of 100 block, excluding 80 feet of "No Parking Any Time" 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
McNeill Street, West 	South side of 100 through 200 blocks 	All 
McNeill Street, West 	North side from Orr to Paddock 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
McNeill Street, West 	North side from Paddock to Baxter 	All 
McNeill Street, West 	South side of 700 through 800 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
McNeill Street, West 	Both sides of 900 through 1000 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
McNeill Street, West 	South side of 1400 block at its intersection with Lillian Street, then 305 feet east 	All 
McNeill Street, West 	North side of 1400 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
McNeill Street, West 	Both sides of 1200 through 1300 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Mulberry Street 	North side of 1400 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Mulberry Street 	North side of 1500 block 	All 
Mulberry Street 	South side of 1400 through 1500 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Neblett Avenue 	Both sides of 700 through 800 blocks (From 600-700) 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Neblett Avenue 	Both sides of the 600 block (From East Side Only) 	All 
Ollie Avenue 	East side of the road from the north line of West Washington Street to the south line of Lingleville Hwy (FM 8) 	All 
Ollie Avenue 	West side of 100 through 600 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Overhill Drive 	North side of 2600 block, 40 feet east of the eastern most entrance to 2655 Overhill Drive 	All 
Paddock Avenue, South 	Both sides of 100 through 200 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Race Avenue, North 	East side, from its intersection with Vanderbilt to its intersection with Shirley 	All 
Race Avenue, North 	West side, from its intersection with Vanderbilt 50 feet north 	All 
Shirley Street 	North side of 1000 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Shirley Street 	Both sides of 1200 block through 1385 on the North side and 1380 on the South side 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Shirley Street 	North side West of 1385 to Lillian Avenue North 	All 
Shirley Street 	South side West of 1380 to Lillian Avenue North 	All 
Sloan Street 	North side of the 200 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Sloan Street 	South side of the 200 block, 40 feet west of North Belknap Avenue 	All 
Sloan Street 	Both sides of 1000 through 1100 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Sloan Street 	North side of the 1900 block 	All 
Sloan Street 	South side of the 1900 block from its intersection with St. Felix to 80 feet west of the intersection 	All 
Sloan Street 	South side 1900 block 80 feet from its intersection with St. Felix through remainder of 1900 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
St. Felix Avenue 	Both sides of 100 through 300 blocks 	All 
St. Peter Avenue 	Both sides of 300 block 	All 
Tarleton Street, West 	Both sides of 1000 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Tarleton Street, West 	North side of 1100 through 1200 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Tarleton Street, West 	Both sides of 1500 through 1600 blocks 	All 
Tarleton Street, West 	Both sides of 1900 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Tarleton Street, West 	North side from Harbin Drive to Dale Avenue 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Tarleton Street, West 	South side of 1100 block from a point 70 feet east of its intersection with the east curb line of McIlhaney, east to its intersection with the west curb line of Ollie Avenue 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Turner Street 	Both sides of 1900 block 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Vanderbilt Street 	North side of 1100 through 1200 blocks 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Vanderbilt Street 	South side of 1100 through 1200 blocks 	All 
Vanderbilt Street 	South side of 1100 block between Ollie Avenue and McIlhaney Avenue 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Virginia Street, South 	100 Block 65 feet from its intersection with Washington Street to 77 feet from its intersection with Washington Street 	All, No Parking Between Signs 
Washington Street 	Both sides from the east city limits to the west city limits except on both sides of the 100 block of East Washington Street and the 100 block of West Washington Street 	All 
Washington Street, West 	1400 block for a distance of 150 feet east of its intersection with the 200 block of South Lillian Avenue 	M-F 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
Wolfe Nursery Road 	Both sides of the entire road 	All 
 
(B)  Residents living on the streets designated as no parking zones, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, in division (A) above shall be allowed up to two parking permits per residence per year. The parking permit may be used by the resident or a person designated by the resident. It shall be the type that is hung by the rear-view mirror and shall be numbered and addressed to allow only for parking on the street directly in front of the permitted residence. Parking permits will be issued by the City Water Department, which shall be responsible to establish procedures for the issuance of the parking permit. These procedures shall include the following: 
(1)  Parking permits shall be issued between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. by the City Water Department. 
(2)  Proof of residency shall be required. 
(3)  Parking permits will be valid by calendar years and color-coded. 
(C)  Residents and churches involved in funerals may have the funeral home place designated cones in front of their residence to allow funeral parking. 
(D)  If any person violates any of the provisions of this schedule, that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $60.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day of each said violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(1975 Code, §§ 13-9.2 and 13-9.6 through 13-9.8; Am. Ord. of 1-3-1984; Am. Ord. 1992-1, 1-22-1992; Am. Ord. 1992-7, 4-7-1992; Am. Ord. 1994-16, 11-1-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-26, 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 1996-9, 4-2-1996; Am. Ord. 1997-17, 9-2-97; Am. Ord. 1999-11, 6-15-1999; Am. Ord. 1999-17, 7-6-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-2, 1-18-2000; Am. Ord. 2000-22, 11-7-2000; Am. Ord. 2001-04, 3-6-2001; Am. Ord. 2001-22, 11-6-2001; Am. Ord. 2001-34, 12-18-2001; Am. Ord. 2002-14, 8-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-05, 4-1-2003; Am. Ord. 2007-03, 2-6-2007; Am. Ord. 2009-20, 11-3-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-06, 3-2-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-28, 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-O-17, 12-1-2015; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-19 , 5-1-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-48 , passed 12-4-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-04 , passed 3-5-2019)  
Title 9 - GENERAL REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 90. - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 90.01. - Purpose, intent. 
The animal control regulations as herein established have been enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the city. The intent of the regulations, prohibitions and provisions is to protect values within the city; to enhance the quality of life of persons, pets and other animals; and to protect the general public from damage and injury which may be caused by unregulated animals. 
(1975 Code, § 3-1; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.02. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Abandon. To withdraw protection, support or help from. 
Animal control officer. A person designated by the city as the primary enforcement officer of ordinances regulating animals and owners of animals and for the enforcement of sections of the state statute pertaining to the care and control of animals. 
Attack. A physically aggressive action against a person. 
Boarding/riding stable. Any facility for boarding, livery, training or riding school; or any facility which maintains horses or ponies, mules, donkeys or burros; whether gratuitously or for a fee. 
Dangerous animal. 
(1)  Any individual animal which, because of its physical nature and/or vicious propensity, would constitute a danger to human life or property, or any animal that is possessed of tendencies to attack or to injure human beings or other animals; 
(2)  An animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a human being, that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(3)  An animal that commits an unprovoked act in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own, and that act causes a person reasonably to believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(4)  An animal that makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl that causes bodily injury or death, and which occurs when such animal is at large; and/or 
(5)  Any warm-blooded mammal which is known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and which cannot be effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the State Department of Health. 
Domestic animal. Any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding and does not occur naturally in the wild, which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine and any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation period. 
Enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is reasonably capable of preventing the escape of a dog. 
Erath County humane society shelter. The facility designated and/or operated by the Erath County Humane Society for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter. The Erath County Humane Society will be referred to as the Shelter hereafter. 
Estray. Any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, jenny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat, confined and domesticated hares and rabbits or any species of cattle. 
Exotic species. Any animal born or whose natural habitat is outside the continental United States, excluding nonvenomous reptiles and fish. This is to include bobcats and cougars. 
Guard dog. Any dog which is professionally trained and kept solely for the protection of persons and property. 
Harboring. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premise to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three days or longer. 
Home isolation. Where a domestic animal may have been bitten or scratched by a wild mammal and the domestic animal is kept on the owner's premises (with permission from ACO) isolated from contact with any other animals or persons, except for the one person designated by the owner to care for the animal during the isolated time. 
Hybrid. An offspring of genetically differing parents as members of different breeds or species. 
Kennel. Any establishment designed or used for the boarding, selling or breeding of animals where three or more dogs or cats are to be boarded, sold or bred. This excludes veterinary clinics. 
Livestock. An animal raised for human consumption or an equine animal, to include the following: cattle, sheep, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, burros, goats, swine, poultry or any hybrid of these. 
Owner. Any person who has right of property in an animal or any person who exercises control over an animal for any length of time. 
Normal enclosure. A fenced area or structure that prevents the escape of an animal that has not been declared as dangerous by the Animal Control Officer. 
Rabies vaccination. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Health and administered by a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine licensed by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners. 
Running at large. Any animal which meets the following conditions. 
(1)  Is not restrained by means of a leash, chain or other physical apparatus of sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such animals while off the owner's premises. 
(2)  Is not confined to premises of owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or secured on the premises by a chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from escaping from the premises and so arranged that the animal will remain upon the premises when the leash is stretched to full length. 
(3)  Any animal which is within a vehicle in a manner that would prevent that animal's escape or contact with other persons or animals will not be deemed "at large." 
Secure enclosure. Any animal that has been declared dangerous by the Animal Control Officer shall be kept in a "secure enclosure." "Secure enclosure" means a fenced area or structure that is as follows: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape of a dog; and/or 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog. 
Stray animal. Any animal roaming with no physical restraint beyond the premises of an animal's owner or keeper. Stray also has the same meaning as running at large. 
Theatrical exhibition. Any exhibition or act featuring performing animals, for example a circus or carnival. 
Unprovoked. With respect to an attack by an animal where the animal was not taunted or teased; hit, kicked or struck by a person with an object or part of a person's body; nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person. 
Veterinarian. Any Doctor of Veterinary Medicine having a current license issued by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners. 
Wildlife. Any animal which occurs naturally in a wild state, including any hybrid breeds. 
(1975 Code, § 3-2; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-17, passed 9-4-2007)  
Sec. 90.03. - Creating a health hazard. 
(A)  No animal owner will violate the health and sanitation provisions in Ch. 93, sections 93.04 and 93.06 of this code. 
(B)  No person will allow his/her animal to eliminate on public property or the property of another and not remove the same. 
(1975 code, § 3-3; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Cross reference— Health and Sanitation, see Ch. 93  
Sec. 90.04. - Tampering with traps and equipment. 
(A)  No person shall knowingly prevent, interfere with, or obstruct an Animal Control Officer in the performance of his or her duties. 
(B)  No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order of the local rabies authority or any animal control officer in the city. 
(C)  No person will remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to/set out by the Animal Control Division. 
(1975 Code, § 3-4; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-17, passed 9-4-2007) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.05. - Authority to destroy injured/diseased animal. 
The Animal Control Division, or authorized representative, is authorized to destroy any injured or diseased animal, whether such animal is on public or private property, when the recovery from such injuries or disease is in serious doubt, and after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner of such animal. 
(1975 Code, § 3-5; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.06. - Excessive noise. 
No person will knowingly keep on their premises an animal that disturbs the peace by making excessive loud or obnoxious noises. Any person who has been notified by the Animal Control Officer or City Police Department that their animal is disturbing the peace in this manner has 24 hours from the time of notification to stop the disturbance and prevent its recurrence. Failure to do so within this time period is a violation of this chapter and will be considered a misdemeanor. Each 24-hour period such a violation occurs is punishable as a separate offense. 
(1975 Code, § 3-6; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.07. - Kennels. 
No kennels shall be allowed within the city limits. Licensed veterinary clinics, licensed retail pet stores and licensed pet grooming centers shall not be declared "kennels." 
(1975 Code, §§ 3-114 and 3-115; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.08. - Estrays. 
(A)  Unattended estray. It will be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow an estray to be at large within the city limits. The party having ownership or right to immediate control of such estray will have the burden to keep the estray off any property other than their own in the city. 
(B)  Impoundment. As required by state law, it will be the duty of the County Sheriff's office to take up any and all estray that may be found within the city and to impound such estray. 
(1975 Code, §§ 3-126 and 3-127; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.09. - Prohibited animals; exemptions. 
(A)  Prohibited animals. Animals which are considered "high risk" under the Texas Rabies Control Act and are prohibited within the city limits are skunks, bats, coyotes, foxes and raccoons. Any hybrid of these breeds is also prohibited. Other animals which may be considered dangerous and are prohibited include, but are not limited to: venomous reptiles, constrictor reptiles, elephants, rhinoceros, wolves, lions, tigers, ocelots, cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, binturongs, ostriches, emus, rheas, apes or any hybrid of these animals. 
(B)  Exemptions. This section does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Zoological Parks accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums; 
(2)  Federally-licensed research institutions; or 
(3)  Any government agency or its employee who use the animals in relation to an education, propagation or behavior program. 
(1975 Code, §§ 3-138 and 3-139; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.10. - Animals prohibited in parks during activities. 
(A)  Animals are prohibited in any of the parks located within the city limits during any organized special event. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, an organized activity includes any city-sponsored activity or event; including, but not limited to, festivals, shows or athletic events. 
(C)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Display of animals for viewing, petting zoos, or similar activities is allowed with the permission of the Stephenville Parks and Recreation Director; and 
(2)  Canine assistance for the handicapped. 
(D)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section will be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, will be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation will constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2001-23, passed 11-6-01; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.11. - Private animal sales. 
No owner or person shall display for commercial purpose, offer, sell, trade, barter, lease, rent or give away any live animal on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot or any flea market. 
(Ord. 2007-17, passed 9-4-2007)  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CARE 
 
Sec. 90.20. - General care. 
No owner will fail to provide an animal in his/her care with sufficient good and wholesome food or water, adequate shelter and protection from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and humane care and treatment. Shelter should be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position and must have three sides, a roof and a floor. 
(1975 Code, § 3-21; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.21. - Cruel treatment. 
(A)  No person will cruelly treat any animal or cause, instigate or permit any type of fighting between animals or between animals and humans. 
(B)  No person will tie or tether a dog or other animal to a stationary object in a manner that would create an unhealthy or dangerous situation to the animal or any person. An unhealthy or dangerous situation shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  To tether any animal with a tether that weighs more than one-fifth of the animal's body weight; 
(2)  To tether any animal with a tether that is less than ten feet in length; 
(3)  To tether any animal in such a manner that does not prevent the animal from becoming entangled with any obstruction, from partially or totally jumping any fence, or from leaving part of its owner's property; 
(4)  To tether any animal without using a properly fitted collar or harness; 
(5)  To tether using choke-type collars on any animal; 
(6)  To tether any animal in such a manner as to permit the animal access upon any right-of-way; or 
(7)  To tether any animal in such a manner as to cause the animal injury or pain or not to permit the animal to reach shelter, food and/or water or otherwise create an unsafe or unhealthy situation. 
(1975 Code, § 3-22; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 2007-17, passed 9-4-2007) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, see V.T.C.A. Penal Code §§ 42.09, 42.10  
Sec. 90.22. - Abandoning or endangering an animal. 
(A)  In this section, "abandon" means to leave an animal in any place without providing reasonable and necessary care for the animal, under circumstances under which no reasonable, similarly situated person would leave an animal. Reasonable and necessary care means shelter, food and water. 
(B)  A person commits an offense if, having custody, care, or control of an animal, he intentionally abandons the animal in any place under circumstances that expose the animal to an unreasonable risk of harm. 
(C)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 3-23; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.23. - Injured animal. 
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal will immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner or report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the Erath County Humane Society. 
(1975 Code, § 3-24; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.24. - Leaving an animal in a vehicle. 
(A)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly leaves an animal in a motor vehicle or in the bed of a pickup for longer than five minutes, knowing that: 
(1)  The outside temperature is above 85 degrees; 
(2)  The windows are not rolled down far enough to allow the animal to be cooled; and 
(3)  Did not provide water for the animal; or 
(4)  The outside temperature is below 40 degrees. 
(B)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.25. - Poisonous substances, traps. 
No person will expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, that may be eaten by any domestic animal or person. This section is not intended to prohibit use of herbicides, insecticides or rodent control materials. No person will operate an open trap or metal jaw type that is exposed to any domestic animal or person. 
(1975 Code, § 3-25; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.26. - Theatrical exhibits. 
(A)  All theatrical exhibits, as defined in section 90.02, will, in addition to other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Facilities will be subject to inspection by an animal control officer upon his/her request during reasonable hours. 
(B)  Animal quarters will be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position. 
(C)  Each enclosure will be maintained in a comfortable and healthy temperature level as well as adequate ventilation. 
(D)  No animal will be caused to fight, wrestle or be physically matched against any other animal or person. 
(E)  No animal will perform or be displayed in any dangerous situation that presents the danger of physical injury to the animal or person. 
(1975 Code, § 3-26; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 90.35. - Restraint. 
Each dog or cat, when outside the owner's building, house, fence, vehicle or a dog or cat in the bed of a vehicle must be restrained by its owner. This restraint may be in the form of a pet carrier, leash, chain or other material appropriate to the size and weight of the dog or cat. Any unrestrained dog or cat may be detained or impounded by the Animal Control Division. If the dog or cat has no identification, it will be considered a stray and be subject to section 90.84 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-54; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.36. - Ownership. 
(A)  No person will keep or harbor more than three cats. A litter of kittens may be kept, until they reach the age of three months, without violating this chapter. 
(B)  No person will keep or harbor more than three dogs at one time within the city limits without a Multiple Dog Permit. A littler of puppies may be kept until they reach the age of three months without violating this chapter. 
(C)  At no time will the total number of dogs or cats or any combination of both over the age of three months exceed six per residence. 
(1975 Code, § 3-55; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.37. - Multiple dog permit. 
If a person wishes to own more than three dogs, he/she may apply for a Multiple Dog Permit. In order to receive a Multiple Dog Permit, the owner must meet the following requirements. 
(A)  Sign a sworn statement that they are not (commercially or individually) boarding, breeding or selling animals for profit. 
(B)  Provide an enclosure as defined by section 90.02 of this code. 
(C)  Provide a minimum outside open space of 1,000 square feet for each dog. 
(D)  Provide adequate protection from the weather for each dog in the form of a shelter with three sides, a roof and a floor that provides enough room for the dog(s) to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position. 
(E)  An inspection will be completed by the Animal Control Division prior to the Multiple Dog Permit being granted. 
(F)  Pay an annual fee that will be assessed by the City Council. 
(G)  Any holder of a Multiple Dog Permit permitted under this chapter found to be in violation of any applicable law of the city or the state, or whose property is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, may have his/her Multiple Dog Permit revoked without prior notice by the Animal Control Division. 
(H)  At no time will the total number of dogs or cats or any combination of both over the age of three months exceed six per residence. 
(1975 Code, § 3-56; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.38. - Rabies vaccination. 
(A)  Any dog or cat four months of age or older within the city limits must be vaccinated against rabies. All dogs or cats must be revaccinated within one year of receiving their first vaccination; regardless of the type of vaccine used or the age at which the animal was initially vaccinated. If the animal has received the two vaccinations and the last vaccination consisted of an annual rabies vaccine, the dog or cat must receive a vaccination within 12 months. If the last vaccination consisted of a triennial vaccine, the dog or cat must receive a vaccination within 36 months. 
(B)  If any unvaccinated dog or cat inflicts a bite, scratch or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits a rabies vaccine will not be administered to the dog or cat until that animal is released from quarantine. 
(C)  Every dog or cat four months of age or older is required to wear a current rabies tag attached to their collar as proof that they have received a rabies vaccination. The dog or cat owner is required to present a current rabies vaccination certificate upon the request of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer. 
(D)  The Animal Control Officer is hereby designated as the local rabies control authority for purposes if implementation of the Rabies Control Act (V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.). 
(1975 Code, § 3-57; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2003-06, passed 4-1-03; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.39. - License; fees. 
(A)  License. All dogs and cats four months of age or older which are kept, harbored or maintained within the corporate limits of the city shall be licensed. To receive a license, the owner must show proof of a current rabies vaccination, in the form of a rabies vaccination certificate, and pay the required licensing fee for each animal. The license shall be valid for exactly one year from the issue date. The license may be obtained from the city or any licensed veterinarian within Erath County. 
(B)  Fees. All licensing fees will be assessed by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, §§ 3-58 and 3-59; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2003-06, passed 4-1-03; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.40. - Tags. 
A tag will be issued to each licensed pet and should be displayed on the animal at all times. Replacement tags for lost or stolen tags may be obtained by presenting the receipt for the current year's license fee and paying a replacement tag fee. Tags are not transferable and no refunds will be made. 
(1975 Code, § 3-60; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.41. - Guard dogs. 
All guard dogs shall be considered dangerous dogs and shall comply with the requirements of section 90.45. All guard dogs will be registered as a guard dog with the city. The area or premises where such dog is confined will be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two inches high, stating "GUARD DOG ON PREMISES." 
(A)  The area of premises will be subject to inspection by the Animal Control Officer to determine that the animal in question is maintained and secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent it from coming in contact with the public. 
(B)  The dog shall be issued a normal city registration tag. In addition, a guard dog registration permit shall be issued and the owner must pay an annual fee (to be assessed by the City Council). A copy of the permit shall be kept by the dog's owner. The guard dog permit will expire one year from date of issuance and is not transferable. 
(1975 Code, § 3-61; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.42. - Late fee. 
(A)  For the purpose of this chapter, a late fee may be assessed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Failure to obtain a license for a dog or cat that is over four months of age; 
(2)  Failure to renew license within ten days of expiration of current license; and 
(3)  Failure to obtain license within ten days of the animal taking up residence in the city. 
(B)  All late fees will be assessed by the City Council. 
(C)  Any owner who is found in violation of this section may also be found to be in violation of other sections of this code and may be subject to prosecution for those violations. 
(1975 Code, § 3-62; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.43. - Revocation of license. 
(A)  The Animal Control Division may revoke any cat or dog license after a hearing for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Impoundment of a cat or dog by the city more than three times during a 12-month period; 
(2)  If the dog or cat in question has been involved in a conviction violating this subchapter more than three times; 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (1) and (2) totaling three incidents; and 
(4)  Upon a determination that the animal is a dangerous dog, as defined in sections 90.44 through 90.46. 
(B)  Upon revoking the license of any animal, the Animal Control Division will notify the owner in writing. Written notification will be completed when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the cat or dog's owner is deposited in the U.S. Mail. 
(C)  Ten days after written notification of revocation, as provided above, is made, no animal which has had its license revoked will be kept, maintained or harbored within the city limits. Each 24-hour period will constitute a separate violation. 
(D)  The Animal Control Division will have the authority to conduct random or city wide verification programs in a manner calculated to determine compliance with the license and rabies vaccination requirements. 
(1975 Code, § 3-63; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.44. - Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog. 
(A)  Not later than the fifth day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person will do the following: 
(1)  Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Control Division; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure; and 
(3)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person. 
(B)  A person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when the following occur: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack described in the definitions (section 90.02) of this chapter; or 
(2)  The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(C)  If a person reports an incident described in the definitions (section 90.02) of this chapter, the Animal Control Division must investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses or any other credible evidence, the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, it will notify the owner of the fact. Notification will be within five working days, and if the Animal Control Division cannot personally deliver the notice it will be made by certified mail, return receipt requested. If this fails, notification may be made by ordinary mail or by leaving a copy of the notice at the owner's residence. 
(D)  An owner, not later than the tenth day after the date the owner is notified that a dog is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the Animal Control Division to the Municipal Court. An owner may appeal the decision of the justice or Municipal Court in the same manner as appeal for other municipal cases. 
(1975 Code, § 3-74; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.45. - Registration of a dangerous dog. 
(A)  The Animal Control Division may annually register the dangerous dog if the owner does the following: 
(1)  Presents proof of the following: 
(a)  Liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 90.44; 
(b)  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and 
(c)  A secure enclosure, as defined in the V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 822, subchapter D, 822.041(4), in which the dangerous dog will be kept; 
(2)  Pays an annual registration fee; and 
(3)  Submits a color photograph of the dangerous dog for identification purposes. 
(B)  The dangerous dog must be kept at least 100 feet from any other residence or occupied building. 
(C)  The Animal Control Division will provide the owner of a dangerous dog or a guard dog with a permit. 
(D)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the seventh day after the date of the sale or move, will notify the Animal Control Division of the new owner's address. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration permit and payment of a fee, the Animal Control Division shall issue a new registration permit to the new owner or for the new address. 
(E)  An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people or animals. 
(1975 Code, § 3-75; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.46. - Attack by a dangerous dog. 
(A)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person. 
(B)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which case the offense is a Class A misdemeanor. 
(C)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the dangerous dog may be considered nonregisterable and ordered destroyed. 
(D)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. An attorney having civil jurisdiction in the county or an attorney for a municipality where the offense occurred may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection will be retained by the city. 
(1975 Code, § 3-76; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 90.55. - General care. 
(A)  No owner of any livestock will maintain yards, pens, stables, sheds or other enclosures in which any livestock is confined in such a manner as to give off odors offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity; to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or rodents; in any manner to endanger the public health, safety or welfare; or to create a public nuisance. 
(B)  Manure and droppings will be removed from yards, pens, stables, sheds or other enclosures regularly, based on size and number of animals. This waste matter must be handled or disposed of in such a way as to keep the premises free of any nuisance. 
(1975 Code, § 3-87; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.56. - Enclosures. 
(A)  No owner will keep any horse, cow, cattle, sheep, donkey, burro, llama, poultry or goat within 200 feet of another residence or occupied building, or any swine within 500 feet of another residence or occupied building. 
(B)  Adequate shelter will be provided for each animal. The shelter must be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position. 
(C)  There will be a minimum space for stable and lot of one-half acre (21,780 square feet) for each horse, mule, donkey, burro or cow. Each additional animal of this type must be given an additional one-half acre. 
(D)  There will be a minimum space for stable and lot of one-fourth acre (10,890 square feet) for each goat, sheep or swine. Each additional animal of this type must be given an additional one-fourth acre. 
(E)  There will be a minimum space for pens, coops and yards of 100 square feet (ten feet by ten feet) for each poultry. Each additional animal of this type must be given an additional 100 square feet (ten feet by ten feet). 
(F)  All fences and gates must be in good repair and be strong enough to hold the animals enclosed within. 
(1975 Code, § 3-88; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.57. - Permits; fees; exemptions. 
(A)  Each livestock owner must submit an application for a livestock permit with the Animal Control Division. The applicant must meet all standards outlined in this subchapter and pay the required fee before a permit will be issued. The Animal Control Division has the right to inspect the applicant's property to ensure that all standards are met before the permit is issued. The permit will be valid for one year from the issue date. 
(B)  All livestock permit fees will be assessed by the City Council. 
(C)  Any student who participates in a school-sponsored or 4-H sponsored agricultural program or project, which livestock is a part of, must still apply for a livestock permit and meet all standards outlined in this chapter. However, if the student can provide written proof of participation in a school-sponsored or 4-H sponsored program or project, the livestock fee may be waived for the duration of the program or project. If the livestock is kept beyond the duration of the program, the livestock fee must be paid by the owner. 
(1)  An exception to the enclosure requirements may be made for the duration of the program or project that involves goats or sheep. 
(2)  No owner will keep any sheep or goat within 100 feet of another residence or occupied building. No more than two sheep or two goats or any combination of sheep or goats totaling two will be allowed. 
(3)  Applications for exceptions to other requirements, for school-sponsored or 4-H sponsored agricultural programs or projects only, may be submitted to the City Council's Public Health and Safety Committee. 
(1975 Code, § 3-89; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.58. - Boarding/riding stables. 
All boarding/riding stables as defined herein will, in addition to other requirements of this city, comply with the minimum standards of this section as well as other state laws that apply. All boarding/riding stables as defined will be 1000 feet from any other private residence. 
(A)  All buildings and sheds used for stabling animals will be well-lit, ventilated and provide adequate protection from the weather. All buildings and sheds used for stabling animals will be kept clean and in good repair at all times. Manure and urine will be removed therefrom daily. Acceptable bedding material must be provided. Any enclosure where animals are kept will be graded and raked to keep the surface reasonably dry. 
(B)  Animals let for riding/teaching purposes must be in good physical condition. 
(C)  Boarding/riding stables which rent or lend horses to the general public for pleasure riding and/or lessons, will also adhere to the following standard. Animals exhibiting the following will be deemed unfit for work: 
(1)  Sores or abrasions caused or likely to be irritated by the bearing of services, girth, harness or bridles, unless packing could be utilized; or 
(2)  Serious injury or illness. 
(D)  All boarding/riding stables will be required to apply for a permit from the city. All requirements defined in this section, as well as any applicable state laws, must be met before a permit will be issued. The stables will be subject to an inspection by the Animal Control Officer before a permit is issued. 
(E)  All boarding/riding stable permit fees will be assessed by the City Council. 
(F)  The Animal Control Officer may order a quarantine of the entire premises where the animals are being stabled or any part thereof or on any particular animal for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Excessive parasitism, diagnosed by a veterinarian which would cause the animal to be unfit to be ridden or driven; 
(2)  General malnutrition as diagnosed by veterinarian; or 
(3)  Presence or suspicion of transmissible disease as diagnosed by a qualified veterinarian. 
(G)  Facilities will be subject to inspection by an Animal Control Officer upon his/her request during reasonable hours. 
(1975 Code, § 3-90; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL BITES 
 
Sec. 90.65. - Reporting bites. 
Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for any animal bite/scratch, or any person having knowledge of an animal bite/scratch, will immediately report such treatment to the City Police Department. 
(1975 Code, § 3-101; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.66. - Reporting suspected rabies. 
(A)  A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, will report the incident or animal to the City Police Department immediately. 
(B)  The report must include the name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner, if known, and any other information that may help in locating the victim or animal. 
(1975 Code, § 3-102; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.67. - Quarantine of suspected rabies. 
(A)  The Animal Control Officer or a veterinarian will quarantine or test any animal that is believed to be rabid, may have been exposed to rabies or may have exposed a person to rabies. 
(B)  An owner will submit for quarantine an animal that meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Is reported to be rabid or to have exposed an individual to rabies; or 
(2)  The owner knows or suspects is rabid or has exposed an individual to rabies. 
(C)  The Animal Control Division may allow home isolation of an owner's domestic animal if that animal is suspected of having been bitten or scratched by a wild mammal and meets the following requirements. 
(1)  The animal must be kept on the owner's premises; 
(2)  The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the location of the isolation prior to isolation, and any time thereafter, to ensure the isolation is, and shall remain, in accordance with requirements of the State Department of Health. 
(3)  The owner must contact a veterinarian for guidance to a rabies vaccination program; 
(4)  The isolated animal must not be able to come in contact with any other animals or persons; 
(5)  The owner shall designate only one person to care for the isolated animal during the duration of isolation; and 
(6)  The duration of isolation shall be in accordance with the State Department of Health. 
(D)  The quarantine period for all animals will be in accordance with the requirements set by the State Board of Health. 
(E)  The animal will be quarantined at the shelter, if stray or at a veterinarian clinic of the owner's choice, at the owner's expense. If the owner of the stray animal is located, the owner may be required to pay a fee to the animal shelter for the quarantine. 
(F)  If the animal cannot be maintained in a safe and secure quarantine or isolation, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted to a State Department of Health certified laboratory for the rabies diagnosis. 
(1)  If owner of animal is known, the owner will be obligated to pay costs of packaging, shipping, and laboratory testing. 
(2)  If owner is unknown, the city will be obligated to pay costs of packaging and shipping. If the owner is located, the owner will be obligated to pay the costs of packaging, shipping, and laboratory testing. 
(1975 Code, § 3-103; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Secs. 90.68—90.79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 90.80. - Impoundment. 
Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or law of the state may be taken into custody by an animal control officer or any law enforcement agent and impounded under the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-37; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.81. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(A)  All animals impounded by the Animal Control Division will be held at the animal shelter for a minimum of three shelter working days. During that time period, the owner may present proof of ownership to the Shelter and, after paying all applicable fees, reclaim the animal. If the animal is not claimed within this time period, it will become the property of the Erath County Humane Society on the fourth shelter working day. 
(B)  All animals brought to the Shelter by a person other than the Animal Control Officer, to include the owner or harborer, will immediately become the property of the Erath County Humane Society. 
(C)  All animals brought to the Shelter by the Animal Control Division or any other person, to include the owner or harborer, which are obviously sick, injured or diseased, will immediately become the property of the Erath County Humane Society. 
(D)  As required by state law, it will be the duty of the County Sheriff's Office to take up any livestock for impoundment. 
(E)  All animals other than dogs, cats, livestock or strays in the city impounded by the Animal Control Division, or brought to the Shelter by any other person, to include the owner or harborer, will become the property of the Erath County Humane Society, unless such ownership is prohibited by state or federal law. 
(F)  Once an animal becomes the property of the Shelter, the Erath County Humane Society will retain the sole authority to determine the final disposition of each animal in its custody. The Society will not place any animal for adoption that is classified in this chapter as prohibited. Animals will be euthanized by an injection of sodium pentobarbital or substances approved for euthanasia by the American Veterinary Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association. All animals listed as endangered or protected will be transferred to the proper authority at the earliest possible date, if transportation is allowed by state law. 
(1975 Code, § 3-38; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.82. - Animals held on complaint. 
If a complaint has been filed in Municipal Court for the city against the owner of an impounded animal for a violation of this chapter, the animal will not be released except on the order of the Animal Control Division. The Animal Control Division may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an animal by the owner to the Animal Control Division does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the court, nor from the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-39; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
Sec. 90.83. - Removal of animals from confinement. 
No person shall remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(1975 Code, § 3-40; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.84. - Animals at large. 
(A)  No person owning or harboring an animal will permit such an animal to run at large. The Animal Control Officer, or his/her agent, and peace officers are authorized to impound any animal mentioned in this chapter which is in violation of this section. 
(B)  Any officer of the city is authorized to take up and deliver to the Erath County Humane Society any animal mentioned in this chapter that may be found at large in the corporate limits of the city, subject to the applicable provisions of the law. Any person harboring such an animal who fails to notify and/or surrender the animal to the Animal Control Division is subject to civil and/or criminal action. 
(1975 Code, § 3-41; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.85. - Confinement during estrus. 
Any unsterilized female animal in the state of estrus (heat) will be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure. The area of enclosure will be so that no undesirable animal may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply will be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a veterinary hospital. All expenses incurred as a result of this confinement will be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the Animal Control Division will be a violation of this chapter and the animal will then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 3-42; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 90.86. - Fees. 
All impoundment fees provided for in this chapter will be assessed by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 3-43; Am. Ord. 1997-8, passed 7-1-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-24, passed 11-17-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-26, passed 11-1-2005)  
CHAPTER 91. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 91.01. - Telephone company to serve as backup fire alarm system. 
(A)  The Mayor is authorized and empowered to arrange with the operators of the switchboard and any other employee of the local telephone exchange in the city to switch calls and turn in fire alarms in the matter of fire alarm service for the city. 
(B)  The telephone company is wholly absolved from any duty as a company to the city or to the public in respect to such service, the arrangement being between the city and the employees of the telephone company and being a purely personal arrangement with such employees. With regard to such service such employees are and shall be considered agents of the city. The city will hold the telephone company harmless and protect it against any claim whatsoever that might arise on account of such service to be rendered to the city by the employees of the company. 
(1975 Code, Sec. 9-1)  
Sec. 91.02. - Contract for fire protection with county. 
(A)  The Mayor is authorized to enter into a contract with Erath County, acting by and through its Commissioners' Court, providing that the city will furnish firefighting equipment and personnel necessary to handle same for the fighting of fires outside the limits on the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The number of fire trucks used to fight fires outside the limits of the city shall be subject to the decision of the Fire Chief and these fire trucks shall be equipped with regular firefighting equipment and shall be manned by personnel of the Fire Department of the city necessary to handle such trucks and equipment; 
(2)  The county will pay the city for such service, and failure to make such payment will, at the option of the city, terminate the agreement; 
(3)  The county will agree that the acts of any person while fighting fires, traveling to or from fires or in any manner furnishing fire protection to the citizens of the county outside the city limits shall be considered as the acts of the agents of the county in all respects, notwithstanding such person may be an employee or fireman, either paid or volunteer, of the city; 
(4)  The county agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city for any damages or injuries to employees, agents, workmen or firefighters of the city, or to any person or the property of any person as a result of answering or performing fire calls outside the city. Should any person assert a claim, cause of action or file suit for damages to his/her person or his/her property based on going to a fire, coming from a fire or fighting a fire by the employees, agents, workmen or firefighters of the city, the county shall agree to defend all such claims, causes of action or suits; and 
(5)  It shall be understood and agreed that should the city's fire insurance rate be jeopardized in any manner as the result of answering fire calls outside the city limits, or should the City Council decide that the fire protection of the city is jeopardized by a continuation of the performance of such contract, the city shall have the right to terminate such agreement upon immediate written notice addressed to the County Judge of Erath County. 
(B)  A contract incorporating the provisions of this section shall be executed on behalf of the city in duplicate by the Mayor, attested by the City Administrator, prepared for execution by the County Judge and the four Commissioners of Erath County, and submitted to such court for its execution. Upon the execution thereof, one duplicate executed counterpart shall be left with the County Judge and Commissioners' Court for recording in the Commissioners' Court minutes of Erath County, and the other shall be returned and kept in the permanent records of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 19-2; Am. Ord. passed 3-4-60; Am. Ord. passed 4-5-83)  
Sec. 91.03. - False fire alarm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give or make a false alarm of fire within the corporate limits of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 19-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 91.04. - Interfering with firefighters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with the firefighters of the city while such firefighters are going to a fire or engaging in fighting a fire. 
(1975 Code, § 19-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 91.05. - Arson; reward for information; procedure. 
(A)  The Mayor of the city is hereby required, authorized and empowered to offer a reward of not less than $500.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person who shall be guilty of the crime of arson, as the same is now defined by the Texas Penal Code, committed in the city. 
(B)  Whenever the Mayor shall be informed that any fire which has occurred in the city was of an incendiary origin, he/she shall call for a report on the same by the City Fire Marshal; and if the Marshal shall report that such fire was caused by the commission of the crime of arson, it shall thereupon become the duty of the Mayor to offer a reward of not less than $500.00 for the arrest and conviction of such person or persons so guilty of the crime of arson in such case. The offer of reward shall be in the form of a proclamation duly issued by the Mayor under his/her official signature and attested by the seal of the city and which shall be posted up in a conspicuous place at the City Hall. And upon information being given by any person which shall cause the arrest and conviction of such persons so guilty of a specific case of arson for which the reward shall be offered and after the final conviction of the person or persons, the person so giving the information shall be entitled to receive from the city the reward. 
(1975 Code, Sec. 91-5; Am. Ord. passed 9-7-82) 
State Law reference— Arson generally, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Art. 13.04  
Secs. 91.06—91.19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
 
Secs. 91.20, 91.21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-13 , adopted April 2, 2019, repealed §§ 91.20 and 91.21. Former §§ 91.20 and 91.21 pertained to adoption and amendments of the International Fire Code and derived from § 9-20 of the 1975 Code; Ord. 1991-9, passed June 4, 1991; Ord. 1995-4, passed February 7, 1995; Ord. 1999-3, passed March 2, 1999; and Ord. 2006-28, passed September 5, 2006.  
Sec. 91.22. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The Chief and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in the International Fire Code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place at the Bureau of the Fire Prevention and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(1975 Code, § 9-29; Am. Ord. 1991-9, passed 6-4-1991; Am. Ord. 1995-4, passed 2-7-1995; Am. Ord. 1999-3, passed 3-2-1999; Am. Ord. 2006-28, passed 9-5-2006)  
CHAPTER 92. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 92.01. - State sanitation regulations adopted. 
The State Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs, Rules on Food Service Sanitation, as adopted by the State Board of Health, effective November 30, 1977, and Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation, as adopted by the State Board of Health, effective August 17, 1985, and as amended thereafter, are hereby referenced and adopted as part of this chapter. Three certified copies of which shall be on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
(1975 Code, § 10-31; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
Sec. 92.02. - Definitions. 
(A)  All definitions included in the regulations adopted in Section 92.01 are adopted by reference herein, and applicable to this chapter. 
(B)  Temporary food service establishment. This term shall mean a commercial food service establishment that serves the general public and operates at a fixed location for more than 24 hours, but not more than 14 consecutive days. 
(1975 Code, § 10-32; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
Sec. 92.03. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to operate any food service establishment or retail food store within the corporate limits of city unless such facility is operated in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(A)  General. No person or firm shall operate a food service establishment or retail food store who does not have a valid permit issued to him/her by the city. Only a person or firm who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive such a permit. 
(B)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  Any person or firm desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail food store shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by city. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed facility and the signature of each applicant. A new application shall be made for a permit at any time there is a change of ownership of the facility. 
(2)  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the city shall inspect the proposed facility to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  The city shall issue a permit if it determines the following: 
(a)  The facility is determined to be in compliance with the requirements of these rules; 
(b)  The facility has obtained a current certificate of occupancy from the city; and 
(c)  The permit fee has been paid. 
(4)  Permits are not transferrable and are only valid at the location for which it was granted. 
(5)  Any permit granted under the provisions of this section shall remain valid for one year from the date of issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked for cause, and shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the facility. 
(C)  Twenty-four-hour or less food service establishment. A volunteer group or a commercial food service establishment which operates in the city for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours will not be inspected but must register with the city and pay the required registration fee prior to operation. 
(1975 Code, § 13-33; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 92.04. - Inspections. 
(A)  The city, or its authorized representative, after proper identification, is authorized to enter any facility subject to the provisions of this code at any reasonable time for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. 
(B)  An inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store shall be performed at least once each year or as often as is necessary for the enforcement of these rules. 
(C)  Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this chapter. A copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the persons in charge of the facility at the conclusion of the inspection. 
(D)  The city agrees to confer with the Stephenville Restaurant Association annually before contracting or appointing a representative of city to perform the inspections required in this code. 
(1975 Code, § 10-34; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
Sec. 92.05. - Suspension of permit. 
(A)  Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is required under the provisions of this code to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until the condition that necessitated suspension has been corrected. 
(B)  In the event that an inspection by the city as provided in section 92.04 is conducted, and in the opinion of city the inspected facility is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall have the authority to immediately suspend the facility's permit. 
(C)  In the event that an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of sanitization, refrigeration, an extended loss of water supply, an extended power outage or sewage backup into the facility, the facility shall immediately cease operations and shall immediately notify city. 
(D)  In the event that a permit is suspended or a facility ceases operation hereunder the facility shall not resume operation until it receives approval of city and any suspension is discontinued. 
(1975 Code, § 10-35; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 92.06. - Revocation of permit. 
(A)  The city may, after providing notice of and opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious violations of this chapter. Serious violations are those violations that in the opinion of the city should cause the facility in question to cease operations immediately. The city shall give notice to the holder of the permit, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of ten days following the service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(B)  A notice is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the holder of the permit as shown on the permit. 
(C)  A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of city. 
(D)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(E)  Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
(1975 Code, § 10-36; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
Sec. 92.07. - Food service manager's training certificate. 
Those facilities permitted herein that serve or store potentially hazardous foods shall employ no less than one responsible employee in charge of food service operations who shall possess a certificate for food service manager training from a program as determined by the city. The food service manager training certification should comply substantially with the food service manager training and certification program recommendations published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, as amended. 
(1975 Code, § 10-37; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
Sec. 92.08. - Hearing. 
The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by city at a time and place designated. The city shall record evidence of such hearing, make a final finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind the permit. A notice of the hearing decisions shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by city. 
(1975 Code, § 10-38; Am. Ord. 1993-29, passed 9-7-1993; Am. Ord. 1993-37, passed 12-21-1993)  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
 
Sec. 92.09. - Definitions. 
All food vendors will comply Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) established by the Texas Department of State Health Services as well as the City of Stephenville Ordinance. Vendors shall not prepare food at an offsite location. You may view the complete TFER rules at www.dshs.state.tx.us/foodestablishments. 
(A)  City shall mean City of Stephenville. 
(B)  Edible goods shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Prepackaged food including, but not limited to, candy, beverages, and ice cream. 
(2)  On-site prepared food, which is prepared in the mobile food unit. 
(C)  Food service establishment shall mean businesses that sell edible goods and have been inspected and approved by the City of Stephenville, including commercial kitchens and commissaries, and shall specifically exclude accessory or self-serve retail food sales. 
(D)  Mobile shall mean the state of being in active, but not necessarily continuous, movement. 
(E)  Mobile food vendors shall mean any business, which sells edible goods from a non-permanent (i.e. mobile) location within the City of Stephenville. The term shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Mobile food trucks: A self-contained motorized unit selling items defined as edible goods. 
(2)  Concession trailers: A vending unit, which is pulled by a motorized unit and has no power to move on its own. 
(3)  Concession carts: Mobile vending units that must be moved by non-motorized means. 
(F)  Non-refrigerated shall mean edible goods that are not required to be kept at a temperature below 41 degrees Fahrenheit according to the federal Food and Drug Administration and the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(G)  Sell shall mean the act of exchanging a good for payment or in return for a donation. 
(H)  Stationary location shall mean the position of the mobile food vendor when addressing the public for the purpose of sales and not in motion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-09 , passed 9-5-2017)  
Sec. 92.10. - Permit and application. 
(A)  Permit application. No person shall act as a mobile food vendor in the city without a permit issued by the city. Every permit, including those from the City, shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place where it can be read by the general public on the mobile food vendor's truck, concession cart, or concession trailer. A person shall complete an application for a permit to the city on forms furnished by the city and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, legal name of business or entity, mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Name, mailing address, phone number, and photocopy of the applicant's state or federal issued photo identification card; 
(3)  The trade name under which the applicant conducts business; 
(4)  Type of business organization or corporation as defined by state law; 
(5)  Sales tax number with a copy of sales tax permit; 
(6)  Signed permission from all private property owners where the mobile food vending unit will be stationed; property owner agrees to allow use of their facilities if set-up is longer than two hours; 
(7)  Vehicle and/or unit make, model, and license plate number; 
(8)  Proof of motor vehicle insurance; 
(9)  Description of product being sold; 
(10)  Action plan to dispose of liquid waste and material; 
(11)  Records/receipts of disposal of waste and materials (If renewal); 
(12)  Copy of the contracted health inspector report issued to the mobile food vendor. 
(B)  Fees. All fees required under this section will be set by city council ordinance. 
(C)  Permit decisions. The city will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. Within five business days of receipt of a completed permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a mobile food vendor permit. The city may deny an application for a permit for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failing to provide all of the information required by the city; 
(2)  The applicant's past record of ordinance violations; 
(3)  Safety record of the applicant or any driver, based on such things as civil and criminal lawsuits and violations of environmental laws and ordinances; 
(4)  Providing false, misleading or inaccurate information to the city. 
(D)  Permit. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued for a time period, not to exceed one year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
(2)  Permits are required to be renewed prior to the expiration date. 
(3)  A new permit application is required to be submitted within 15 days of the following, whereupon the previous permit will be voided and the previous permit canceled: 
(a)  When ownership of the operating entity is changed; or 
(b)  The City determines that operations or management methods are no longer adequately described by the existing permit application. 
(4)  Permits are not transferrable. 
(E)  Suspension or revocation of permit. A permit may be revoked by the city for any violation of this section. 
(F)  Appeals. A mobile food vendor has the right to appeal a determination made by the Planning and Building Director to the City Administrator by submitting a written appeal to the City Administrator's office, with a copy to the Director of Planning and Building Director, not more than five days after receiving notice of the suspension or denial of permit. The city Administrator or his or her designee will hear the appeal and issue a written finding not more than 20 days after the notice was delivered to the City Administrator. The City Administrator's determination is final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-09 , passed 9-5-2017)  
Sec. 92.11. - Zoning and location restrictions. 
(A)  Distance regulations. 
(1)  No mobile food vendor, except mobile vendors pre-approved for a solicitation permit shall conduct business within any single-family, multi-family or agricultural zoning district, but may be located in such districts when: 
(a)  Serving and within 100 feet to a (property) with an active building permit; 
(b)  Operating on a lot with a retail commercial business, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Grocery stores; 
2.  Convenience stores; 
3.  Gas stations; 
4.  Any other retail commercial business as determined by the City Administrator or his designee; or 
5.  Located within a city park or recreation area, so long as the vendor obtains permission from the Director of Community Services or his or her designee. 
(2)  A mobile food vendor may not be located within 100 feet of the property line of an open and operating fixed-location food service establishment. This buffer may be reduced upon receiving written permission from said establishments. 
(B)  Stationary restrictions. A mobile food vendor shall not remain on premises and/or conduct sales at a stationary location: 
(1)  In congested areas where the operation impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic or where it impedes access to the entrance of any adjacent building or driveway. 
(2)  In public parking spaces, right-of-way and/or easements owned by the City of Stephenville without written approval by the Director of Planning and Building Services Director or his or her designee. 
(3)  In a designated bike lane. 
(4)  Within the boundaries of City sponsored event unless approved by permit with the Director of Community Services. 
(5)  Within 500 feet of any special events entrance. 
(C)  Location regulations. 
(1)  No mobile food vendor shall locate on any private property without written permission to do so and must comply if asked to leave by the property owner or city official. A copy of the written permission to operate in a specific location, signed by the private property owner, shall be kept within the mobile vending unit at all times. 
(2)  No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial handbill in or upon any motor vehicle without permission of the owner(s) of said property(s) and/ or if there is a placard near or at the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "no advertisement". 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-09 , passed 9-5-2017)  
Sec. 92.12. - Mobile food vendor requirements. 
(A)  Each unit shall be equipped with a trash receptacle with lid to prevent windblown litter and shall be disposed of in accordance with the city's solid waste ordinance. All solid waste and recyclables shall be bagged. Receptacles shall not be overfilled to prevent complete lid closure. All disturbed areas must be cleaned following each stop at a minimum of 20 feet of the sales location. 
(B)  If liquid waste results from food processing of a mobile food vendor's truck, concession cart, or concession trailer, the waste shall be contained in a permanently installed retention tank located on the vending unit. 
(C)  Liquid waste, solid waste, and/or recyclables shall be removed from a mobile food vendor's truck, concession cart, or concession trailer at a disposal site approved by the city or by a city permitted waste transporter. Removal of waste shall be in a manner that a public health hazard or nuisance is not created. Records of removal and disposal shall be provided to staff upon request. 
(D)  Liquid waste from a mobile food vendor shall be characterized as food service waste and shall meet the waste removal, manifesting, disposal, and treatment requirements of the city's franchise agreement prior to discharge into the city's publicly owned treatment works. 
(E)  Waste generated from washing or maintenance of mobile vending unit shall be done in a manner to prevent release on public or private property. 
(F)  The mobile food vendor will be subject to inspection by the city upon permit application and be subject to random inspections mandated by the Texas Food Establishment Rule and upon reissuance of the permit. Inspections must pass all fire and health inspections. Failure to pass any inspection at any time will result in cancellation of permit. With the cancellation of any permit, an applicant must submit a new application and fee. 
(G)  Mobile food vendor's truck, concession cart, or concession trailer shall be self-sufficient for water and sewer utilities. Use of water and wastewater hoses to provide utility service to mobile vending unit is prohibited. Extension cords may be used for electrical service if the equipment and connection(s) used between the vending unit and supplying source pose no threat to public safety (i.e. personal injury or fire). 
(H)  All signage used by the mobile food vendor, including signage painted directly on the mobile food vending unit, shall meet the standards and requirements of the city's sign ordinance, but shall not be required to obtain a sign permit under that chapter. 
(I)  Mobile food vendors shall maintain the following fire prevention devices: 
(1)  All vendor shall keep at least 20 feet of separation from any permanent structure while using cooking equipment. 
(2)  All mobile vendors shall provide means to shut off all electrical power with one motion shall be accessible from the outside of the unit. 
(3)  All mobile food vendors shall keep at least one class ABC fire extinguisher with a minimum 3A40BC rating, with visible current inspection (tagged), fully charged, and located within 30 feet of cooking equipment; 
(4)  All mobile food vendor units producing grease-laden vapors (grills, fryers, etc.) shall keep, in addition to the extinguisher required in subsection (1), a Class K rated portable fire extinguisher, with visible current inspection (tagged), fully charged, and located within 30 feet of cooking equipment; 
(5)  All mobile food vendors units producing grease-laden particles within the mobile unit shall install an extinguishing vent hood (Type 1 or other, if approved by the City Fire Marshal or designee), which must be tested in the presence of the Stephenville Fire Marshal or designee before a permit may be issued; and 
(6)  All mobile food vendor units using compressed gas (LP/propane cylinders, etc.) shall keep gas containers secured outside of the passenger area of the vending unit. Compressed gas cylinders shall be secured by one or more restraints to a fixed object or nested and secured by one or more restraints and cannot be located closer than ten feet from any trash or combustible material. All valves, hoses, and connections used shall be rated for use with petroleum gas. 
(7)  All mobile units using an LP gas system shall be equipped with a shutoff switch or valve accessible from outside the unit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-09 , passed 9-5-2017)  
Sec. 92.13. - Enforcement. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell edible goods while displaying a valid permit issued by the City in the name of another individual, organization, or entity outside of an employment relationship. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through an agent or employee to sell goods within the corporate limits of the city after the expiration of the permit issued by the City under this section. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for an individual directly or through an agent or employee to misrepresent on the permit affidavit any acts that are regulated under this section. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through his agents or employees to represent that the issuance of a permit by the City constitutes the city's endorsement or approval of the product for sale. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile food vendor operation that is not in compliance with the Texas Food Establishment Rules as amended from time to time. 
(F)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-09 , passed 9-5-2017)  
CHAPTER 93. - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, see Ch. 90; Food Service Establishments, see Ch. 92; Nuisances, see Ch. 94 
 
Sec. 93.01. - Abattoirs and slaughterhouses. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to build or establish a slaughterhouse, slaughter pen or yard or abattoir within the corporate limits without first obtaining permission from the Council. 
(1975 Code, § 10-2; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.02. - Injurious trades, occupations and substances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to carry on any trade, business or occupation injurious to the health of those who may reside in the vicinity, or to allow any substances which shall have such effect to remain on premises in his/her possession. 
(1975 Code, § 10-16; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.03. - Injurious, offensive buildings and premises. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to own, keep or use any building or premises in the city in such a manner as to be injurious to the health of the people, offensive to the neighborhood or to any private family or person or detrimental to the public health. 
(1975 Code, § 10-17; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.04. - Animal pens, enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to own, keep or use any pen or enclosure in which cattle and other animals are kept in such a manner as to become a nuisance within the city or within 5,000 feet from the city limits. 
(1975 Code, § 10-18; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.05. - Stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city or within 5,000 feet from the city limits to permit or allow holes or places on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit same to remain. 
(1975 Code, § 10-19; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.06. - Carrion, filth, manure or other impure matter. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard within the city or within 5,000 feet from the city limits to permit or allow any carrion, filth, manure or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(1975 Code, § 10-20; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99.  
Sec. 93.07. - Accumulations of weeds, brush or rubbish. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person who shall own any premises in the city to allow grass, weeds, brush, rubbish or any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such premises. 
(B)  Such premises, in addition to those grounds within their respective boundaries, shall be held to include all parcel(s) of land lying and being adjacent to, abutting and extending beyond the property line of any such premises to the centerline of adjacent or abutting street(s) or alley(s). 
(C)  It shall be the primary duty of the owner of any premises within the city to cut and remove all weeds as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this code. In any prosecution for a violation of this chapter, the owner shall not be permitted to plead or show evidence that the occupant or tenant of property is the person against whom the charges should be brought. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any piles or windrows of debris or weeds, grass or brush which could serve as habitat for rodents or other vectors of disease on such premises after the same has been cut, and it shall be the duty of the owner of such property to remove such grass, weeds, brush or other unsightly or objectionable matter after the same has been cut from the premises to prevent insanitary conditions from occurring on such property. 
(E)  Grass and weeds under this section shall include, but not be limited to any tall grass or weeds exceeding an average height of ten inches, or vegetation providing safe harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. Exempted from the provisions of this subsection are the following: 
(1)  State highway rights-of-way; 
(2)  Agricultural areas that are separated from developed residential property by more than 100 feet and are not otherwise a nuisance to adjoining property or persons. Agricultural meaning crop production and/or grazing; 
(3)  Heavily wooded areas filled with uncultivated underbrush; 
(4)  The cultivation of concentrated wildflowers from March 15 to August 1 of each year, provided that wildflowers are not overgrown with grass or weeds; and 
(5)  Other areas that, in the opinion of the enforcing officer, are separated by a sufficient distance so as not to be a nuisance to adjacent property or persons. 
(F)  Brush and rubbish under this section shall include, but not be limited to any brush, rubbish, trash or other unsightly matter which tends to make the property and/or the neighborhood in which the property is located unsightly or offensive. Exempted from the provisions of this subsection are the following: junk yards, scrap yards, wrecking yards and similar establishments, provided such is legally established. 
(1975 Code, § 10-21; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 93.99. 
State Law reference— Weeds, see V.T.C.A. Health & Safety Code § 342.008  
Sec. 93.08. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer or his/her duly authorized assistant, hereafter known as enforcing officer, to enter all premises as may be necessary to enforce this chapter and to take such actions as shall remedy the violation of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 10-1; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992)  
Sec. 93.09. - Notice to abate. 
In the event the owner of any premises in the city on which a nuisance exists as provided in this chapter fails or refuses to abate or correct such condition within ten days after notice to such owner to do so, in writing or by letter addressed to such owner at his/her post office address, or within ten days after posting notice on the property or on the buildings to which the violation relates if personal service may not be had as aforesaid or if the owner's address is not known, the city may abate or correct such condition, or cause the same to be done, and such expense shall be assessed on the real estate or premises upon which it was incurred. 
(1975 Code, § 10-23; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992)  
Sec. 93.10. - Lien for expenses incurred. 
The enforcing officer shall file a statement of such expenses incurred pursuant to Section 93.99, giving the amount thereof and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, to the City Secretary, who shall cause the same to be filed with the County Clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with the provisions of the V.T.C.A. Health & Safety Code sections 342.001—342.007, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount shall bear 10% interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of such expenses, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(1975 Code, § 10-24; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992)  
Secs. 93.11—93.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 93.99. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or individual who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00, and each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or occupant of any lot, lots or premises under the provisions of this chapter shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provision of this chapter, the President, Vice President, Secretary or Treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(1975 Code, § 10-22; Am. Ord. 1992-14, passed 7-7-1992)  
CHAPTER 94. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned and junked motor vehicles, see V.T.C.A. Transp. Code §§ 683.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 94.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
Junked motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle which has an expired license plate or an invalid certificate affixed thereto and the condition of which is, as follows: 
(1)  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or discarded; 
(2)  Abandoned; or 
(3)  Inoperable (not legally or mechanically fit for road use) and has remained inoperable for more than 45 consecutive days. 
Motor vehicle collector. A person who does the following: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; or 
(2)  Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacture's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(1975 Code, § 11-47; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 94.02. - Exceptions. 
The provisions hereto shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that meets the following conditions: 
(A)  Is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(B)  Is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are the following: 
(1)  Maintained in an orderly manner; and 
(2)  Not a health hazard; 
(C)  Any motor vehicle specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately-owned drag strips or raceways. 
(1975 Code, § 11-48; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 94.03. - Declared a public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way within the city that meets the following conditions is a public nuisance: 
(A)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(B)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(C)  Invites vandalism; 
(D)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(E)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; or 
(F)  Produces conditions adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities. 
(1975 Code, § 11-49; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 94.04. - Nuisance abatement; procedures. 
The procedure for abatement of nuisances shall be as follows: 
(A)  Notice must be given as set out in section 94.05 if the nuisance is not abated; 
(B)  The Municipal Court Judge must conduct a hearing as set out in section 94.06; 
(C)  Upon receipt of the order for removal, the Chief of Police shall have the motor vehicle or part removed to an authorized licensed vehicle storage facility; 
(1)  After removal, the vehicle is prohibited from being reconstructed or made operable; and 
(2)  Notice must be given to the State Department of Transportation identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. 
(1975 Code, § 11-50; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 94.05. - Notice. 
(A)  The procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this subchapter must provide not less than ten days notice of the nature of the nuisance and must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to the following: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lien holder of record of the nuisance; 
(3)  The owner or occupant of the following: 
(a)  The property on which the nuisance is located; and 
(b)  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(B)  The notice must state the following: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(C)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(D)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(1975 Code § 11-51; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 94.06. - Hearing. 
The Municipal Court Judge shall conduct a hearing under the procedures adopted by this subchapter. 
(A)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 94.04, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the service of the notice. 
(B)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(C)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicles description, vehicle identification number and license plate number. 
(1975 Code, § 11-52; Am. Ord. 1997-2, passed 1-7-1997)  
CHAPTER 95. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Council's authority relative to streets, see Charter, Art. III, § 17(12), (15) 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 95.01. - Littering, clogging or filling gutters, sidewalks, streets and alleys. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building or premises within the city to allow the gutters, sidewalks, streets and alleys adjacent to the building or premises to become littered, clogged or filled with any offensive substance, liquid or solid, or any dirt, mud or similar matter, rubbish, water, bottles, broken glass, crockery ware, iron, tin, wire or stones, or any other thing dangerous to health, life or limb of any person or animal. It shall be the duty of the owner of the property from whence the matter has come to clean the gutters, sidewalks, streets and alleys of the deposited matter. 
(B)  Upon discovery of such a deposit upon any gutter, sidewalk, street or alley, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works, or his/her authorized representative, to notify the owner of the property. In the event the owner of any property in the city on which a nuisance exists as provided in division (A) of this section fails or refuses to abate or correct such condition within ten days after notice to do so, in writing or by letter addressed to such owner at his/her post office address, or within ten days after notice by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in any newspaper in the city if personal service may not be had as aforesaid or if the owner's address is not known, the city may abate or correct such condition, or cause the same to be done, and such expense shall be assessed on the real estate or the lot upon which it was incurred. 
(C)  The Mayor shall file a statement of such expenses incurred pursuant to this section, giving the amount thereof and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, with the County Clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 4436, which then shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount shall bear 10% interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of such expenses, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(1975 Code, § 16-1; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-64; Am. Ord. 1985, passed 7-2-85) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.02. - Littering prohibited. 
(A)  Generally. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to cast, throw or place, or to suffer his/her agents or employees or any person of his/her family to cast, throw or place, or by his/her orders cause to be cast, thrown or placed, into or upon any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, street, gutter or any public or private place or any vacant lot or tract of land within the city, any animal, fruit or vegetable refuse or offal, or any tin, glass, bones, rags, iron, pieces of wood, straw, dirt, filth, ashes, chips, shells, paper or any other rubbish or trash. 
(B)  Store owner's responsibility. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for anyone to throw, place or sweep any paper, dirt, trash or rubbish from any store into the streets or gutters in the city. 
(C)  Use of disposable articles; sweeping into streets, gutters. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for the owner or operator of any business within the city to permit any articles, such as paper cups, paper napkins or any other article used in serving the customers of such business which may be dropped or deposited by a customer or any other person on property used by the owner or operator of such business, to be blown by the wind or carried by air currents onto any street, alley or public place of the city or onto the property of any other person; or for such owner or operator to permit or cause such articles to be thrown or swept from the building or lot used for such business into the streets, alleys or gutters in the city. 
(1975 Code, § 16-4; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-64; Am. Ord. passed 4-6-65) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Cross reference— Food service establishments, see Ch. 92; General offenses, see Ch. 130; Nuisances, see Ch. 94;  
Sec. 95.03. - Permission required to dig hole, drain or ditch. 
Any person who shall dig any hole, drain or ditch in any street, alley or public ground within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained permission from the City Council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-5)  
Sec. 95.04. - Permission required to remove stone, sod, gravel or sand. 
Any person who shall dig, move or carry away, or cause to be dug, moved or carried away, any sod, stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, alley or public place in the city, without first having obtained permission from the City Council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-6)  
Sec. 95.05 - Covering excavations. 
Any person having charge of any public or private improvement in the city, who shall leave any hole, ditch or excavation in or adjoining any public square, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, without guarding or covering the same so as to prevent persons and animals from the danger of falling therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-7)  
Sec. 95.06. - Destroying streets, sidewalks; obstructing repair. 
Any person who shall willfully injure or tear up any improvement, sidewalk, crosswalk, drain or sewer, or any part thereof, in any street, pavement or sidewalk within the city, or who shall obstruct the making or repairing of any sidewalk, crosswalk or pavement which may be under construction pursuant to any resolution of the City Council, or who shall hinder or obstruct the person employed to make the repair or public improvement ordered by the City Council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-8)  
Sec. 95.07. - Destroying bridges, culverts, gutters and the like. 
Any person who shall willfully injure or destroy, or assist in injuring or destroying, any bridge or its appurtenances, or any culvert, causeway, gutter or other public improvement within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-9)  
Sec. 95.08. - Obstruction of streets, alleys. 
(A)  Any person who shall unnecessarily obstruct the public square or any street, avenue or alley within the city with an automobile or other vehicle, or with boxes, lumber, timber, firewood, posts, awnings, signs or other substances or merchandise, in any manner whatsoever so as to prevent free travel thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(B)  This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit any person engaged in building, removing or improving any building or other improvement, after obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police, from occupying that portion of the public square or any street, avenue or alley adjacent to such improvement or buildings with stone, bricks or other material; provided, that such material shall not occupy more than one-third of the street, avenue or alley, nor more than 33 feet in width of the public square, from the outside of the sidewalk and parallel with same in front of such building or improvement, nor be placed there more than ten days before the beginning of such building or improvement; nor shall the owner of such building or improvement allow any surplus lumber, stone, brickbats, broken stone or other rubbish to remain in the public square, street, avenue or alley more than five days after the completion of such building or improvement. 
(1975 Code, § 16-10)  
Sec. 95.09. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
(A)  Any person who shall erect or cause to be erected any awning or post on any sidewalk in the city at a distance less than the width of the sidewalk from the inside thereof, or shall suspend or put up any awning, sign, sample or other article less than eight feet above the sidewalk; or shall place, throw or deposit any article whatever upon any sidewalk so as to prevent free passage thereon; shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If any such obstruction is not removed within four days after notice by the Chief of Police or a policeman to do so, it shall be removed by the city at the expense of the party notified to remove such obstruction. 
(B)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent merchants and dealers from placing packages of goods, wares or merchandise which they may be receiving or shipping on any sidewalk, if such packages do not occupy more than one-half thereof or do not remain thereon more than two hours; nor to prevent carpenters or builders from occupying not to exceed one-half of the sidewalk adjacent to any improvement they may be engaged in erecting, or from crossing or passing over such sidewalk with material for such improvement or building. All scaffolding erected over or on the sidewalk shall be put up in a good substantial manner so as not to endanger the safety of others. 
(1975 Code, § 16-11) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.10. - Construction on public square. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect upon the public square of the city any tent, shed, advertising board or structure of any kind whatever. 
(1975 Code, § 16-12) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.11. - Sports, exercise in streets. 
Any person who shall engage in any sports or exercise in any public street or highway in the city calculated to injure pedestrians or hinder or retard the passage of vehicles shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(1975 Code, § 16-13)  
Sec. 95.12. - Street paving. 
(A)  Permit required; application. Any person who desires at his/her cost and expense to pave or place any paving material on any street, alley or public thoroughfare within the city, before doing such paving or placing such paving material, shall apply to the Building Inspector for a permit. The application for such permit shall describe in writing the street or section of street, alley or public thoroughfare on which the applicant desires to place such pavement or paving material and the exact location thereof by block number or by its location with reference to intersecting streets, avenues, alleys or other public thoroughfares. 
(B)  Consideration of application. The Building Inspector, upon receiving an application for a permit required by division (A) of this section, shall refer it to the City Council before he/she takes action thereon. The City Council shall duly consider such application with reference to whether sewer and water lines and any other public utilities are laid in such alley, street or other public thoroughfare, and shall then, by resolution, direct the Building Inspector to either grant or refuse the application for a permit. 
(C)  Response to application. In the event the City Council directs the Building Inspector to issue a paving permit, it may be in the form of a letter written by the Building Inspector to the applicant and shall specify the exact portion of the street, alley or public thoroughfare and the nature of the paving or the paving material which is to be placed thereon. In the event the Council directs the Building Inspector to refuse such permit, the refusal of the permit may be in the form of a letter from the Building Inspector to the applicant advising the applicant that his/her application for a permit has been denied by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, §§ 16-13 through 16-15)  
Sec. 95.13. - Maintenance of sidewalks, driveways and trees by property owners or occupants. 
(A)  It shall be the duty and the obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property upon which a sidewalk, driveway or other way is located and used by or which may be used by the public to keep and maintain such sidewalk, driveway or way in a safe condition for use. Such sidewalks, driveways or ways shall be maintained so as to be free of depressions, excavations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions or encroachments by the owner or occupant of such real property. 
(B)  It shall be the duty and obligation of the owner and occupant of any property abutting upon any defective, unsafe or hazardous sidewalk, parkway, way or driveway to repair the same at his own expense. 
(C)  The city, or other utilities providers, regulate vegetation in easements and rights-of-way. Notwithstanding the right of the city, or other utility providers to regulate vegetation in easements or rights-of-way, it shall be the duty and the obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property abutting upon a tree or tree part, including those trees or tree parts situated in the right-of-way, (excluding any median in a street), parkway, utility easement, drainage easement or other public way, to maintain, at the expense of said owner, occupant and/or user of said real property said tree or tree part in a safe condition and to trim, prune or remove any tree or tree part that is in an unsafe or hazardous condition. 
(D)  If any injury or damage is occasioned or suffered or inflicted upon any person by reason of the violation of the provisions of this section, primary liability for any loss or damage shall be upon the owner, occupant or user of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-04 , 1-2-2018)  
Secs. 95.14—95.24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CURBS AND GUTTERS 
 
Sec. 95.25. - Compliance. 
Any curb and gutter constructed by the city or by any person on and immediately adjacent to any public street or alley shall conform to the specifications and requirements prescribed in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 16-40; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.26. - Permit required; application. 
Any person who desires at his/her cost and expense to cause construction of a concrete curb and gutter within any street, alley or public thoroughfare within the city, before doing such construction or placement of any material, shall apply to the Building Inspector for a permit. The application for such permit, as defined in the City Building Code, shall describe in writing the street or section of street, alley or public thoroughfare on which the applicant desires to place such curb and gutter and the exact location thereof by block number or by its location with reference to intersecting streets, avenues, alleys or other public thoroughfares. 
(1975 Code, § 16-41; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, see Ch. 150  
Sec. 95.27. - Materials. 
(A)  Concrete. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed of Class "A" Concrete (five sack concrete-3,000 pounds at 28 days). Mortar topping, if used, shall be eight sack concrete with sand. 
(B)  Reinforcement. Reinforcement shall be as shown in Figures 2 and 3 of the typical details for curb and gutters, Appendix A. 
(1975 Code, § 16-42; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85)  
Sec. 95.28. - Construction. 
(A)  General specifications. No concrete shall be placed unless the subgrade, forms and reinforcement have been checked and approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her agent. Concrete shall be deposited on a moist subgrade. During placing, the concrete shall be thoroughly spaded next to the forms and shall be carefully tamped, using an approved tamper, in uniform layers not exceeding six inches in depth, until a uniformly dense concrete is obtained. No concrete over 30 minutes old or retempered concrete shall be used. After the placing of the concrete has sufficiently advanced, the concrete shall be struck off with a "mule" cut to the exact section as shown in Figure 2 of Appendix A the typical details for curb and gutters. If the contractor elects to use a mortar topping on the curb and gutter-section to facilitate finishing, a first pass over the rough concrete may be made with a "mule" which will strike off as much as ¼ inch short of finish grade. If this method is used, the topping must follow the initial placement immediately. The finish mule must be cut to the exact section shown in Figure 2 of Appendix A of the typical details for curb and gutters and must in no case fall more than 50 feet behind the initial strike-off. Any section which is allowed to attain initial set before the application of the topping, or which has in any way been handled in a manner which would tend to jeopardize the complete bonding of the two courses will be removed and replaced at the direction of the Director of Public Works or his/her agent. As soon as the concrete has set sufficiently to retain its shape without support of the forms, the clamps and spreaders may be removed. Forms shall remain in place at least 24 hours after completion of work. All honeycombed areas disclosed by removal of forms shall be immediately corrected by use of cement mortar. The top of all the work and the face of all curbs will be checked for irregularities as soon as the surface is finished, using a ten-foot straightedge; all variations greater than ¼ inch in ten feet shall be immediately corrected. All curbs and gutters shall be marked every five feet and a ½-inch premoulded joint of like cross-section shall be installed at every eighth mark and at all points of curvature and tangency at intersections. Three No. 4 round, smooth dowel bars 24 inches long shall be installed at each of these expansion joints. One-half of the dowel shall be coated with asphalt and terminated with an expansion cap. 
(B)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be scarified, mixed, reshaped by balding, sprinkled and tamped to 95% standard proctor density at approximately optimum moisture. The process shall be performed to the end that a minimum six-inch layer of compacted subgrade is secured immediately below the bottom of the curb and gutter and extending one foot beyond the back of curb. The subgrade shall be checked for grade, and any portion thereof which falls below the grades shown on the plans shall be filled to plan grade with sand at the expense of the contractor. 
(C)  Forms. The forms shall be of wood or metal, straight and free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist springing during the process of depositing and compacting the concrete. Straight forms of wood shall be two-inch nominal thickness surfaced plank, or of metal of an approved section with a flat surface on top and bottom. Curved forms shall be used on radii and may be of flexible wood or metal. These forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the concrete section in which they are in contact and so designed as to permit securely fastening together in correct position. Forms shall be securely staked, braced and firmly held to the required line and grade, using approved spreaders and clamps, and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar. All forms shall be cleaned thoroughly and wetted before the concrete is placed against them. 
(D)  Finishing. Finishing will commence as soon as the concrete is workable. An edging tool, so designed to cut a radii is to be used on the back edge of the curb, the street edge of the gutter and at points where dividing plates were placed. The entire area of the curb and gutters is to be brushed with a moist brush to a carpet finish. Sections where dividing plates have been left in until the structure was fractured when they were removed will not be accepted and will have to be taken out and removed. The contractor will take proper steps to protect the structure. The Director of Public Works, or his/her agent, will be the sole judge as to any additional steps for protection to the curb and gutter. 
(E)  Curing. Concrete shall be cured with the application of a two membrane curing compound. This liquid membrane-forming compound for curing concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of A.S.T.M. Designation C309 for Type 2, White Pigmented Compound (other colors will not be permitted). The material shall have minimum flash point of 80°F when tested by the "Pensky-Martin closed cup method." When applied at the proper consistency through an anatomizing nozzle by means of approved pressure equipment, the compound shall produce a fine mist which shall provide a firm, continuous, uniform moisture impermeable film, free from pinholes, which shall adhere satisfactorily to the surface of the damp concrete without running off or appreciably sagging. Under normal conditions and at the specified rate of coverage, the material shall be dry to the touch in not more than four hours. During the curing period of 72 hours, the material shall not disintegrate, check, peel or crack. 
(F)  Backfilling, sloping and finishing. As soon as the curb forms are removed, backfilling of the curb will commence. It is important that backfilling be given special attention to protect the new curb. Select material shall be used for backfill, which will not include rocks or other foreign material that might damage the curb. Backfill shall be thoroughly compacted and neatly graded off of the top of the curb. When the curb and gutter are constructed in residential areas, the top four inches of backfill dirt will be topsoil or other approved soil which will support the growth of lawn grasses. All construction materials, items of excavations and other foreign matter collected during the process of construction, will be disposed of in an acceptable way before the job is accepted. 
(1975 Code, § 16-43; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.29. - Existing pavement. 
(A)  In all cases where the property owner or the contractor acting for the property owner constructs curbs and gutters adjacent to an existing topped or unproved street, the property owner or any contractor acting for the property owner will replace and repair any damage done to the existing pavement and all gutters constructed will be on a level with the existing pavement. 
(B)  In the event any person shall fail to repair any damage to existing pavement or shall construct a gutter which is not on the level with existing pavement, the city shall repair such damage and correct any defective gutter and assess the cost therefor. In addition thereto, the property owner or contractor shall be subject to the penalty provided in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 16-44; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.30. - Inspections. 
The Director of Public Works of the city shall inspect all curb and gutter construction, which shall be subject to his/her approval in regard to meeting the details, specifications and requirements set out in this subchapter. 
(1975 Code, § 16-45; Am. Ord. 1985-13, passed 9-3-85)  
Sec. 95.31. - Typical details for curbs and gutters. 
Figures 1, 2, and 3 shall be a part of this subchapter including all notations and dimensions as shown in Appendix A. 
(1975 Code, § 16-46)  
Secs. 95.32—95.44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 95.45 - Street numbers required. 
Each property owner in the city shall be required to number all buildings, both business and residential. 
(1975 Code, § 16-62) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 95.46. - Location, size. 
Each house and place of business shall be numbered in a plain and conspicuous place on the side abutting the street nearest the front of such house or building. The number shall be at least four inches in length and of proportionate width and may be placed on each house and building by the owner or under his/her direction. 
(1975 Code, § 16-63)  
Sec. 95.47. - Numbering plan. 
The map which has been filed in the office of the Building Inspector designating the numbers for each block and subdivisions thereof shall furnish the basis and plan for house numbering. The owner of each residential or business structure, before placing a number thereon, shall be advised by the Building Inspector of the proper number for the structure owned by him/her, which shall be numbered according to the plan contained on the map on file in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(1975 Code, § 16-64)  
Sec. 95.48. - Designation of bases. 
Graham Avenue shall constitute and be the base for all streets running east and west, and Washington Street shall constitute and be the base for all streets running north and south, in the numbering of houses in the city. 
(1975 Code, § 16-65)  
Sec. 95.49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CLOSING STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 95.50. - Reference to transportation code. 
Provisions for the closing of streets and alleys are granted by the V.T.C.A. Transp. Code § 311.07. The procedures and regulations set out herein are consistent with the requirements of the Code and set out regulations to be followed in the closing of streets and alleys. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.51. - Public hearing generally. 
The City Council, on its own initiative, may call a public hearing to determine whether or not any street or alley in the city, or any portion thereof, should be closed or abandoned as a public thoroughfare. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.52. - Petition for hearing. 
The City Council shall be required to call a public hearing on the closing of any street or alley, or any portion thereof, upon receipt by the City Secretary of a petition, meeting the requirements set out herein, requesting such hearing, form any person or entity (hereinafter referred to as petitioner) owning property adjacent to such street or alley section to be closed. The petition must legally describe that portion of the street or alley to which the request for abandonment applies, specifically state that all people signing the petition fully support the requested closure and it must be signed by at least 25 registered voters of the city. The name and address of each person signing the petition must be clearly and legibly printed next to the signature. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.53. - Nonrefundable fee to be paid in advance. 
Before any action is taken, the petitioner shall pay a fee, in an amount set by the City Council, in advance to cover the expenses of processing the request. This sum of money shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.54. - Recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
Before City Council may take final action to adopt any ordinance to close a street or alley the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the request from the point of view of impact on future traffic circulation in the city and shall make a recommendation on such matters to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required to conduct a public hearing. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.55. - Public hearing. 
The public hearing by the City Council shall be held not less than 15 days after the certification of the petition, and at the next regular meeting of the City Council, for the primary purpose of discussing the proposed abandonment. Written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to all owners of real property, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, within 200 feet of the street or alley to be closed no less than 11 days before the public hearing. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.56. - Appraisal of real property required. 
(A)  Within 90 days after the City Council public hearing and Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, but before City Council final action, the petitioner shall provide an appraisal by a certified appraiser of real property. The cost of the appraisal is to be paid in full by the petitioner. Upon written application by the petitioner stating the need therefor, this time period may be extended by the City Administrator. Such extension shall be in writing. 
(B)  As an alternative to the above, the petitioner may elect, in writing, to utilize the average appraised values of the land immediately adjacent to the street or alley to be closed as shown on the most recent approved municipal tax roll. Such average value shall be calculated by city staff. 
(C)  If the requested closure is approved by City Council, the actual selling price shall be determined solely by the City Council, but in no case shall the selling price be less than the appraised value as determined under this section. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.57. - Action by city council. 
No street or alley shall be closed except by ordinance adopted and approved by no less than five affirmative votes of the City Council. Such ordinance shall include a description of the street or alley to be abandoned in relation to adjacent lots and blocks along with a map showing the location of the street or alley and adjacent lots. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.58. - Replat required. 
Unless otherwise approved by the Council, when the abandonment of a street or alley results in lots that do not front upon an improved street, said lots shall be replatted so that all resulting lots have frontage upon an improved street. Said replat shall be presented to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council within nine months of the date of the ordinance abandoning said street or alley or the ordinance abandoning the street or alley shall become null and void. Should said ordinance become null and void the purchase price paid for the abandoned street or alley shall be refunded to the petitioner. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 95.59. - Appeals. 
Any person deciding to appeal the decision of the City Council to a court of competent jurisdiction shall do so within ten days after enactment, as set out in section 95.57, of the ordinance closing the street or alley, or portion thereof, and if no appeal is taken within such ten-day period, then the ordinance shall never be questioned in any court of this state. 
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 7-7-2015)  
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 95.60. - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to: 
(A)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on, or over the public-rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects. Additionally, it may lower the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public-rights-of-way. 
(B)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(C)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(D)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(E)  Preserve the physical integrity of streets and highways; 
(F)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(G)  Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(H)  Assist on scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(I)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.61. - Authority; scope. 
This subchapter applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.62. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Certificated telecommunications provider. Any entity that has been granted a certificate from the V.T.C.A. Public Utility Commission, under V.T.C.A. Utility Code ch. 54, authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service (the same as the definition found in V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 283.002(2)). 
City. The City of Stephenville, Texas, including its designated agent. 
City administrator. The City Administrator of the city or the City Administrator's designee. 
Direction of the city. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this subchapter, now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Facilities. Any and all wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Public rights-of-way. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. This does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way used for wireless telecommunications. (This is the same as the definition found in V.T.C.A. Local Gov't Code § 283.002(6)) 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.63. - Municipal authorization required. 
(A)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way shall first file an application for a construction permit with the city, and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this subchapter pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way. 
(B)  Prior to placing, reconstructing or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, any person (except for a certificated telecommunications provider) must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city. 
(C)  Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city ("grant") to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this subchapter takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant. The grant shall remain in effect until it: expires, is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or is terminated as otherwise provided for in law. So long as such grant is in effect, it shall control, and this subchapter shall not be applicable in the event of a conflict. 
(D)  Prerequisites to issuance of construction permit—Each person must register with the city. In order for the city to know which persons own facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city, each such person shall register with the city. In registering with the city, each such person shall, at a minimum, provide the following information: 
(1)  The person's name, and 
(2)  The current name, address and telephone number(s) of a contact available 24 hours a day, who is employed by, and has binding and decision-making authority for the person. 
(E)  Each person shall update and keep current his/her registration with the city at all times. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.64. - Administration and enforcement. 
(A)  The City Administrator shall administer and enforce compliance with this subchapter. 
(B)  A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way required by, and in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the City Administrator. 
(C)  Upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with this subchapter, the City Administrator shall report to the City Council. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.65. - Construction obligations. 
In connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities, to manage public rights-of-way pursuant to the city's historic rights under state and federal laws as a custodian of public property, a person is subject to reasonable police power regulations of the city. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(A)  At the city's request, a person shall provide the city with accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance and repair of facilities performed in the public rights-of-way. 
(B)  A person may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground. This shall be according to applicable city requirements and absent a compelling demonstration by the person that, in any specific instance, such a requirement is not reasonable, feasible or equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(C)  A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements. This includes the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical, and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public rights-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that, based upon information provided by the person, the field conditions warrant the waiver. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. In order to minimize such interference, a person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city. 
(D)  As reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the person's facilities, a person must obtain a permit. A construction permit is not required for routine maintenance that does not require excavation of the public rights-of-way. A construction permit is also not required for routine maintenance that does not block traffic lanes or sidewalks during peak traffic periods (between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays) or for more than two hours during any non-peak traffic periods. Once a permit has been issued, a person shall give to the city a minimum of 48 hours notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its facilities in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on or over any public rights-of-way (except in an emergency as provided for in division (K) below) will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to this code. If the person fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit. 
(E)  When construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other work has been completed, the person shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. Within 30 calendar days after completion of the work in accordance with existing city standards then in effect, a person shall replace and properly replace and repair the surface, base, irrigation system and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the person's facilities. The city can extend this 30-day deadline for good cause. 
(F)  Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work, and if repairs have still not been initiated five days after the city has given written notice to the person, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(G)  Within two years from the date of the completion of the repair work, should the city reasonably determine that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing city standards, a person shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(H)  Notwithstanding the foregoing in section 95.66, if it determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city, after providing emergency notice, may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts to the extent reasonable under the circumstances. Within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice, a person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city. 
(I)  At least five business days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way, a person shall provide the city with construction plans and maps showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city. Taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing, such approval will not be unreasonably withheld. 
(J)  If the City Administrator declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate its facilities by the deadline provided in the City Administrator's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If, after notice, the person fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(K)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person ("emergency conditions"), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. The City Administrator or designee shall be notified as promptly as possible regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(L)  Within 60 days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of the person's business to the extent they are prepared in the ordinary course of business, but excluding customer-specific, proprietary or confidential information, as reasonably prescribed by the city and allowed by law. The city may, at its discretion, accept in lieu of "as-built" drawings, any reasonable alternative that provides adequate information as to the location of facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(M)  The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(N)  In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the City Administrator or his/her designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the person or persons to: 
(1)  An unreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, 
(2)  An unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, 
(3)  An unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or 
(4)  Any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.66. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(A)  In its exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to: 
(1)  Lay sewer, gas, water and other pipelines, cables and conduits; 
(2)  Do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way occupied by a person; and 
(3)  Change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets. 
(B)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type. To the extent it can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, the city may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(C)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. If it closes or abandons a public rights-of-way that contains a portion of a person's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public rights-of-way subject to the rights of the person. 
(D)  If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of the person's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120 days. Exceptions to this time limit will be granted for circumstances that require additional time, as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the person. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change or relocate, the city will confer with the person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever it has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal. Nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the person. 
(E)  If it fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city for such delay as set forth in the city code or ordinances, now or hereafter enacted. 
(F)  Notwithstanding anything in division (D), the City Administrator and a person may agree in writing to different timeframes than those provided above, if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(G)  A person may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed. Upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 working days. 
(H)  If the city gives written notice of no less than 48 hours, persons shall temporarily remove, raise or lower aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The party or parties requesting and benefitting from these temporary rearrangements shall pay for their expense. The person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.67. - Insurance requirements. 
(A)  A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city, with an insurance company acceptable to the city and licensed to do business in the state. A person shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of the request for construction permits. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the City Administrator determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state, or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters, the person must demonstrate, by written financial information provided at the city's request, that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city. The city's current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000. 
(B)  At no cost to the city, a person shall provide to the city copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or a regulation binding the city, the person or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(C)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  The city, its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives all named as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  The city provided with 30 days notice for cancellation, non-renewal or material change; and 
(3)  Notice of claims shall be provided to the City Administrator by certified mail. 
(D)  A person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the City Administrator. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the City Attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop and may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(E)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(F)  The policy clause "Other Insurance" shall not apply to the city, if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(G)  The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company issuing an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.68. - Indemnity. 
(A)  With the exception of certificated telecommunications providers, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses: 
(1)  For the repair, replacement, or restoration of city property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions; 
(2)  From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for: 
(a)  Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to: the person, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors; the city's agents, officers and employees; and third parties); and/or 
(b)  Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to: the agents, officers and employees of the person; the person's subcontractors; the city; and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this subchapter. 
(B)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors. 
(C)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city: it is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.69. - Governing law. 
This subchapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in effect on the date of its passage to the extent that such code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 95.65 and 95.66 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
Sec. 95.70. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 5-16-2000)  
APPENDIX A. - DETAILS FOR CURBS AND GUTTERS 
 
 
 
 
Sec. 95.71. - Use of city rights-of-way for small cell infrastructure. 
(A)  Design Manual. In accordance with Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, the installation and construction of network nodes and new node support poles in the public rights-of-way is subject to the design manual that is attached to ordinance no. 2017-O-18 as Exhibit A and hereby incorporated into the City Code. 
(B)  Public Parks. For purposes of Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, recreational public parks within the City of Stephenville include those areas, lands, or properties within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Stephenville that are (1) designated as parkland by the Stephenville City Council, (2) identified as parkland in the City's most recently adopted Comprehensive Plan, including the most recently adopted Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan, or (3) held out, used, set aside, or otherwise designated for public enjoyment and recreation, either actively or passively. 
(C)  Fees and Rates. Pursuant to Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, there is hereby levied and assessed and shall be collected the application fees and public rights-of-way use rates set forth in the table below: 
Application Fees 	Amount 
Network node 	$500.00 per application for up to 5 network nodes, and $250.00 for each additional network node on a single application; up to 30 network nodes are allowed on each application. 
Node support pole 	$1,000.00 per application for each pole 
Transport Facility 	$500.00 for up to 5 network nodes and $250.00 for each additional network node on a single permit; up to 30 network nodes are allowed on each permit. 
 
Annual Public Rights-of-Way Use Rates 	Amount 
Network node 	$250.00 per network node site. 
Node support pole 	No separate rate from the network node annual fee (each support pole should have a network node attached). 
Transport Facility 	$28.00 monthly for each network node site, unless an equal or greater amount is paid the city, e.g., under Chapter 283, Tex. Loc. Gov. Code or Chapter 66, Tex. Util. Code. 
Service Pole Attachment 	$20.00 per year to collocate a network node on a service pole in the public right-of-way 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-O-18, § 1, passed 11-7-2017)  
CHAPTER 96. - UNFAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 96.01. - Declaration of policy. 
(A)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(B)  It is further declared that the policy is based upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access to adequate housing of his or her own choice without regard to race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such rights which is within the power and proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(1975 Code, § 16-21; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.02. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. 
Age. The calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
Creed. Any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
Discriminatory housing practice. An act which is unlawful under this chapter. 
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Family. A single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
Marital status. An individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
Parenthood. A person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of 18. 
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
Physical or mental disability. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT shall include: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific learning disabilities. 
Senior adult. A person 55 years of age or older. 
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(1975 Code, § 16-22; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.03. - Interpretation and effect. 
This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them by Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this chapter, it is the intent of the City Council that the courts shall be guided by Federal Court interpretations of the Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(1975 Code, § 6-23; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.04. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 96.08, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(A)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; 
(B)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; 
(C)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(D)  Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(E)  For profit or with the hope or expectation to profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; or 
(F)  For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(1975 Code, § 6-24; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.05. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance because of: 
(A)  Race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(B)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of the present or prospective owner, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(1975 Code, § 6-25; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.06. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(1975 Code, § 6-26; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.07. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he/she or they has complied with the provisions of this chapter, because he/she or they have exercised his/her or their rights under this chapter, or enjoyed the benefits of this chapter, or because he/she or they has made a charge , testified or assisted in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the Administrator. 
(1975 Code, § 6-27; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 96.08. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(A)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 96.04 hereof all transactions involving: 
(1)  The renal of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other of the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as his or her residence. 
(2)  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his or her residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
(a)  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities of the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; 
(b)  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title); 
(c)  The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; 
(d)  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; and 
(e)  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(B)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(C)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(D)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(E)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental disability and marital status. 
(F)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that the reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling the rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this chapter. 
(1975 Code, 6-28; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.09. - Complaints. 
(A)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he/she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the Administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The Administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(B)  A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI Office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(C)  The Administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local, state, or federal court. 
(D)  If at any time the Administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint had been filed, the Administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his or her own motion and in his or her own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(E)  The Administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to division (A) of this section. 
(F)  All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the Administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(G)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before and officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(1975 Code, § 6-31; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.10. - Investigation. 
(A)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the Administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; 
(B)  If the Administrator determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the Administrator shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(C)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the Administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this chapter. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the Administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without written consent of all persons concerned. 
(D)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the Administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the Administrator, if the efforts of the Administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the Administrator had made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the Administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that such violations be prosecuted in the Municipal Court. With such recommendations, the Administrator shall refer his or her entire file to the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall, within 30 days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in Municipal Court. If the City Attorney determines to prosecute, he or she shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(1975 Code, § 32; Am. Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.11. - Fair housing administrator. 
The Mayor shall appoint and the Council shall confirm a Fair Housing Administrator (hereinafter referred to as "Administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this chapter. The Administrator may delegate his or her authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his or her direction. 
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.12. - Cumulative legal effect. 
This chapter is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.13. - Cooperation with the secretary of housing and urban development. 
The Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Sec. 96.14. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the objectives of this chapter, the Administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Secs. 96.15—96.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 96.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $200.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of 75 days from the date of the filing of the initial complaint with the Administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(B)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-6-2004)  
Title 11 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 110. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 110.01. - Regulations for sale of merchandise in residential districts. 
(A)  Continuous sales prohibited. Continuous sales of used or new merchandise in residential districts within the city is prohibited. 
(B)  Definition. Continuous sales. Sales conducted by the owner or occupant of property in the apartment or residential districts in the city, where the public is invited by signs, advertising or in any other manner to come for the purpose of purchasing goods, wares and merchandise more than twice in any calendar year and not to be held within six months of each other. 
(C)  Permit. The owner or occupant of property within the districts herein above mentioned may obtain a permit to conduct a bona fide occasional sale of surplus odds and ends owned and controlled by the occupant by applying for such permit three days before the sale and paying a permit fee as set by ordinance or resolution from time to time and conditioned that the sales tax due and owing the state will be remitted as required by law, and that all laws and regulations will be complied with, and that the sale will not last more than three consecutive days, and that no merchandise other than surplus property owned by the permittee for more than 12 months will be sold. The purchase of new or used merchandise for the purpose of offering for sale at such residential location is expressly prohibited. 
(1975 Code, Sec. 11-11) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99  
CHAPTER 111. - TOW TRUCKS AND WRECKERS 
 
Sec. 111.01. - Compliance with state law. 
Any person operating a tow truck and/or wrecker shall comply with all applicable state laws. A failure to comply with applicable state laws is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.02. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident or collision. Any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled. 
Certificate holder. Any person possessing a current, valid Certificate of Registration to engage in the wrecker business in the City of Stephenville. 
Certificate of registration. Written authorization granted by the Chief of Police, under the provisions of this chapter, to a wrecker company having a place of business within the city or outside the city operating a tow truck that performs nonconsent tows inside the city. 
Consent tow. Any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include the tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer. 
Manufacturer's certificate. A plate permanently affixed to either a truck, wrecker equipment or tow sling by the manufacturer of the equipment which states the vehicle's or equipment's gross poundage capacity. 
Owner. Any person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle, or has the legal right of possession thereof. This does not include any person who has gained possession of a motor vehicle only as a result of wrecker services performed. 
Person. An individual, a corporation, a partnership, joint venture, or association. 
Repossession. A tow made by, or on behalf of, a lien holder taking possession of collateral. 
Rotation list. A list prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, of wrecker companies which have applied and qualified to appear thereon, and which maintain inspected tow trucks of a capacity required to be on said list. 
Tow truck/wrecker. A motor vehicle equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, but not including devices moved only by human power, or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
Wrecker business. The business of towing vehicles not belonging to the wrecker company on a public street within the incorporated limits of Stephenville for compensation, or with the expectation of compensation including, but not limited to, compensation for towing, storage, and repair. It does not include a business towing a vehicle to a point outside the city when the owner requests that it be towed to a point outside the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Wrecker company. Any person or business engaged in the wrecker business. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.03. - Fees. 
The City Council shall establish a fee required or authorized under this chapter by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.04. - Requirements to perform nonconsent tows. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a tow truck that performs nonconsent tows in the city unless the person has a Certificate of Registration issued by the Chief of Police, except as provided in division (B)(9) below. 
(B)  An applicant for a Certificate of Registration to perform nonconsent tows shall submit, on a form provided by the Chief of Police, an application containing or accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The owner's name, the trade name, principal business address, and telephone number that is answered during normal business hours, of the wrecker company; 
(2)  The list of wreckers proposed to be operated by the wrecker company, including but not limited to the motor vehicle identification number, make, unit number and the name of the owner of the wrecker listed (the wrecker company affiliate), if different from the wrecker company applying for the Certificate of Registration; 
(3)  A certificate of insurance indicating that all state insurance requirements are met; 
(4)  A certificate of on-hook cargo insurance to cover damage to a towed vehicle; 
(5)  A copy of a vehicle storage facility license issued by the Texas Department of Transportation; 
(6)  A copy of the motor carrier certificate of registration issued by the Texas Department of Transportation; 
(7)  A copy of fees as posted on the Texas Department of Transportation website; and 
(8)  Any other documents as reasonably required by the Chief of Police. 
(9)  This chapter does not apply to nor prohibit a wrecker company, which obtained a motor carrier certificate of registration from the Texas Department of Transportation and having a place of business outside the incorporated city limits, from making a consent tow within the city.  
Sec. 111.05. - Certificate of registration for nonconsent tows, issuance and expiration. 
(A)  The Chief of Police or authorized designee shall register a wrecker company and issue a Certificate of Registration which is determined to be in compliance with the requirements of state law for conducting non-consent tows. However, the Chief of Police may deny an application for a Certificate of Registration, if the applicant: 
(1)  Has had a registration revoked; 
(2)  Operates a tow truck after the state registration has been revoked; 
(3)  Causes or allows the operation of a tow truck by an unlicensed driver on the public roadways; 
(4)  Operates a tow truck performing nonconsent tows on the public roadways without a Certificate of Registration; 
(5)  Submits false information on a registration application; 
(6)  Fails to maintain insurance required by state law for the operation of a wrecker company or its equipment; 
(7)  Fails to comply with all applicable state laws or city ordinances to include zoning laws; or 
(8)  Fails to meet any other legal requirement of obtaining such Certificate of Registration. 
(B)  The term of each Certificate of Registration and placement on the rotation list shall run concurrent to licenses and registrations that are issued by the Texas Department of Transportation, Motor Carriers Division. Renewal of the certification and placement on the rotation list will be granted only upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations which shall be in effect at the time of the renewal application. 
(C)  Each wrecker company which has received a Certificate of Registration shall at all times carry a copy of its Certificate of Registration in each wrecker it operates. 
(D)  Each wrecker company which has received a Certificate of Registration shall be responsible for updating the information provided in the application by submitting supplemental information to the Chief of Police. Failure to provide updated information, such as, but not limited to, replacement or additions of tow trucks, drivers' license suspensions or revocations, change in insurance company, revocation of required insurance or expiration of storage facility license, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a Certificate of Registration and removal from rotation list. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.06. - Rotation list established for nonconsent tows. 
The Chief of Police shall establish and maintain a rotation list, from which list wreckers shall be picked to answer calls for non-consent tows. Each wrecker business that applies and meets the requirements herein shall be entitled to one place on the appropriate list. The names of the wrecker companies on the list shall be listed in numerical order, beginning with the date the application is approved. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.07. - Rotation list qualifications. 
(A)  A wrecker company shall submit an application for placement on the rotation list to the Chief of Police, containing or accompanied by the following to verify qualifications and requirements: 
(1)  A copy of a vehicle storage facility license issued by the Texas Department of Transportation for a storage facility located within the incorporated limits of the city or within five miles of the corporate limits of the city where all motor vehicles it tows on behalf of the city shall be stored at all times; 
(2)  Acknowledgment that the company has registered and received a Certificate of Registration for each tow truck it owns or will use while on the rotation list. The wrecker company must maintain at least one wrecker; 
(3)  Acknowledgment that the company maintains 24-hour wrecker service and provides the Police Department with a local telephone number which is answered 24 hours a day; 
(4)  Acknowledgment that the company is able to respond to any location in the city within 30 minutes of being notified by telephone; 
(5)  Acknowledgment that the company has someone available 24 hours a day to release any vehicle impounded within one hour of a request by the owner or the Police Department; 
(6)  A list of all drivers and drivers' driving records, obtained from the Texas Department of Public Safety. Said list shall be updated as new drivers are added or when a driver's license is suspended or revoked; 
(7)  A certificate from the appropriate tax assessor-collector agency that certifies that all city taxes on all properties, real and personal, to be used in connection with the applicant's wrecker business are current. The certificate shall list the name of the wrecker business, its subsidiaries or assumed names; and 
(8)  A statement from the Community Development Division of the City of Stephenville indicating compliance with all zoning laws and other applicable ordinances. 
(B)  A wrecker company will automatically be removed from the rotation list on the expiration date of its Certificate of Registration, and will be placed back on the list only upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations which shall be in effect at the time of the renewal request application. 
(C)  In order to be placed on the rotation list each wrecker shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Shall display in a permanent manner the name and phone number of the holder of the Certificate of Registration on both sides of each wrecker. The lettering must be at least two inches high, and lettering must be in a color that will contrast to the color of the tow truck; 
(2)  Shall be in a condition such that it can be safely and reliably used as a wrecker; 
(3)  Shall include the Manufacturer's Certificate and be equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line and boom, with a rated or tested lifting capacity of not less than 8,000-pound single-line capacity; and 
(4)  Shall carry at all times the following standard equipment: 
(a)  Slings and/or tow bars along with "J" hooks and chains; 
(b)  Safety chain; 
(c)  A working ten-pound fire extinguisher (or the equivalent); 
(d)  Shovel; 
(e)  Wrecker bar; 
(f)  Broom; 
(g)  Dolly (except for slide-bed tow trucks); 
(h)  Ropes or other device for securing steering wheel; 
(i)  Overhead visi-bar or beacon-type light visible from front and rear; and 
(j)  Tow lights. 
(D)  Placement on the rotation list shall be denied if the safety requirements are not met. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.08. - Suspension and removal from the nonconsent rotation list. 
The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a Certificate of Registration or remove a wrecker company from a place on the rotation list pursuant to this chapter, if a wrecker company or any of its tow trucks fails to comply with any of the requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.09. - Inspection of wrecker equipment and storage facilities. 
Any wrecker company, Certificate Holder or applicant, by virtue of making an application with the city, agrees to allow during normal business hours, the inspection of wreckers, wrecker equipment, and storage facilities for compliance under this chapter. This authority shall be cumulative of any other authority held by the Chief of Police, other law enforcement officials, or other legally authorized public officials. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.10. - Procedures for notifying wrecker services. 
(A)  When the police officer investigating an incident determines that a tow truck is necessary to move the vehicle, the officer shall contact the vehicle owner to determine which wrecker company to contact. The owner of the vehicle shall designate a wrecker company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer or automobile club. If an owner does not have a preference, the wrecker company next up on the rotation list will be contacted. 
(B)  If the owner of a vehicle is not available or is physically unable to designate the wrecker company, auto repair shop, automobile dealer or automobile club he or she desires to remove the vehicle, then the police officer shall communicate that fact to the dispatcher and advise as to the type of wrecker required. The dispatcher shall call the wrecker company next in line on the rotation list. 
(C)  If the wrecker company, after arrival at the scene, determines that assistance is needed, the wrecker company may use assets from that same wrecker company or call another wrecker company for assistance. If the wrecker company does not have the necessary equipment and does not have a preference of a wrecker company to contact, they may ask the officer to contact another wrecker company for assistance, and the police officer on the scene will call for the wrecker that is next on the rotation list. 
(D)  Failure of any wrecker company to deliver a wrecker to the scene within 30 minutes of being notified without justification acceptable to the police officer on the scene shall cause the wrecker company to forfeit that call. Additionally, the Chief of Police shall have the discretion to suspend or revoke a wrecker company from a place on the rotation list for failure to timely respond. 
(E)  In any circumstance in which a vehicle or other object is so located on a public street as to constitute a hazard or obstacle, or to interfere with traffic, or in the event a stolen vehicle is found or in any other circumstance in which a police officer in the course of his or her duty directs the removal of a vehicle from or to any location, any police officer may require its removal at the owner's expense, by any practical means, including but not limited to, use of a wrecker selected by the owner, or failing that, selected by the use of the rotation list. 
(F)  A wrecker business may be dispatched to the scene of accident, at the discretion of the Police Department, without consideration of the rotation list if: 
(1)  The wrecker business has specific or specialized equipment that can be used to reduce potential of additional bodily injury or additional damage to property; 
(2)  The wrecker business has specific or specialized equipment that can be used for cleanup at the accident; or 
(3)  The wrecker business is the only such business with a wrecker large enough to move a vehicle or obstacle. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.11. - Parking of wrecker at the scene of a collision. 
Whenever a wrecker arrives at the place where a motor vehicle has been disabled by an accident, the wrecker driver shall park his or her wrecker as close to the street curb as possible and otherwise park the wrecker in such a manner as not to interfere with traffic, or the officer's ability to process an accident location or crime scene. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.12. - Wrecker drivers to obey orders of police officer. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any wrecker arriving at the place where any accident has occurred or an abandoned vehicle is located to disobey any lawful order given by any police officer of the city investigating such accident or to interfere in any manner with such officer in the performance of his or her duty. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.13. - Duty to remove debris. 
It shall be the duty of each wrecker that removes a wrecked, damaged or disabled vehicle from the place where an accident has occurred to clear and remove from the street and adjacent right-of-way any and all debris, parts or glass accumulated as a result of the accident from the street. If two or more wreckers are required at the location, the wrecker drivers will share the responsibility for removing debris and will take primary responsibility for the area around the vehicle they were called to tow. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.14. - General prohibitions. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street within the city unless such person has been called to the scene by the Police Department or by a party involved in the collision. The prohibition of this section shall not be applicable when such actions are necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in a collision. An exception is also allowed if the tow truck is driving by during the normal course of business and is not intentionally trying to circumvent the provisions of the rotation list. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in nonconsent tows in the city unless such person possesses a current, valid Certificate of Registration. The Police Department shall be authorized to summon wreckers without Certificate of Registration in emergency situations. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tow truck in the city, unless it is equipped as required by state law. A tow truck and its required equipment shall be in safe operating condition at all times when the tow truck is operating on the public roadway. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.15. - Removal of motor vehicles from private property. 
The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle from private property, without the consent of the owner of the vehicle, shall notify the Stephenville Police Department within one hour of such removal. The information to be provided in such notification shall include: 
(A)  The date, time and location of the removal; 
(B)  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
(C)  The name of the Certificate Holder which performed the removal; and 
(D)  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.16. - Repossession of vehicles. 
The driver of a tow truck who removes a vehicle for the purpose of repossessing the vehicle shall be required to do the following: 
(A)  Contact the Police Department prior to making such repossession; and 
(B)  Present a written notice from the lien holder requesting such repossession which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of owner of said vehicle; 
(2)  Date, time and location of the removal; 
(3)  The physical description and license or registration number of the vehicle; 
(4)  The name of the certificate holder which is to perform the removal; and 
(5)  The storage location of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Sec. 111.17. - Effective date. 
The provisions within this chapter shall become effective 30 days after approved by vote of the City Council. The requirements for Certificates of Registration and requests for placement on the rotation list shall become effective on the date that renewal of required licenses and registrations are required. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
Secs. 111.18—111.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 111.99. - Penalty. 
Each officer, agent or employee of any corporation and every other person who violates or fails to comply with, or who aids or abets in the violation of, any provision of this chapter, or fails to obey, observe or comply with any other decision, rule or regulation, direction, demand or requirement of the city, shall be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. Each day any provision of this chapter, or any rule, regulation or order of the city relevant thereto is violated shall constitute a separate offense, and the fact that the city may have caused prosecution for violation of its rules, regulations or orders under the penal section of this chapter shall not operate to prevent or limit the exercise of the authority of the city to suspend, revoke, alter or amend permits or certificates as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-32, passed 11-7-2006)  
CHAPTER 112. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 112.01. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to secure the general health, safety and welfare for the residents of the City of Stephenville by: 
(A)  Prohibiting door to door solicitation at residences during the times when such activity is most intrusive and disruptive to citizens' privacy; 
(B)  Regulating the locations in which solicitation activity may occur to promote safety and minimize congestion; 
(C)  Regulating the manner in which any solicitation activity may occur to promote good order and protect citizens from aggressive and intimidating practices; and 
(D)  Requiring solicitors to obtain permits from the city to aid in crime detection and deter deceptive practices and fraud. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.02. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization, or the benefit of any educational institution. "Charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include any direct benefit to the individual making the commercial home solicitation, to include the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law. 
Commercial enterprises. Any property intended for the conduct of business, whether for profit or not, including but not limited to office buildings, private offices, factories, markets, shopping centers and shopping malls. 
Commercial solicitation. Any course of conduct whereby any person shall solicit orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services or anything of value or shall attempt to dispose of such, whether in exchange for payment or not, to an individual or a commercial entity. 
Peddler. Any person traveling by foot, wagon, vehicle or any other type of conveyance from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing them for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. 
Private residence. Any dwelling place, including but not limited to homes, duplexes, rooming houses, apartments and condominiums. 
Public right-of-way. For the purposes of this chapter, shall mean a legally established area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other similar use. "Right-of-way" also includes the travel portion of the roadway and all traffic medians. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.03. - Application of subchapter. 
This subchapter shall apply to all solicitors and peddlers, regardless of whether they are required to obtain a permit or to register to solicit. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.04. - Location and manner of permissible solicitation. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution upon residential property within the city without first obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this chapter. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to approach any part of a residence other than the front door. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to solicit, peddle, or distribute on residential property prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:30 p.m. of any day Monday through Saturday, or any time on Sunday or any other federally designated holiday. 
(D)  This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or invitation made by the occupant, invitation of the owner of the property or a person residing on the premises. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or distribute upon or around any city rights-of-way, and it shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitation, sales, or distribution of merchandise, products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in traffic on a public street or alley. 
(F)  The person(s) in charge of conducting commercial solicitation or distribution shall ensure that all solicitors or distributors involved possess on their person photo identification, such as a valid driver's license or other valid governmental identification that correctly identifies the solicitor/distributor and for whom the solicitor/distributor is working. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitors or distributors to fail or refuse to show or display such identification upon the request of any person. 
(H)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitors or distributors to engage in solicitation/distribution without having a copy of the permit in their possession. 
(I)  The permit holder must ensure that the permit is properly displayed while conducting peddling, commercial home solicitation or distribution activities. Properly displayed shall mean attached or hung so that the permit is clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials. 
(J)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitor to solicit for a purpose other than that set out in the application upon which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 112.99  
Sec. 112.05. - Prohibited conduct generally. 
A person engaged in solicitation or distribution shall not: 
(A)  Make physical contact with the person being solicited, unless that person's permission is obtained; 
(B)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that such individual does not wish to give anything or to buy anything from that solicitor; or 
(C)  Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 112.99  
Sec. 112.06. - Minors soliciting. 
No person under six years of age shall solicit nor shall any organization holding a permit to solicit allow persons less than six years of age to solicit. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 112.99  
Sec. 112.07. - Permits nontransferable. 
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person. Any attempted assignment or transfer shall render the permit void. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.08. - Application for permit. 
(A)  A person or organization seeking a permit for the purpose of conducting home solicitation or distribution shall file an application with the City Police Department. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full and legally recognized names and any associated aliases, logos, nicknames, and abbreviated names of the entity or person applying for a permit to solicit; 
(2)  Whether the person applying is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and: 
(a)  The business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each partner; 
(c)  If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of this state, another state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the individual in charge of such corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; 
(d)  If an association, the application shall show the association's principal business address and telephone number, if any, and shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten in number, in which case the application shall so state and the person registering may alternatively list the name and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association; and 
(e)  If the association is a part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business location of its central office shall be given, in addition to the mailing address and business location of its local office. 
(3)  The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation or distribution; 
(4)  The time period within which solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation or distribution and its projected conclusion and the specific location(s); 
(5)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation or distribution is to be accomplished; 
(6)  The type of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to be furnished, or description of items or information to be distributed; 
(7)  Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(8)  A permit will not be issued if there is an affirmative statement as to whether the applicant has ever been: 
(a)  Convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor involving fraud, theft, embezzlement, burglary, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property within the preceding ten years, or convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, or any offense involving moral turpitude; 
(b)  Found liable in a civil or administrative action in which the complaint or petition alleged fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, misappropriation of property, or the use of untrue or misleading representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of property or to obtain money or a thing of value from another; 
(c)  Found liable under any law regarding the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive business practices; or 
(d)  Subject to an injunction or restrictive court order relating to business activity as the result of an action brought by a federal, state, or local public agency, including an action affecting a vocational license. 
(9)  The names of any cities where the applicant has worked in the previous 365 days; 
(10)  Two recent full-face photographs of each applicant, two inches square; 
(11)  A copy of a valid state tax sales certificate, if applicable; 
(12)  An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant; 
(13)  Names and addresses of five persons as references, excluding relatives and persons living with the applicant; 
(14)  A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works, sells or solicits or distributes stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company; 
(15)  A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good standing of such association or organization; and 
(16)  In the event that the applicant is an individual who is not canvassing, selling, distributing, or soliciting for any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two citizens of the applicant's permanent residence shall be submitted. 
(B)  Each person who intends to canvass, sell, distribute, or solicit shall be required to completely fill out an application for permit. 
(C)  The application must be made under oath and signed by the applicant and accompanied by a non-refundable $25.00 investigation fee and shall not be returned to the applicant regardless of whether a permit is issued or not. 
(D)  Information provided by applicant will be subject to verification by the City Police Department. 
(E)  Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or falsification of any part of the application shall be grounds for the denial or revocation of a permit. 
(F)  After review of the permit application and within ten business days of the receipt of the application, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall either issue a permit, as provided in this chapter, or notify the person applying that the application does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, specifying why the application is incomplete or otherwise does not comply. 
(G)  If the applicant is 15 years of age or less, a copy of the parental consent form required by V.T.C.A. Labor Code § 51.0145 and the name, address and telephone number of all persons who will be responsible for supervising the activities of the applicant must be provided. 
(H)  A permit granted under this subchapter shall be valid only until the termination of the solicitation period specified in the permit or for 30 days, whichever is less. At the end of that time, the applicant may apply for an extension of the permit. The city reserves the right to limit maximum days of permit duration at its discretion. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.09. - Revocation of permits. 
If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, the Chief of Police finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, or in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event of conviction of the permit holder of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has failed to furnish the items required by this subchapter, such permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.10. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permits. 
Under this chapter, if an applicant shall be denied a permit or shall have a permit revoked, such applicant may appeal that action to the City Council by submitting a letter to the City Secretary within ten days of the action complained of. A hearing on the denial or revocation will then be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the City Council or a special meeting of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.11. - Consumer's right to cancel. 
(A)  The merchant, peddler, or seller shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation transaction made in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation. Date of transaction means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or realty purchased in a solicitation transaction. 
(B)  If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by email shall be considered given at the time recorded that it was sent; notification by telegram shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant's designated place of business. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler, or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation transaction. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 112.99  
Secs. 112.12—112.24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 112.25. - Exemptions to permitting requirements. 
(A)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(6) below in the city shall first register with the Chief of Police by filling out a form to be promulgated by the Chief of Police in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and by furnishing proof that they are actually engaged in such activity in the city, and the Chief of Police shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting them from the terms and conditions of this section and from paying a fee therefor: 
(1)  Persons with religious organizations engaged in the sale of religious literature or in soliciting for subscriptions for religious purposes, including religious newspapers, books and magazines; 
(2)  Persons seeking a contribution for a charitable purpose as defined in Sec. 112.02; 
(3)  Other nonprofit organizations seeking charitable contributions, such as Multiple Sclerosis, American Heart Association, Muscular Dystrophy, American Cancer Society, Boy Scouts of America, and the like; 
(4)  Public utility companies operating under a franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Commercial agents or drummers dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business; and 
(6)  Insurance salesmen, real estate salespersons and others licensed by the state. 
(B)  No agent or solicitor shall conduct or participate in any charitable solicitations campaign except under a valid registration certificate issued by the Chief of Police in compliance with this subchapter, and must exhibit the same to any person who requests such identification. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.26. - Responsibility for acts of solicitors. 
The recipient of a permit for a charitable solicitations campaign shall be responsible for the acts of such permittee's authorized representatives in connection with such campaign. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 112.27. - Permit required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct any charitable solicitations campaign on the streets, in any office building or in or on any other public or private place, by house-to-house canvas or by telephone, in the city unless the person conducting the campaign and responsible therefor shall first have obtained a registration certificate in compliance with this subchapter; provided, however, this section shall not apply to: 
(A)  Any organization which solicits funds solely from its own members or from its own assemblies, not using public streets or public places for such purposes; 
(B)  Any public school which controls the solicitation of funds by parent-teacher association organizations and the solicitation of funds by other activity groups which may be sponsored by the public school or by a local association or club, the primary purpose of which is to sponsor certain student and parent activities for the benefit of such association, club or activity; 
(C)  Any solicitation for the benefit of an individual or family who has suffered a personal tragedy resulting from personal injury, illness or the loss of housing; and 
(D)  Any solicitations campaign conducted through the use of television or radio as to those activities directly related to the use of television or radio. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 112.99  
Secs. 112-28—112-98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 112.99. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to observe any provisions of this chapter shall have their permit revoked immediately and will not be entitled to reapply for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. In the event of such forfeiture of permit, no part of such permit fee as may have been so paid shall be refunded to such person; and 
(B)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed the maximum about allowed by law for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(C)  In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the definition of any violation of the terms of this chapter as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violations. 
(Ord. 2012-29, passed 12-4-2012)  
CHAPTER 113. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 113.01. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases as used in this subchapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subchapter. 
City. The City of Stephenville, Erath County, Texas. 
Driver. The person actually driving the taxicab, whether as owner, agent or employee of the owner. 
Taxicab. Shall mean and include every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city, and not over a defined or fixed route, irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the city limits, at rates for distance traveled or for wait time, or for both, if such vehicle is routed to its destination under direction of the passenger hiring the same, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A vehicle being operated as a chartered bus under a contract to carry 12 or more passengers. 
(2)  Vehicles being used as ambulances. 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for operation by the persons actually driving the same, unless the vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the same. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.02. - Responsibility of each person engaging a taxicab. 
Any person who engages a taxicab or vehicle for hire will do so at their own risk and expense and, with exception of the directives as listed in this subchapter, shall understand the city, its agents, officers or employees, do not in any way represent or undertake to represent the fitness of any taxicab, vehicle for hire, driver, certificate holder, business or company, and it shall be the responsibility of each person to decide whether or not to engage or use the taxicab or vehicle for hire without relying on any action by the city. Further, any person engaging the taxicab or vehicle for hire shall not hold liable the city, its agents, officers or employees for any malfeasance committed by the taxicab, vehicle for hire, driver, certificate holder, business or company. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.03. - Certificate and permits required. 
No person or entity shall operate any taxicab service or vehicle for hire service without first obtaining a certificate of operation from the city. No driver employed by the person or entity who has obtained a valid certificate of operation shall be allowed to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire without first obtaining a permit to operate the vehicle. No vehicle or other mode of transportation for hire may be operated within the city limits unless specifically authorized, registered, permitted, inspected, insured, and bonded in accordance with this subchapter. A nonrefundable and nontransferable application fee will be assessed at the time the application is approved. This fee will be determined by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.04. - Exception. 
A vehicle lawfully transporting a passenger or passengers from a point outside of the city to a destination within the city, returning empty by the most direct route to its regular place of business outside the city, is excepted from the provisions of this subchapter, provided, however, that no such vehicle without such certificate shall solicit or accept a passenger from any point within the city for transportation to any destination whatsoever. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.05. - Form and contents of certificate. 
Every certificate issued under this subchapter shall be signed by the City Administrator, or his or her designee, and shall confirm the name and address of the applicant. The acceptance of the certificate indicates the applicant has agreed to abide by all regulations as listed in this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.06. - Transferability. 
No certificate shall be transferred without the consent of the City Administrator or his or her designee. Any transfer without prior consent or approval shall cause an immediate suspension of the certificate. The term "transfer" includes a change in the ownership of the company, a new or alternate applicant or partner. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.07. - Duration of certificate or permit. 
(A)  Effective upon adoption of this subchapter, a certificate issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for a period of three years, unless suspended or revoked for cause under the authority of this subchapter. 
(B)  Effective upon adoption of this subchapter, a permit issued to a driver is valid for a period of two years, unless suspended or revoked for cause under the authority of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.08. - Renewal of certificate or permit. 
(A)  Renewal of a certificate or permit may be done by submitting an application to the city, along with a nonrefundable and nontransferable renewal fee, at least 30 days before the expiration of the certificate or permit. 
(B)  Renewal of certificates is reviewed by the city and may be approved so long as the certificate holder has satisfactorily met the terms as outlined in this subchapter. 
(C)  If all terms are not met, the city will review the applicant's file and, if an application is rejected, the applicant must meet all requirements, at which time the applicant will be reinstated, and pay the initial nonrefundable and nontransferable application fee. 
(D)  If an applicant is denied for initial application or renewal, the city will notify the applicant in writing of the denial for failure to comply with the provisions of this subchapter or other applicable law. An applicant may appeal the denial following appeal procedures listed in this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.09. - Application. 
Application for certificate for operation of taxicab service or vehicle for hire service shall be in writing on a form provided by the city. The form shall request the following information. 
(A)  The name, date of birth and address of each applicant, sole proprietor, partnership, LLC, DBA and corporation. 
(B)  If a corporation, the address of the principal place of business, names and addresses of each member of the board of directors and officers, the corporation's permit to conduct business in the state and any trade names. 
(C)  The address of each place of business from which the applicant intends or proposes to operate. 
(D)  A detailed description of each vehicle the applicant proposes to use, including but not limited to, the year, make, model, type, seating capacity and primary color. 
(E)  Authorization from the applicant for a complete and thorough background check to include all criminal offenses, traffic offenses, and civil judgments against them (this is to include applicants, sole proprietors, partnerships, LLCs, DBAs and corporations). 
(F)  A list of all drivers who will be operating under the authority of the applicant's certificate. 
(1)  This list will be updated as drivers are added or removed. Drivers will be subject to the same background check as the applicant. 
(2)  Drivers must possess a valid and current Texas driver's license. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.10. - Application oath and service fee. 
Application for a certificate to operate a taxicab service or vehicle for hire service shall be made under oath that all information provided is true and correct. It shall be accompanied by a service fee to cover administrative costs to process the application. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.11. - Issuance of certificate. 
The city shall issue the certificate upon receipt of required fees, signature of applicant on the certificate, and the signature of the City Administrator or his or her designee. The original certificate will be filed at the Police Department. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.12. - Denial of certificate for reasons other than criminal background. 
(A)  The city may deny a certificate for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Applicant fails to meet criteria established in this subchapter. 
(2)  Applicant refuses to cooperate with any investigation conducted by the city. 
(3)  Applicant makes a false statement of material fact in the application. 
(4)  Applicant has had a certificate revoked within the last two years for any reason. 
(5)  Failure to meet any state regulation related to taxicabs. 
(B)  The city's notice of denial shall be made in accordance with this subchapter. 
(C)  The applicant has the right to appeal the denial in accordance with this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.13. - Certificate holders required to indemnify the city and to insure their drivers. 
A certificate holder shall: 
(A)  Indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless for claims or causes of action against the city arising from the conduct of the driver in the operation of a vehicle for hire. 
(B)  Provide that the driver is insured under the holder's liability insurance policy for at least $500,000.00 in liability coverage. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.14. - Non-liability of city for pecuniary responsibility. 
Neither the city, nor any officer thereof, shall be held liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any certificate holder or insurer, or in any manner become liable on account of any act or omission relating to the operation of a taxicab or vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.15. - State registration and inspection of vehicles. 
The certificate holder shall make certain all vehicles operating under the holder's authority are properly and currently registered and inspected according to state regulations and statutes. Vehicles operated that are not in compliance with this section are subject to traffic penalties, and the certificate holder may be subject to suspension of their certificate. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.16. - Most direct route to be used. 
Any driver of a taxicab employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.17. - Complaint procedure. 
Any complaints received by the city regarding any taxicab service or company, shall be completed in writing. The complainant shall provide in detail the nature of the complaint. The complaint will then be forwarded to the certificate holder, who will have ten business days to respond the complaint. The city will investigate the complaint and will take action to remedy a sustained complaint. The action to remedy a complaint may include a warning, a suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.18. - Appeals of suspensions, revocations or denials of certificates or permits. 
(A)  For purposes of this section alone, the term APPEAL is synonymous with suspension and revocation hearings only as the procedures are the same. 
(B)  If the city suspends or revokes a valid certificate, or denies a certificate for any reason, the city will give written notice of the intent to suspend, revoke or deny by certified mail. The notice shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The reason for the suspension, revocation or denial. 
(2)  The certificate holder or permit holder has ten calendar days from the date of notice to comply with any failures of any part of this subchapter found during an inspection, or to request an appeal hearing. The holder must respond in writing to a request for an appeal hearing. 
(3)  If a written request for appeal hearing is not received in a timely manner, the suspension, revocation or dental will take effect at the expiration of the tenth calendar day after notification. 
(C)  If requesting a hearing, and upon receiving the request for hearing, the city shall schedule a hearing to take place five days from the date of receipt unless otherwise agreed upon. Notice of that date will be sent by certified mail. 
(D)  The appeal hearing will take place in front of the City Administrator. The City Administrator will decide to uphold the appeal, deny the appeal, suspend or return for further investigation. The results of the hearing with the City Administrator will be final. 
(E)  Final results of the hearing will be delivered by certified mail. 
(F)  A suspended certificate will not affect the expiration date. 
(G)  If a certificate is revoked, the holder will be ineligible for a new certificate for a period of one year. 
(H)  After a suspension of a certificate, the holder may file for reinstatement with the city by written request. The city will then inspect the operation to determine if the deficiency causing the suspension has been corrected by the holder. After inspection, the city may reinstate or deny the holder based upon the facts ascertained in the inspection. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.19. - Reasons a certificate or permit may be suspended or revoked. 
A certificate or permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons, including but not limited to: 
(A)  Failed to comply with an order issued to the certificate holder or permit holder by the city within the time specified. 
(B)  Intentionally or knowingly impeded the city in the performance of its duties. 
(C)  Breached the terms of the certificate. 
(D)  Failed to pay any fees or penalties as listed in this subchapter. 
(E)  Failed to maintain required amount liability insurance coverage. 
(F)  Failed a vehicle inspection by the state. 
(G)  Failed to register a vehicle and continued to use the vehicle. 
(H)  Committed fraud or willful misrepresentation in the original application or renewal. 
(I)  Failed to comply with any provision of this subchapter. 
(J)  Use of the taxicab for illegal or immoral purposes, or the use of the taxicab in the commission of an offense against the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.20. - Fares. 
The city will not regulate taxi fares. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.21. - Commercial advertising on taxicabs. 
Commercial advertising or devices may be placed on, upon or in any taxicab operated in the city, provided they are securely fastened to the vehicle, do not interfere with driver or passenger safety, and do not obscure lights, logos, telephone numbers, cab numbers, the driver's vision or the safe operation of the taxicab. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.22. - Transportation for illegal, immoral purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab within the city to knowingly transport or offer to transport, or to aid or assist in transporting, directly or indirectly, any person in, on, over or through the streets, alleys or public highways of the city by means of such taxicab, for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution or any other unlawful or immoral purposes. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.23. - Cruising permitted. 
(A)  Cruising is permitted on any street within the city limits, If a prospective passenger hails the taxicab or vehicle for hire, the driver may stop and pick up the passenger. 
(B)  The driver of the taxicab or vehicle for hire may not, at any time, actively solicit any potential fares. Solicitation includes by word, signal or sign. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Sec. 113.24. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed the maximum allowed by law. Each and every day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2014-25, passed 10-7-2014)  
Secs. 113.25—113.29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSES 
 
Sec. 113.30. - Application of provisions. 
This subchapter shall not apply to taxicabs, rental cars or other public conveyances not operating with fixed routes, schedules and fares. 
(1975 Code, § 18-56)  
Sec. 113.31. - Motor buses declared common carriers and subject to regulation. 
All motor bus companies or persons operating a motor bus carrying passengers for hire over the streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city are hereby declared to be common carriers and to be subject to regulation by ordinance by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 18-57)  
Sec. 113.32. - Certificates of convenience and necessity required; exception. 
(A)  When existing transportation facilities on and over the streets and alleys of the city do not provide passenger service which the City Council deems adequate to provide for public convenience, such inadequacy will be considered as creating a condition wherein the public convenience and necessity require additional service on such streets and alleys; and it shall be the duty of the City Council to issue certificates of convenience and necessity as provided in this subchapter if, in the opinion of the Council, the certificates will promote the public welfare. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-propelled passenger vehicle for the regular transportation of persons for compensation and hire over any street or alley in the city without a permit of convenience and necessity issued by the city, through its City Council, except such as are authorized to operate over the highways of the state under the laws of the state; provided, however, that any person operating in the city pursuant to a certificate of convenience and necessity issued by the city prior to the effective date of this Code may continue to so operate so long as such certificate continues in effect. 
(1975 Code, § 18-59) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99  
Sec. 113.33. - City council's determination of convenience and necessity. 
The City Council is hereby vested with the power and authority and it shall be its duty, upon the filing of an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this subchapter, to ascertain and determine, under such rules and regulations as it may promulgate after considering existing transportation facilities over the proposed route or routes, the service rendered and capable of being rendered thereby and the demand for or need of additional service, if there exists a public necessity for such service and if public convenience will be promoted by granting the application and permitting the operation of motor vehicles on such streets, alleys and ways designated in the application. The City Council shall also ascertain and determine if the particular streets, alleys and ways designated in the application are of such type of construction, or in such state of repair, or subject to such use as to permit the use sought to be made thereof by the applicant, without unreasonable interference with the use of such streets and alleys by the general public. 
(1975 Code, § 18-60)  
Sec. 113.34. - Application for certificate; hearing. 
(A)  The form of application for a certificate of convenience and necessity required by this subchapter shall be in writing, and shall set forth the address and name of the applicant; the names and addresses of its officers, if any; complete information concerning the financial condition and physical properties of the applicant; the complete route or routes which the applicant intends to use; the seating capacity of the vehicle to be used; the proposed time schedule; and a schedule of rates showing the passenger fares to be charged between the several points or parts of the city to be served. The City Council may require additional information in its discretion. 
(B)  Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity required by this subchapter, the City Council shall fix a place and time for the hearing. Notice of the filing of the application shall be given by mail, not less than ten days, exclusive of the day of mailing, before such hearing, addressed to the owner of the existing transportation facilities over the proposed route, and if there are no existing transportation facilities over the proposed route, notice of the hearing shall be posted in the office of the City Administrator. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council under such rules and regulations as it may prescribe. 
(1975 Code, § 18-62)  
Sec. 113.35. - Factors determining issuance of certificate. 
In determining whether or not a certificate of convenience and necessity required by this subchapter should be issued, the City Council shall give weight and due regard to the following: 
(A)  Probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant; 
(B)  The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant and his/her organization and personnel; 
(C)  The character of vehicles and the character of service proposed; 
(D)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; and 
(E)  The character of the bond or insurance proposed to be given to insure the protection of the passengers and the public. 
(1975 Code, § 18-63)  
Sec. 113.36. - Effect of existing railroad transportation on application. 
The City Council shall have no power in any event to refuse an application for a certificate of necessity and convenience on the ground that there are existing satisfactory railroad transportation facilities sufficient to serve the transportation needs of the territory involved. 
(1975 Code, § 18-64)  
Sec. 113.37. - Certificate approval, denial. 
If the City Council shall determine after the hearing that the service rendered or capable of being rendered by existing transportation facilities or agencies on the proposed route or routes is reasonably adequate; or that public convenience would not be promoted by the granting of an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity and operation of such motor bus line; or that such streets and alleys are not in such state of repair or are subject only to such use as would not permit the use thereof sought to be made by the applicant without unreasonably interfering with the use of such streets and alleys by the general public, the application may be denied and the certificate refused. Otherwise, the application shall be granted and a certificate issued upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may impose and subject to such rules and regulations as it may prescribe. 
(1975 Code, § 18-65)  
Sec. 113.38. - Temporary certificates; special rules. 
The City Council shall have the power and authority to grant temporary certificates to meet emergencies and shall have the power to make special rules and regulations to meet special conditions in different localities and for such time as in its judgment may be deemed expedient and best for the public welfare. 
(1975 Code, § 18-66)  
Sec. 113.39. - Sale, assignment or transfer of rights. 
Any right, privilege, permit or certificate held, owned or obtained by any motor bus company under the provisions of this subchapter may be sold, assigned, leased or transferred or inherited; provided, however, any proposed sale, assignment, lease or transfer shall first be presented in writing to the City Council for its approval or disapproval. The proposed sale, assignment, lease or transfer may be prohibited if it is found and determined by the City Council that it is not made in good faith, or that the proposed assignee, lessee or transferee is not able or capable of continuing the operation of the equipment proposed to be sold, assigned, leased or transferred in such manner as to render the service demanded by the public necessity and convenience on and along the designated route or routes; provided, however, all rights, privileges, permits and certificates held, owned or obtained by any motor bus company or person under the provisions of this subchapter, or owned or obtained by any assignee or transferee, shall be taken and held subject to the rights of the city at any time to limit, restrict and forbid the use of the streets and alleys of the city to any owner or holder of such rights, privilege, permit or certificate. 
(1975 Code, § 18-67)  
Sec. 113.40. - City council to fix fares. 
The fares to be charged by any person operating by virtue of permits issued under this subchapter shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 18-68)  
CHAPTER 114. - AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE 
 
Sec. 114.01. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
City, when used in this article, shall mean the City of Stephenville, Erath County, Texas. 
Emergency, when used in this chapter shall mean the services used to respond to an individual's perceived need for immediate medical care to prevent death or aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury, or the sudden onset of a medical or traumatic condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity, including severe pain, such that the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in: 
1.  Placing a patient's health in serious jeopardy; 
2.  Serious impairment to bodily functions; or 
3.  Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part. 
EMS, when used in this chapter, shall mean a provider of Emergency Medical Service, ambulance service, or EMS provider. 
Licensed ambulance service, when used in this chapter, shall mean an ambulance service that is currently licensed as an EMS provider by the Texas Department of Health. 
Out of town emergency transfer, when used in this chapter, shall mean the transporting of a patient to a medical facility in a town or city other than Stephenville. Primarily this would mean transporting of a patient, for whatever reason, from the local hospital to a hospital in another city. 
Private owned service, when used in this chapter, shall mean an individual, company or organization that is in the business of providing an EMS or ambulance service that is primarily a for-profit operation. 
Stand-by, when used in this chapter, shall mean a service provided by an EMS provider at a special event to provide for the treatment and transportation of the sick or injured. (example: football games, rodeos, races, and the like) 
(Ord. 1999-22, passed 8-17-99)  
Sec. 114.02. - Emergency ambulance service. 
(A)  The City of Stephenville Fire Department EMS shall be the primary provider of emergency ambulance service and emergency medical service within the city limits and in other areas under contract with the city to provide such service. 
(B)  All patients transported by the city EMS shall terminate at the hospital Emergency Room. 
(C)  Any person utilizing the city's EMS service shall pay for services rendered. A copy of the city's EMS fee schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, including the holder of a city permit or license from the Texas Department of Health, to intentionally furnish, operate, maintain, advertise for or otherwise be engaged or profess to be engaged in the operation of, or provide emergency ambulance service upon the streets within the city or in any areas under contract with the city to provide such service. (see exceptions) 
(Ord. 1999-22, passed 8-17-99)  
Sec. 114.03. - Exceptions. 
(A)  A licensed ambulance service may respond in situations where the city, or its authorized representative, requests or authorizes another service to assist in an emergency under circumstances in which a city ambulance is not available to respond to an emergency situation which may require treatment or transportation of a patient or patients. 
(B)  It shall be permissible for a private owned ambulance service, who in the process of providing non-emergency ambulance service, and the situation develops into an emergency, to proceed with treatment and transportation of the patient to the hospital, provided that said service is licensed by the Texas Department of Health to provide such service. 
(C)  It shall be permissible for any ambulance or person therein, to respond to or from an emergency situation, outside of the city or its contracted areas of service. 
(D)  Private owned ambulance services that through a contractual arrangement or other agreement to provide service and stand-by at special events, are permitted to treat and transport patients to the local hospital within the city and its areas under contract. 
(Ord. 1999-22, passed 8-17-99)  
Sec. 114.04. - Private owned ambulance services. 
(A)  When an applicant files for a permit to provide ambulance service, the City Council must determine that it would be beneficial for the public's convenience, necessity and welfare, to provide additional service. The City Council may then grant a permit. 
(B)  Private owned ambulance services operating within the city are authorized to provide non-emergency transport, out of town emergency transfer, and stand-by service only. 
(C)  All private owned ambulance services are required to obtain an annual permit on or before January 1 of each year, to operate and provide service within the city. Permit applications shall be kept on file in the office of the City Secretary, and the fee for the permit will be as per the city's current fee schedule. 
(D)  Applications for permits to operate a private owned ambulance service within the city shall be reviewed by the Public Health and Safety Committee of the Stephenville City Council. The committee will consider all applications and will make a recommendation to the entire City Council. 
(E)  Any private owned ambulance service operating within the city, or its areas under contract, shall at all times possess a current Texas Department of Health license to provide such service, and shall at all times meet the requirements of the Texas Department of Health in regards to staffing, equipment, and supplies. 
(F)  All private owned EMS providers operating within the city or its contracted service areas, shall at all times have in full force and effect insurance coverage as follows: 
(1)  General liability insurance providing coverage for bodily injury, property damage, advertising injury, or personal injury arising out of the operation of said ambulance service with a minimum of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and a general aggregate of $1,000,000.00; 
(2)  Automobile liability insurance with a minimum combined single limit (each accident) of $1,000,000.00 including hired and non-owned coverage; 
(3)  Uninsured/underinsured motorists coverage; 
(4)  Malpractice insurance; and 
(5)  Excess liability to cover all underlying liability policies. 
(a)  The insurance policies required herein shall be submitted to the Public Health and Safety committee, or its designated representative, for approval. Satisfactory evidence that such insurance is at all times in full force and effect, shall be provided in form as specified by the committee, or its representative. 
(b)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the permit granted for the operation of ambulance services herein, and the insured shall be obligated to give not less than 30 days' written notice to the city before any cancellation or other termination of any such policy. 
(c)  The cancellation or other termination of any policy of insurance required herein shall automatically revoke and terminate the permit for ambulance service granted herein, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall provide and be in full force and effect at the time of such cancellation or other termination. 
(G)  All private owned ambulances operating in the city shall be maintained in sufficient mechanical condition as to comply with all the regulations set out by the Texas Department of Health. 
(H)  All private owned ambulances operating in the city shall have the name of the service prominently displayed on each side on the vehicle in letters of at least three inches in height. 
(I)  Any right, privilege or permit held, owned or obtained by any private owned ambulance service under the provisions of this article may be sold, assigned, leased or transferred, or inherited; provided, however, any proposed sale, assignment, lease or transfer shall first be presented in writing to the city council for its approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. 1999-22, passed 8-17-99; Am. Ord. 2002-23, passed 10-1-2002; Am. Ord. 2005-33, passed 12-6-2005)  
Secs. 114.05—114.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 114.99. - Penalty. 
Each officer, agent or employee of any corporation and every other person who violates or fails to comply with, or who procures, aids or abets in the violation of, any provision of this chapter, or fails to obey, observe or comply with any other decision, rule or regulations, direction, demand or requirement of the City Council, shall be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. Each day any provision of this chapter, or any rule, regulation or order of the City Council relevant thereto is violated shall constitute a separate offense, and the fact that the City Council may have caused prosecution for violation of its rules, regulations or orders under the penal section of this article shall not operate to prevent or limit the exercise of the authority of the City Council to suspend, revoke, alter or amend permits or certificates as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1999-22, passed 8-17-99)  
CHAPTER 115. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 115.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of the owner. 
Alarm system. An assembly or equipment arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent action and to which the Department is expected to respond. Systems commonly referred to as "burglar alarm systems", "panic/alert systems", and "fire alarm systems" are included. "alarm system" does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises which does not have a local alarm. 
Alarm user. The owner, agent or person in control of the premises where an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system on a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. 
Automatic dialing device. An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglar alarm system. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Calendar year. Shall be measured from October 1 to September 30. 
Commercial establishment. A structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business enterprise. 
Department. The Police or Fire Department of any authorized agent or site thereof. 
Fire alarm system. An alarm system signaling the detection of fire or smoke by a smoke alarm, heat detector or fire sprinkler system. 
Holdup alarm system. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Nonvalid alarm. The activation of an alarm system which is not the result of an emergency or threat of emergency, for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and for which responding police or fire personnel find no evidence of any criminal activity, smoke, fire or excessive heat. This term shall include activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of their employees or agents. This term shall not include activations which result from any of the following: 
(1)  Alarms caused by an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence, illegal entry or other demonstrable criminal activity; 
(2)  Any activation of an alarm system which is caused by tornadoes, earthquakes, gale force winds or higher, thunderstorms or electrical storms, utility power surges or surges through phone lines; 
(3)  Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause but where continuous decided effort, in the sole opinion of the Police or Fire Department, is being made jointly by the alarm business used by the alarm user for installation or servicing and any other concerned person to correct the malfunction expeditiously; 
(4)  Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to call the Police or Fire Department; 
(5)  Alarms followed by an immediate call to the Police or Fire Department canceling the alarm giving the proper code number, such call having been made prior to the arrival of the Department; 
(6)  Alarms resulting from the servicing of an alarm system by an alarm business when, prior to such repair or service, the alarm user or his/her agent has notified the Police or Fire Department, in person or by call by giving the proper code number, that the alarm system will be repaired or serviced at the particular date and time coinciding with that alarm; or 
(7)  Alarms caused by an animal, provided that actions of the animal were beyond the control and prevention of the alarm user. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.02. - Local alarms; limits on operation. 
(A)  All alarm systems equipped with any exterior sound-producing device, including, but not limited to, gongs, buzzers, sirens, bells or horns, shall be equipped with a time device which limits the operation of such sound-producing device to a continuous 15 minutes; except that commercial establishments shall be allowed a continuous 30 minutes of operation of the sound-producing devices. Unless otherwise specified, fire alarm systems shall not be equipped to automatically limit the operation of mechanical or electronic water-motor gongs. 
(B)  The alarm user or his/her designee must respond to the alarm site within 20 minutes of notification by the Police or Fire Department. Failure to respond to the alarm site within 20 minutes shall deem the alarm as an nonvalid alarm. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.03. - Restrictions on automatic dialing devices. 
No automatic dialing device shall be keyed to the Police or Fire Department or otherwise connected to the department terminals. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.04. - Penalties for nonvalid alarms. 
(A)  The first five nonvalid burglar alarms at each individual alarm site during a calendar year to which the Department responds shall not result in a service charge to the alarm user. Each response by the Police Department to a nonvalid burglar alarm after the first five at the same alarm site during a calendar year shall result in the imposition of a false alarm fee against the alarm user. 
(B)  The first five nonvalid holdup/robbery alarms at each individual alarm site during a calendar year to which the Department responds shall not result in a service charge to the alarm user. Each response by the Police Department to a nonvalid holdup/robbery alarm after the first five at the same alarm site during a calendar year shall result in the imposition of a false alarm fee against the alarm user. 
(C)  The first five nonvalid fire alarms at each individual alarm site during a calendar year to which the Department responds shall not result in a service charge to the alarm user. Each response by the Fire Department to a nonvalid fire alarm after the first five at the same alarm site during a calendar year shall result in the imposition of a false alarm fee against the alarm user. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.05. - Appeal of a nonvalid determination. 
(A)  If an alarm user believes that the Police or Fire Department's determination that an alarm was nonvalid is unjustified, the alarm user may appeal that determination by filing a notice of appeal with the Chief of the applicable department, within ten days of date of notice to the alarm user by the Police or Fire Department of the nonvalid alarm. In the notice of appeal, the alarm user shall set out the specific basis upon which such user is contesting the nonvalid determination. 
(B)  The Chief to whom the appeal has been made, or a representative designated by the said Chief, shall act as a Hearing Officer and shall conduct a hearing to determine whether to reclassify the alarm as valid. The burden of proof shall be upon the alarm user. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall not be bound by the rules of evidence applicable in a court proceeding but may rely upon that evidence which a reasonable person would rely upon in reaching a decision. The Hearing Officer may request additional information from the alarm user or the Department. 
(C)  The hearing shall be conducted within a reasonable time after the notice of appeal is filed. During the time the appeal is pending, the alarm shall not be considered in determining the number of nonvalid alarms occurring during a calendar year. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall provide the alarm user and the applicable department with written notice of his/her determination within a reasonable time. 
(D)  If the alarm user is still not satisfied, the alarm user may appeal to the City Administrator. 
(E)  The decision of the City Administrator is final. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.06. - False alarm fees. 
Fees imposed for false alarms shall be approved by the City Council by minute entry or as a part of the annual budget. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
Sec. 115.07. - Collection of penalties and fees. 
All fees and penalties authorized in this chapter may be billed directly to the alarm user or may be billed through the water and garbage billing system and payable as provided for in the collection of such utility bills. 
(Ord. 2002-17, passed 9-17-2002)  
CHAPTER 116. - LOITERING 
 
Sec. 116.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Loiter. Includes the following activities: standing, sitting, the walking about aimlessly without apparent purpose; lingering; hanging out; hanging around; lagging behind; the idle spending of time; delaying; sauntering and moving slowly about, where such conduct is not due to physical defects or conditions. 
Parent. A person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, stepparent, person in loco parentis or legal guardian of the minor; 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, parks and the common areas and parking lots of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, theaters, retail shopping centers and shops. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 116.02. - Notification. 
A person receives notification of this section when: 
(A)  (1)  The public place has a sign posted conspicuously on the location that states: 
"NO LOITERING, Stephenville Code of Ordinances Chapter 116". 
(2)  The sign should state any special circumstances, such as times or time period, examples, "after dark" or "between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m." 
(B)  The person receives verbal or written notification from the owner, manager, proprietor, or lessee of the property that loitering is not permitted. 
(C)  The person receives verbal or written notification from a Stephenville police officer that the person is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 116.99  
Sec. 116.03. - Examples of loitering activities. 
The term Loiter as herein defined includes any of the following activities. This list is not meant to be all inclusive: 
(A)  Lingering in a public place, in which the person has no ownership or employment interest, either within or outside of a vehicle, when the premises are not open for business to the public. 
(B)  Lingering in a public place, either within or outside of a vehicle, under circumstances that show no apparent reason or business to do so. 
(C)  Lingering in a public place, either within or outside of a vehicle, and by their actions, words, gestures or manner would likely disturb, annoy or frighten persons of ordinary sensibilities, whether or not any person is actually disturbed, annoyed or frightened thereby. 
(D)  Linger, remain, or return to a public place after being directed or requested by a police officer to move on or leave the premises. 
(E)  Repeated activity by a person, continuous or broken, which outwardly manifests no purpose, such as going from one place to another and back with no showing of use for such movement. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 116.99  
Sec. 116.04. - Offenses. 
(A)  A person commits an offense if he or she loiters or returns to loiter, on or in a public place after that person receives notification that the person is in violation of this section. 
(B)  A parent of a child commits a violation if the parent knowingly, or by insufficient control, allows a child to remain in or on a public place or return to a public place after notification that the child is in violation of this section. It is prima facie evidence of insufficient control if a child is found in violation three or more times. 
(C)  A person commits an offense if, by act or omission, he or she knowingly induces, encourages, or assists a child to appear or remain in or on a public place in violation of this section. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 116.99  
Sec. 116.05. - Exceptions. 
(A)  A person shall not be considered loitering while in direct route, and not lingering, to or from work or to or from place of residence. 
(B)  A person under the age of 17 shall not be considered as loitering while engaged in, or in direct route to school, church, or entertainment activities with permission of the person's parent. 
(C)  A person shall not be considered loitering if the person's explanation for remaining in or on a public place is reasonable taking into consideration the circumstances of the time and place. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009)  
Secs. 116.06—116.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 116.99. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $200.00. 
(Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-3-2009)  
CHAPTER 117. - PAWNBROKERS AND OTHER DEALERS 
 
Sec. 117.01. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Chief of police. The Chief of Police of the City of Stephenville, Texas, or his/her designated representative. 
Crafted precious metal dealer. Any person who engages in the business of purchasing and selling crafted precious metal as defined in V.T.C.A. Occupations Code § 1956.051, excluding those exceptions found in §§ 1956.052 et seq., of such Code, as amended. 
Metal recycling entity. Anyone, who, from a fixed location, engages in the business of utilizing machinery or equipment for the processing of or manufacturing of iron, steel, or nonferrous metallic scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron, scrap steel or nonferrous metallic scrap for smelting purposes. 
Pawnbroker. Any person as defined in the Texas Pawnshop Act, V.T.C.A. Finance Code §§ 371.001 et seq., as amended. 
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, or any of their employees or agents. 
Secondhand dealer. Any person engaged in the business of buying and selling used or secondhand personal property, or lending money on the security of personal property deposited with the person. 
Secondhand metal dealer. A person who operates or maintains a scrap metal yard or other place in which used or previously purchased metal items or scrap metal is collected or kept for shipment, sale, or transfer. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 117.02. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(A)  Except as otherwise herein provided, every person licensed or transacting any business as a crafted precious metal dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand metal dealer within the city limits shall, beginning 60 days following the effective date of this chapter, maintain an electronic inventory-tracking system and transmit all information required by this chapter via computer to the entity designated by the Chief of Police. 
(B)  The information required to be transmitted by this section for crafted precious metals dealers, pawnbrokers, and secondhand dealers must include: 
(1)  The date and time of each transaction in which personal property is purchased, pledged, or received for the sum of $25.00 or more (or other consideration equivalent to that amount). 
(2)  An accurate and detailed description of any and all property purchased or acquired during the regular course of business for the sum of $25.00 or more (or other consideration equivalent to that amount), including any and all trademarks, identification numbers, serial numbers, model numbers, brand names, and other identifying marks. 
(3)  The actual price paid or the amount of money involved in each such transaction. 
(4)  The full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, driver's license number or state-issued identification card number of the person with whom each such purchase or transaction is consummated. 
(5)  A digital photograph of any item not bearing a unique serial number purchased or acquired for a sum of money more than $50.00. 
(6)  Such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably deem necessary to ensure compliance with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(C)  The information required to be transmitted by division (B) of this section shall be transmitted within 48 hours of the date and time a purchase or transaction is consummated. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 117.03. - Defenses; exceptions. 
This chapter shall not be applicable to: 
(A)  Automobile dealerships. 
(B)  The sale of aluminum cans. 
(C)  Charitable organizations. 
(D)  Used or secondhand clothing businesses. 
(E)  Used or secondhand furniture businesses. 
(F)  Antique dealers. 
(G)  Metal recycling entities. 
(H)  Second hand metal dealers. 
(I)  Farm equipment and utility vehicle dealerships; 
(J)  Used or secondhand book stores. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 117.04. - Government or utility property. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a crafted precious metal dealer, pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer within the city limits to purchase or receive any item of property on which words or markings appear indicating ownership of such item by the United States, the State of Texas, or any of its political subdivisions or agencies, or any public utility company, except where the person offering such item for sale or transfer provides: 
(1)  Written authorization from the governmental entity, agency, or utility to convey the item on behalf of the entity, agency, or utility; or 
(2)  A valid receipt from the governmental entity, agency, or utility evidencing such entity, agency, or utility has conveyed or relinquished ownership of the item. 
(B)  It shall not be a defense to prosecution under division (A) of this section that an item of property contains no words or markings indicating ownership if the person who purchased or received the item knows or should reasonably be expected to know such item is owned by the United States, the State of Texas, or any of its political subdivisions or agencies, or any public utility company. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 117.99.  
Sec. 117.05. - Acceptance of property sealed or unopened in its original packaging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a crafted precious metal dealer, pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer within the city limits to purchase or receive an item of property sealed or unopened in its original packaging unless the person conveying such item presents a receipt or proof of purchase for the item. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 117.99.  
Sec. 117.06. - Acceptance of property inscribed with a company name. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or transacting any business as a crafted precious metal dealer, pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer within the city limits to purchase or receive an item of property bearing the name, initials, or logo of a business entity unless the person conveying such item provides at the time of conveyance a valid receipt indicating lawful ownership, a signed statement attesting to lawful ownership, or written authorization from the owner to convey the item on such owner's behalf. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 117.99.  
Secs. 117.07—117.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 117.99. - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. 
(Ord. 2012-33, passed 12-4-2012)  
CHAPTER 118. - GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES 
 
Sec. 118.01. - Definitions. 
Amusement redemption machine. Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance that for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance, including but not limited to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, sweepstakes, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe, eight liner or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so. 
City official. A code enforcement officer or building official of the City of Stephenville or any peace officer of the State of Texas. 
Game room. A building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement redemption machines. 
Game room owner. A person who has any ownership interest in a game room or an owner, director, or officer of a business entity that has any ownership interest in a game room. 
Operational machine. A machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.02. - Licensing. 
(A)  Payment of fee and issuance of license: An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to the City an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room license fee of $250.00. Application shall not be approved until a completed application has been submitted and found to meet all application requirements. 
(B)  Application: An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the City Secretary a written application on a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator, or lessee of the amusement redemption machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate application must be filed for each location. The following information is required in the application: 
(1)  Location, by address, of the proposed operation. 
(2)  A copy of the certificate of formation if the business is registered with the secretary of state, or the applicant's d/b/a, if applicable; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the following persons, if applicable: 
(a)  Applicant if a natural person; 
(b)  All persons who own 25 percent or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room; 
(c)  All corporate officers, if any, of the business; 
(d)  If a partnership, each of the general and limited partners; 
(e)  The property owner; and 
(f)  The manager of the property and/or business. 
(4)  The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the preceding five years; 
(5)  Whether a previous license or permit of applicant, or, if applicable, corporate or partner of applicant, has been revoked within two years of filing of the application; 
(6)  Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement redemption machine game room; 
(7)  An authorization to conduct a background check for all individuals included in licensing (c)(ii). The license will be denied if any individual has any convictions, guilty pleas, or deferred adjudications related to gambling or organized crime. 
(8)  A sworn statement that: 
(a)  That all the facts contained in the application are true and correct; 
(b)  The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; 
(c)  The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws and City ordinances, including Chapter 47 of the Texas Penal Code; and 
(d)  Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact person who can be reached after hours. 
(C)  Expiration and renewal: 
(1)  Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room license issued by the City shall automatically expire on the thirty-first day of December following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such license shall automatically expire if the licensee sells the property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise disposes of such devices. An amusement redemption machine game room license is not assignable or transferable. The City shall not refund any portion of a license after the license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the City. 
(2)  Late Penalty. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to continue operating an amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an amount equal to 20 percent of the fee actually due or 20 percent of the previous year's fee, whichever is greater, in order to obtain reinstatement of his license. Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective. 
(D)  Posting of license: The license shall be conspicuously posted inside the building. 
(E)  Restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations: The following restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations shall apply to all amusement redemption machine game rooms: 
(1)  Condition of premises. All building and fire code standards must be met. A certificate of occupancy shall be requested before license is issued. Game room must be located in an area zoned for that activity. 
(2)  Methods of conduction of business. Amusement redemption machines are not allowed outdoors. 
(3)  Hours of operation. May only be operated between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(4)  Parking requirements. One space for each two machines, plus one space per employee per shift. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages. No amusement redemption machine game room may be located on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, with the exception of any Congressionally chartered, non-profit organization. 
(6)  The owner, operator, or manager of the premises must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The machines shall not be left unattended. 
(7)  Machines must be situated within the premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all patrons of the establishment. 
(8)  A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  Total number of machines in one establishment shall be limited to 50. 
(10)  All machines must be permitted according to the permitting requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.03. - Unrestricted access by city official. 
An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine, shall provide a City official with immediate unrestricted access, upon request to all areas of the game room and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.04 - Inspection by city officials. 
(A)  A city official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the City of Stephenville, Texas' incorporated City limits to determine whether the game room or an operational amusement redemption machine complies with the City of Stephenville Code of Ordinances and state law. 
(B)  An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a City official to inspect a game room or operational amusement redemption machine commits an offense. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.05. - Transparent, uncovered windows required. 
(A)  Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side so that the area is open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and is admitted without charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions, tinting or other structures or obstructions. 
(B)  The requirements of subsection (A) above may be waived or modified by the Building Official if the game room owner can demonstrate: 
(1)  The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district, and deemed to have architectural or historic significance; and 
(2)  Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a substantially detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.06. - Hours of operations, ingress and egress. 
(A)  All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance. 
(B)  All game rooms shall have doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit or to allow or permit any game room to remain open for business or open to the public before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.07. - Amusement redemption machine permitting. 
Permit Application: An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to obtain a permit for each amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator, or lessee must submit, at their own expense, each amusement redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in advance by the City to ensure that the machine does not generate the resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions or luck of the player. Any game that is in violation of this requirement or State Law will not be permitted or allowed to operate within the incorporated limits of the City of Stephenville. 
Permit: Following approval by the independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory, the City shall issue a permit that will be permanently affixed to the approved machine. The permit shall include the name of the machine and the machine's serial number. City will be allowed to charge a permit fee as allowed by State Law. 
Sealing or Seizure: A person commits an offense if he or she owns an operational machine without a permit or with a tampered permit. In addition to other criminal or civil remedies outlined in this ordinance, the City shall have the authority to seal or seize any coin-operated machine located in any amusement redemption game room for which a permit is not displayed. If any amusement redemption machine is found with evidence of permit tampering of any kind, including a permit issued to a different machine or a change in the game's hardware or software after the date of the permit issuance, the City shall have the authority to seal or seize all amusement redemption machines in the game room for retesting at the owner's expense and/or to revoke the owner's license to operate a game room. 
Nuisance Declared. Because such businesses in the City are a potential for being an attractive nuisance to minors and because of the questioned legality of such activities, the City Council hereby finds such businesses constitute a nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the City of Stephenville. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this ordinance, no license will be issued for any such establishment within a 500 feet radius of a church, residence, school, daycare, hospital or another business entity subject to licensing or permitting under this ordinance. Any businesses existing as of the time of the passage of this ordinance shall be permitted to continue, however, if they should cease operations, or violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or any other applicable City, state or federal law, their license shall be subject to revocation and such may not be renewed unless they meet all provisions of any applicable law including the above spacing requirements. Existing businesses are subject to all other requirements herein including, but not limited to, licensing and permitting which shall be required within 60 days of passage of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
Sec. 118.08. - Offense; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum amount allowable by law. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by V.T.C.A. Penal Code ch. 6.02 is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinance inconsistent or in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict, hereby repealed. 
In the event any clause, phrase, provision, sentence, or part of this chapter or the application of the same to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect, impair, or invalidate this chapter as a whole or any part or provision hereof other than the part declared to be invalid or unconstitutional; and the City Council of the City of Stephenville, declared that it would have passed each and every part of the same notwithstanding the omission of any such part thus declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, whether be one or more parts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-15 , 4-3-2018)  
CHAPTER 119. - CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 119.01. - Short title and purpose. 
(A)  This article may be known and cited as "Credit Access Businesses Regulation." 
(B)  The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City of Stephenville by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this chapter establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.02. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access business. 
Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit access business. 
Consumer's language of preference is the language the consumer understands best. 
Credit access business has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city council, city manager, or city council or city manager's designee, to enforce and administer this chapter. 
Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.001. 
Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this chapter and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration application filed under this article. 
State license means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.03. - Violations; penalty. 
(A)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(B)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 per day in accordance with chapter 10, section 10.99 of the Stephenville, Texas Code of Ordinances. 
(C)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(D)  The penalties provided for in subsection (B) are in addition to any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.04. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense, the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a credit access business under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.05. - Registration required. 
A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts business as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.06. - Registration application. 
(A)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access business and other persons with a financial interest in the credit access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access business pursuant to V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance with the code. 
(6)  A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $50.00. This fee is subject to changes at the discretion of the City Council. 
(B)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within 45 days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.07. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request. 
(A)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration upon receiving a completed application under section Sec. 119.06. 
(B)  A certificate of registration issued under this section must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or any peace officer for examination. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.08. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(A)  A certificate of registration expires on the earlier of: 
(1)  One year after the date of issuance; or 
(2)  The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without renewal, or other termination of the registrant's state license. 
(B)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with section 119.06. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the registration. 
(C)  An annual registration fee of $250.00 will be due upon registration renewal. This fee is subject to changes at the discretion of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.09. - Non-transferability. 
A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.10. - Location of credit access businesses. 
Any lot containing a credit access business establishment shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any lot containing another credit access business establishment, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other lot. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.11. - Maintenance of records. 
(A)  A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit access business, which must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer; 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced; 
(3)  The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals; 
(4)  The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and 
(5)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under section 20-31 of this article. 
(B)  A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(C)  A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.627. 
(D)  The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this section must be retained for at least three years and made available for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and customary business hours of the credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.12. - Restriction on extension of consumer credit. 
(A)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed 20 percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(B)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  Seventy percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(C)  A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(D)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or renewed. 
(E)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(F)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.13. - Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement. 
(A)  Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages. 
(B)  For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(C)  For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the consumer in its entirety, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 119.14. - Referral to consumer credit counseling. 
A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and must include the information required by subsections 119.11 (A)(1)—(5) of this article specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-18, 6-12-2018)  
Title 13 - GENERAL OFFENSES  
CHAPTER 130. - GENERAL OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Littering, see §§ 95.01 and 95.02. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to V.T.C.A. Penal Code § 1.08, "No government subdivision or agency may enact or enforce a law that makes any conduct covered by the [Texas Penal Code] an offense subject to a criminal penalty…" Therefore, offenses contained in the Texas Penal Code have preempted similar city ordinances. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 130.01. - Peeping tom. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the residential premises of another person and look into a window or other opening of such residence without the permission and consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(1975 Code, § 11-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.02. - Injuring, cutting trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or in any way injure any tree used for shade or ornamental purposes standing or growing in any of the streets or alleys, or along the sidewalks, or within any of the public places belonging to or within the city. 
(1975 Code, § 11-5) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.03. - Playing on, catching rides on trains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play upon any railroad tracks or cars, whether the cars be in motion or standing, or to ride on any cars while they are being sidetracked or switched by any train within the corporate limits. This section shall not apply to persons engaged in running trains or in any way connected with them, nor to persons traveling on them. 
(1975 Code, § 11-8) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.04 - Reserved.  
Sec. 130.05. - City park regulations. 
(A)  The part of the city park located south of the Bosque River and the two little league parks located north of the Bosque River, the two little league parks being separated from the rest of the park located north of the Bosque River by a gate, shall be closed each night from 10:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. of the following day beginning on November 1 of each year and ending on March 1 of each year, and the park shall be closed each night from 12:00 midnight until 8:00 a.m. of the following day beginning on March 1 of each year and ending on October 31 of each year, except when scheduled, park-sponsored all-night activities are in progress in the part of such park described above. 
(B)  No person other than authorized city personnel shall be allowed to be in the above described part of the city park during the above indicated times that the park is to be closed. Any other person found in the park during these closing hours shall be in violation of this section. 
(1975 Code, § 11-12; Am. Ord.. passed 3-7-1978) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 130.06—130.14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOL 
 
Sec. 130.15. - Possession of intoxicating beverages in city recreation hall or city park prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession intoxicating beverages while that person is in the City Recreation Hall or in any of the covered pavilions in the city park. 
(1975 Code, § 11-13; Am. Ord.. passed 5-1-1979) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.16. - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(A)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms and phrases as set forth in V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 1.01 et seq. are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(B)  Required; fee. No person within the city shall manufacture, sell, distribute or store any alcoholic beverage or engage in any other activity in relation thereto, for which a permit or license is required by the state alcoholic beverage code, without first obtaining a license to do so from the city. The fee for such license or permit shall be an amount equal to one-half the permit or license fee charged by the state under the state alcoholic beverage code. 
(C)  Location of alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to sell alcoholic beverages where the place of business is within 300 feet of any church, public or private school, or public hospital. 
(2)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(a)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(b)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to sell alcoholic beverages in any residential area zoned as R-1, R-1.5, R-2, R-3, RE, or RHA. 
(4)  The City Council may allow a variance to the distance regulations provided in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section if it determines that the enforcement of the regulations in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on the applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or, for any other reason the City Council determines, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(Ord. 2008-27, passed 12-2-2008)  
Secs. 130.17—130.24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREARMS 
 
Sec. 130.25. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Air gun. An air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known, that, by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging and propelling shots, pellets or any solid object for a distance of greater than 50 feet. 
Firearm. Any device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. 
(1975 Code, § 11-61; Am. Ord.. 1993-22, passed 8-3-1993; Am. Ord.. 1997-1, passed 1-7-1997)  
Sec. 130.26. - Discharge of firearms and air guns prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any type or description or any air gun within the limits of the municipality unless the property on which the firearm or air gun was discharged was annexed by the municipality after September 1, 1981, and: 
(A)  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun is discharged: 
(1)  On a tract of land containing ten acres or more and more than 150 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(2)  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
(B)  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber is discharged: 
(1)  On a tract of land containing 50 acres or more and more than 300 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(2)  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(1975 Code, §§ 11-62, 11-63; Am. Ord.. 1993-22, passed 8-3-1993; Am. Ord.. 1997-1, passed 1-7-1997; Am. Ord. 2012-32, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.27. - Reserved.  
Sec. 130.28. - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to this subchapter are as follows: 
(A)  Any person discharging a firearm in defense of person; (As defined in the Texas Penal Code.) 
(B)  Police officers or animal control officers in the discharge of their duties; 
(C)  The discharge of firearms at locations and times approved in advance by the Chief of Police; and 
(D)  Persons shooting air guns on private property who have completed a gun safety course as approved by the Chief of Police. 
(1975 Code, § 16-64; Am. Ord.. 1993-22, passed 8-3-1993; Am. Ord.. 1997-1, passed 1-7-1997)  
Secs. 130.29—130.39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 130.40. - Sale, exhibit of fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or have in his/her possession with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale or sell within the city any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge or other combustible fireworks of any kind; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the sale of any such article at wholesale to merchants conducting business entirely within the city or to the sale by wholesalers for private or public demonstration; nor to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes or other signaling devices used by railroads; nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies; nor shall it prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application has been made and a permit issued by the City Council for such demonstration. The permit shall not be granted unless the demonstration or display will be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the City Council, after proper inspection, will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(1975 Code, § 11-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
State Law reference— Fireworks, see V.T.C.A. Penal Code, Art. 1725  
Sec. 130.41. - Discharging fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, pistol, cap or cartridge or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(1975 Code, § 11-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 130.42—130.49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 130.50. - Hunting, fishing on enclosed land. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the enclosed land of another within the corporate limits, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or agent in charge, and hunt with firearms or catch or take any fish from any pond, lake or tank. 
(1975 Code, § 11-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Cross reference— Firearms, see §§ 130.25 et seq.  
Sec. 130.51. - Malicious mischief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to unlawfully, willfully or maliciously break, throw down, destroy or carry away any gate, step, door, box or board which is the property of another without his/her consent, or to take down, deface or carry away any signboard, plate or card which indicates the name, occupation or business of any person, firm or corporation without the consent of the owner. 
(1975 Code, § 11-6) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.52. - Injuring, stealing public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, remove, injure or destroy any public property or building, or the grounds belonging to such buildings, within the corporate limits. 
(1975 Code, § 11-7) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 130.53—130.59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 130.60. - Noise. 
(A)  Noise as nuisance. 
(1)  Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise that causes material distress, discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(2)  Any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration that substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(B)  Nuisances enumerated. Noises that are prohibited include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The playing of a radio, recorder, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in a dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence. 
(2)  Parties or gatherings with people yelling, talking loud or creating other noise, during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 am., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in a dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence. 
(3)  The use of a loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(4)  The keeping of any animal or bird whose frequent or long, continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(5)  The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(6)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger. 
(7)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. 
(8)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(9)  The creation of any excessive noise on a street adjacent to a school or institution of learning then in session, or adjacent to a hospital, that unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in a manner indicating that the street is near a school or hospital. 
(10)  The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle; the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers; or the erection, excavation, demolition, alternation or repair on any building. 
(11)  The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors that disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  The use of any bell, drum, loudspeaker, whistle or other instrument or device to create noise and, thereby, attract attention to any performance, show, or sale of merchandise; except for ice cream vendors between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and dusk. 
(13)  For any person operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city, it is unlawful to operate any sound amplifier that is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, its sound is audible or the vibration accompanying its sound is perceptible to a person at a distance of 30 feet from the source. 
(C)  The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  An authorized emergency vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 541.201; 
(2)  Motor vehicles used for business or political purposes, properly permitted, that, in the normal course of business, use a sound-making devices; or 
(3)  Horns or warning devices required under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 547.502. 
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 11-7-2000) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Secs. 130.61—130.64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 
 
Sec. 130.65. - Posting handbills, posters without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stick, paint or stamp upon any house, fence, wall, pavement or other object not his/her own, within the corporate limits, any written, printed or other notice, bill, sign, circular, poster or advertisement without first having obtained permission from the owner. 
(1975 Code, § 15-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.66. - Defacing bulletin boards, signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, remove or destroy any bulletin board, sign, show frame, platform or other object not his/her own. 
(1975 Code, § 15-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99.  
Sec. 130.67. - Billboards obstructing street crossing views. 
The erection and maintenance of any billboard or signboard and the maintenance of any billboard or signboard heretofore erected within the corporate limits of the city at any place adjacent to a public street or highway, when such billboard or signboard obstructs the view of a person traveling thereon at a curvature in such street or highway or at an intersection thereof with any street, highway, alley or railroad track, so that a vehicle on such street or highway or on the street, highway, alley or railroad track intersecting therewith is not visible for a distance of at least 50 yards, is hereby prohibited and declared a nuisance. 
(1975 Code, § 15-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 10.99; Council's authority to regulate signs and billboards, see Charter, Art. III § 17(13); Traffic regulations, see Ch. 71.  
Secs. 130.68, 130.69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
 
Sec. 130.70. - Roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, coasters, scooters, bicycles and the like. 
(A)  No person shall ride in, ride upon or in any manner operate any roller skates, roller blades, skateboard, scooters, bicycles, or similar device upon any sidewalk, roadway and/or street within the Central Business District of the city. No person shall ride in, ride upon or in any manner operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk within the Central Business District. For the purposes of this section, the Central Business District shall be defined as that portion of the city bounded by Tarleton Street on the north, Long Street on the south, Floral Street on the east and Barton Street on the west. 
(B)  Owners or managers of restaurants, businesses, professional buildings, churches, schools, or shopping centers may prohibit persons from riding in, riding upon, or in any manner operating any skates, roller blades, skateboard, scooters, or similar device upon sidewalks and parking lots of said premises. Owners or managers of these types of establishments may prohibit such activity by posting a sign bearing one of the following legends. 
(1)  "USE OF ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES ON THESE PREMISES IS UNLAWFUL. CITY OF STEPHENVILLE ORDINANCE SECTION 130.70." 
(2)  "IT IS UNLAWFUL TO USE ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES ON THESE PREMISES DURING BUSINESS HOURS. CITY OF STEPHENVILLE ORDINANCE SECTION 130.70." 
(3)  "IT IS UNLAWFUL TO USE ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SKATE BOARDS, SCOOTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES ON THESE PREMISES AFTER BUSINESS HOURS. CITY OF STEPHENVILLE ORDINANCE SECTION 130.70." 
(C)  No person shall ride in, ride upon or in any manner operate any roller skates, roller blades, skateboard, scooters, or similar devices upon the following streets: Washington, Graham, Lillian, Alexander, Mary, Ollie, Frey, Long, Dale, Northwest Loop, South Loop, Lingleville Road, Wolf Nursery Road, Overhill Drive, Harbin Drive and/or East Road. Persons may cross the listed roadways/streets at an intersection or crosswalk. 
(D)  No person shall ride in, ride upon or in any manner operate any roller skates, roller blades, skateboard, scooters, bicycles, or similar devices upon the Birdsong Amphitheater stage. 
(E)  The manager, owner of any restaurant, business, professional building, church, schools, shopping center or any other facility may prohibit operation of bicycles on their property by including the word "bicycles" in the legend on the sign they post. 
(F)  The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to wheelchairs or other devices designed to aid handicapped or impaired persons when operated by a handicapped or impaired person. 
(Ord. 2004-16, passed 7-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 130.72.  
Sec. 130.71. - Neighborhood electric vehicles and motor assisted scooters. 
(A)  The definition of neighborhood electric vehicle and motor assisted scooters shall be the same as defined by V.T.C.A. Transp. Code § 541.301. 
(B)  The operation of neighborhood electric vehicles and motor assisted scooters is prohibited on Washington, Graham, Lillian, Alexander, Mary, Ollie, Frey, Long, Dale, Northwest Loop, South Loop, Lingleville Road, Wolf Nursery Road, Overhill Drive, Harbin Drive and/or East Road. The vehicle may cross the listed roadways/streets at an intersection or crosswalk. 
(Ord. 2004-16, passed 7-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 130.72.  
Sec. 130.72. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $200.00. 
(Ord. 2004-16, passed 7-6-2004)  
Secs. 130.73—130.79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - REGULATION OF SEXUAL OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 130.80. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council of the City Of Stephenville finds that sex offenders who are required to register as sexual predators under V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 62, present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. It is the intent of this subchapter to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from loitering or prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 130.81. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Child. Any person under the age of 17. 
Child care facility. As defined by City of Stephenville Zoning Ordinance. 
Child care institution. As defined by City of Stephenville Zoning Ordinance. 
Child safety zone. Is defined as but not limited to: 
(1)  Public parks; 
(2)  Private and public schools; 
(3)  Public library; 
(4)  Amusement arcades or video arcades; 
(5)  Indoor and outdoor amusement centers or amusement parks, or carnivals, circuses, fairs or fair grounds; 
(6)  Public, commercial and semi-private swimming pools; 
(7)  Child care facility or child care institution; 
(8)  Public or private youth soccer, football or baseball field; 
(9)  Crisis center or shelter; 
(10)  Skate park or rink; 
(11)  Public or private youth center; 
(12)  Movie theater; 
(13)  Bowling alley; 
(14)  Scouting facilities; 
(15)  Any public or private group, location or activity that regularly provides athletic, civic or cultural activities that includes as participants or recipients persons who are 17 years of age or younger, including but not limited to Safe Trick or Treat, Christmas on the Square and Vacation Bible Schools; 
(16)  Offices for Child Protective Services. 
Database. The Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database or the Sex Offender Registration files maintained by the Sex Offender Registration Officer of the Stephenville Police Department. 
Loitering. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around an area. 
Park or playground. One of the following: 
(1)  Any land, including improvements to the land, that is administered, operated or managed by the City of Stephenville for the use of the general public as a recreational area. 
(2)  City recreational areas include, but are not limited to, conservation area, jogging trail, hiking trail, bicycle trail, recreational center, water park, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field. 
Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Places where children regularly congregate. Same as Child Safety Zone. 
Public way. Any place to which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, shopping centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops and similar areas that are open to the use of the public. 
School. A private or public pre-school, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school. 
Sex offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person under 17 years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under V.C.T.A. Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 62. 
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 130.82. - Sex offender prohibition. 
(A)  It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(B)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a Child Safety Zone. 
(C)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within 300 feet of a Child Safety Zone. 
(D)  A sex offender shall not, on each October 30 and 31, or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see Sec. 130.85.  
Sec. 130.83. - Evidentiary matters. 
(A)  If a sex offender who is prohibited from being in a Child Safety Zone is found in a Child Safety Zone by a police officer, the sex offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this subchapter. 
(B)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this subchapter applies to such a person if that person's record appears in/on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(C)  The distance of 300 feet from a Child Safety Zone shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary of the Child Safety Zone. 
(D)  The distance of 1,000 feet from a place where children congregate shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(E)  In the case of multiple residences on one property, measurement shall be made from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest property line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(F)  In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove otherwise. 
(G)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the City of Stephenville and maintained by the Stephenville Police Department. The City of Stephenville shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Stephenville Police Department or available on the City of Stephenville Website or Stephenville Police Department Website. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 130.84. - Exceptions. 
(A)  The person required to register in/on the database established the permanent residence or temporary residence and residency has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the Sex Offender Registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this subchapter. 
(B)  The place where children regularly congregate, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register in/on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all Sex Offender Registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(C)  The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this subchapter would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed in/on the database. 
(D)  The person required to register in/on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(E)  The person required to register is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional institution located within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(F)  The person required to register is under 18 years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent or guardian. 
(G)  The person required to register has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure, Ch. 62. 
(H)  The person required to register has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal or pardoned. 
(I)  The person's duty to register in/on the database has expired. 
(J)  Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender. 
(K)  The person is adhering to local school policy or is otherwise preempted from this section by state law. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012)  
Sec. 130.85. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 2007-18, passed 9-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-31, passed 12-4-2012)  
Secs. 130.86—130.89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES 
 
Sec. 130.90. - Established. 
This subchapter, §§ 130.90 et seq., "Prohibited Substances" is created to read as follows. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 130.91. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Restricted smoking material. 
(1)  Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof, if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(a)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(b)  2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(c)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(d)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(e)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(f)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
(2)  Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2", "K-2 SUMMIT", "K-2 SEX", "GENIE", "DASCENTS", "ZOHAI", "SAGE", "SPICE", "KO KNOCK-OUT 2", "SPICE GOLD", "SPICE DIAMOND", "YUCATAN FIRE", "SOLAR FLARE", "PEP SPICE", "FIRE N' ICE", RED DRAGON, AND "SALVIA DIVINORUM". 
(3)  Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
Restricted smoking material paraphernalia. Any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 130.92 - Restricted smoking materials; purpose. 
The purpose of this subchapter is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined within the city limits of the City of Stephenville, Texas, and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials within the city limits. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 130.93. - Sale, delivery, offer or gift. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to any person. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 130.97.  
Sec. 130.94. - Use or possession of restricted smoking material. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of Stephenville. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 130.97.  
Sec. 130.95. - Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume restricted smoking material. It is a violation of this section, if a person is found in possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of restricted smoking material are present on the restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010) 
Cross reference— Penalty, see § 130.97.  
Sec. 130.96. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(A)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this subchapter if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(B)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this subchapter if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 130.97. - Offenses and penalties. 
(A)  Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(B)  Every act in violation of this subchapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(C)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-5-2010)  
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES  
TABLE I: FRANCHISES 
Ord. No. 	Date Passed 	Description 
— 	5-6-19 	Granting a franchise to Texas Power and Light Company for a term of 50 years. 
— 	7-6-48 	Granting a franchise to Erath County Electric Co-operative Association. 
— 	6-5-51 	Granting a franchise to Gulf States Telephone Company for a term of 25 years. 
— 	2-5-52 	Granting a franchise to Southwest Natural Gas Company for a term of 25 years following the termination of the previous franchise. 
— 	8-4-53 	Granting a franchise to Southwest Natural Gas Company for a rate increase. 
— 	7-2-57 	Granting a franchise to Jack Arthur for electronic home theater equipment for a term of 20 years. 
— 	9-17-57 	Granting a franchise to Gulf State Telephone Company for a rate increase. 
— 	2-6-62 	Granting a franchise to Erath County Electric Co-operative Association for a term of 30 years. 
— 	12-3-63 	Granting a franchise to C. C. Pemberton for garbage collection for a term of ten years from December 15, 1963. 
— 	3-3-64 	Granting a franchise to Charles E. Tabor for community television for a term of 10 years, with the option to renew in 10 years. 
— 	6-3-73 	Granting a franchise to B. R. Bledsoe for garbage collection for a term of 5 years from April 1, 1973. 
— 	12-12-93 	Granting a franchise to Erath County Electric Co-operative Association, Inc. terminating on March 1, 2010. 
— 	11-7-95 	Granting a franchise to Lone Star Gas Company for a term of 25 years. 
— 	9-16-97 	Granting a franchise to Union Telephone of Texas, Inc. for a term of 12 years. 
1998-20 	10-6-98 	Granting a franchise renewal for Northland Cable Television, Inc. for a term of 15 years. 
2002-25 	10-15-02 	Amending the existing gas franchise between the city and TXU Gas Company to provide for a different consideration and to authorize the lease of facilities within the city's rights-of-way. 
2002-26 	10-15-02 	Amending the existing electric franchise between the city and Oncor Electric Company for a different consideration. 
2011-10 	6-7-11 	Granting a franchise to United Electric Cooperative Services, Inc., expiring on December 31, 2026. 
  
TABLE II: VACATIONS 
Ord. No. 	Date Passed 	Description 
1998-9 	5-5-98 	Vacating that portion of an alley running from West Jones Street on the north to West Vanderbilt Street on the south located adjacent to Blocks 36, 53 and 54. 
1999-7 	6-22-99 	Vacating that portion of an alley running from North Graham Street on the east to North Belknap Street on the west, located in Block 25 of the Frey First Addition. 
1999-10 	6-1-99 	Vacating that portion of Minnie Street running from North Graham Street on the east to North Belknap Street on the west. 
2000-16 	9-5-00 	Vacating that portion of an alley running from North Columbia Avenue on the east to North Barton Avenue on the west, and authorizing its conveyance to Edward Wolfe. 
2000-17 	9-5-00 	Vacating and closing that part of North Harrison Avenue, part of West McKewn Street, and part of North Smallwood Avenue, located adjacent to Blocks 39, 40, 41, 42, 46, 47, 51 and 52, college view addition, containing 47,186 square feet of land; authorizing the conveyance of the same to Tarleton State University. 
 


THE ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF STEPHENVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    This volume constitutes Title XV (Zoning Code) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
Section Numbering System 
    The section numbering system used in this publication of the Stephenville Zoning Code is the same as that employed in the Stephenville Code of Ordinances. Inasmuch as the Zoning Code is referenced in the Stephenville Code of Ordinances as Title XV, the first part of the section number is the chapter number followed by a dash and a number representing a section number within the Zoning Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this publication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents the title of the Zoning Code. The number to the right of the colon represents the sequence of the page within that article; thus, page 3 of Title XV of the Zoning Code would appear as T15:3. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Vice-President, Supplement Department, and Erin Edwards, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Staci L. King, City Secretary, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication of the City's Zoning Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Stephenville, Texas. 2018. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 2018-O-23  7- 3-2018 Omitted 2018-O-24  7- 3-2018 Included 2018-O-25  8- 7-2018 Included 2018-O-26  8- 7-2018 Included 2018-O-27  8- 7-2018 Included 2018-O-28  8- 7-2018 Included 2018-O-29  8- 7-2018 Included 2018-O-32  8-28-2018 Included 2018-O-33  8-28-2018 Omitted 2018-O-41 11- 6-2018 Omitted 2018-O-42 11- 6-2018 Omitted 2018-O-43 11- 6-2018 Included 2018-O-44 11- 6-2018 Included  
TITLE XV - LAND USAGE 
CHAPTER 150. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dangerous Building Abatement Code, see Ch. 151; Uniform Fire Code, see §§ 91.20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - ADOPTION OF CODES 

Sec. 150.01. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Building Code , 2009 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the building code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Building Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(1975 Code, § 5-1; Ord. 1991-8, passed 6-4-1991; Ord. 1995-3, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999; Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.02. - Adoption of International Mechanical Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Mechanical Code , 2012 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the mechanical code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Mechanical Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(1975 Code, § 5-3; Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-4-1991; Ord. 1995-1, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999; Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.03. - Adoption of International Plumbing Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Plumbing Code , 2009 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the plumbing code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Plumbing Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(1975 Code, § 14-1; Ord. 1991-11, passed 6-4-1991; Ord. 1995-2, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999; Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Cross reference- Sewers and water, see Chapters 50 and 51. 
Sec. 150.04. - Adoption of National Electrical code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, including appendix, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the electrical code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the National Electrical Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(1975 Code, § 8-1; Ord. 1991-7, passed 6-4-1991; Ord. 1995-5, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999; Am. Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.05. - Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Fuel Gas Code , 2009 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the fuel gas code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.06. - Adoption of International Residential Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Residential Code , 2009 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the residential code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Residential Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.07. - Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code. 
    Effective January 31, 2015, the International Energy Conservation Code , 2009 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the energy conservation code of the city, and is made a part hereof. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the International Energy Conservation Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. 2003-20, passed 8-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-29, passed 12-2-2014) 
Sec. 150.08. - Adoption of International Fire Code and amendments, additions and deletions. 
(A)  The International Fire Code , 2006 Edition, including appendix, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted, and designated as the fire code of the city, and is made a part hereof, as amended. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Fire Code as adopted and the other provisions of this code, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(B)  Amendments, additions, and deletions to the International Fire Code , 2006 Edition, as set forth by ordinance, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 7-7-2015) 
Secs. 150.09-150.14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION; LICENSE REGULATIONS; FEES 

Sec. 150.15. - Registration and license regulations for mechanical contractors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not registered with the city to engage in the design, installation, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or modification of equipment for environment air conditioning, commercial refrigeration, process heating or cooling systems or ventilation systems. The registration application shall require the mechanical contractor's name, local address and telephone number, and such other information as the Building Official may determine appropriate and proper with respect to background, experience and previous registration of the applicant. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not licensed as an air conditioning and refrigeration contractor in accordance with the provisions of the law of the state and having failed to register the license with the city to engage in mechanical work as described above. 
(Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 150.16. - Registration and license regulations for plumbing contractors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not registered with the city to engage in the design, installation, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or modification of plumbing systems. The registration application shall require the plumbing contractor's name, local address and telephone number, and such other information as the Building Official may determine appropriate and proper with respect to background, experience and previous registration of the applicant. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not licensed as a plumber in accordance with the provisions of the law of the state and having failed to register the license with the city to engage in plumbing work as described above. 
(Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 150.17. - Registration and license regulations for electrical contractors. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not registered with the city to engage in the design, installation, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or modification of electrical systems. The registration application shall require the electrical contractor's name, local address and telephone number, previous registration of the applicant and an appropriate showing of qualifications by the applicant. 
(B)  An appropriate showing of qualifications by an applicant shall be made by the presentation of a valid and current electrician's license issued by a city which first required the taking and passing of the Texas Standard Electrical Examination or any other test for the issuance thereof deemed appropriate by the Building Official or Electrical Board. 
(Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 150.18. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees shall be collected prior to the issuance of any permit for building construction work, plumbing work, mechanical work or electrical work in accordance with the Permit Fee Schedule, adopted and maintained as a public record in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. 1999-2, passed 3-2-1999) 
CHAPTER 151. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, passed March 6, 2018, repealed ch. 151, §§ 151.01-151.09, 151.20-151.23, 151.35-151.40, 151.50-151.58, 151.70-151.73, 151.80-151.91 and 151.99 and enacted a new ch. 151 as set out herein. Former ch. 151 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1975 and Ord. 1989-11, passed July 11, 1989. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 151.01. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects described in this article shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property, welfare or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 11/2 times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(9)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(12)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
a.  An attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 
c.  Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength; (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(15)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined to be a fire hazard. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(18)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(b)  The term "building code," as used in this section, refers to the building code then in affect as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.02. - Declared public nuisance; repair, vacation or demolition required. 
    All dangerous buildings and structures within the terms of section 151.001 are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.03. - Minimum standards for continued use and occupancy of buildings and standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings or structures, regardless of the date of their construction, are that buildings or structures shall not be in a condition or have a defect which constitutes a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 151.001. The following standards shall be followed by the building official and the building commission in ordering repair, vacation or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist as a dangerous building or structure, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building or structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building or structure is 50 percent or more damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished and in all cases where a building or structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building or structure is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statutes of the state, it shall be demolished. Included in the term "demolished" in this article is the cleaning of the property and removing all debris and trash, and sealing sewer service (belowground) to prevent infiltration into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 151.04-151.110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - Administration 

Sec. 151.111. - Building and standards commission. 
(a)  Established. A building and standards commission is hereby established. All references to the "building commission" or "commission" in this article shall mean the building and standards commission. 
(b)  Composition and term of members. The building and standards commission shall consist of five members and shall be the same persons appointed to and serving on the board of adjustment of the city created under the zoning ordinance of the city. Upon appointment to the board of adjustment under the zoning ordinance of the city, such members shall be deemed as automatically appointed to the building and standards commission to serve for the same term as such members serve on the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Alternates. The city council may appoint up to four alternate members of the building and standards commission who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members of the commission when requested to do so by the city manager or mayor. Alternate members shall serve for a two-year period and shall be the same alternates appointed to serve on the board of adjustment. 
(d)  Quorum and meetings. A quorum for the transaction of business of the building and standards commission shall consist of not less than four members. No decision by the commission shall be deemed rendered unless concurred in by not less than four members. The commission shall select a chairman who shall act as presiding officer at all meetings, and it shall establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary for proper conduct of its business. The commission shall hold regular meetings at least once each month and in addition, such special meetings as may be required for the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151-112. - Duties of building official. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official or his designee to: 
(1)  Inspections. Inspect or cause to be inspected, when deemed necessary, public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, dwellings, tenements or apartments, other multifamily residences and commercial manufacturing buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such a place a dangerous building or structure within the terms of section 26-91. 
(2)  Investigations of complaints. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article. 
(3)  Procedure for inspection. Upon probable cause to suspect that any building or premises are in violation of this article, and: (i) if such building or premises are opened and clearly unoccupied, the building official may enter such building or premises for the purpose of inspecting the building or premises without prior notice to any person; or, (ii) if such building or premises are closed, or if a reasonably prudent person would have reason to believe that such premises are occupied, the building official shall have recourse to every procedure, right or remedy provided by law to secure entry for the purpose of inspecting the building or premises. 
(4)  Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure, and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building or structure, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building or structure. The building official may commence criminal proceedings or civil proceedings, or both, as determined by the conditions existing on such premises. 
(5)  Written notice to owner. Notify in writing, by certified mail, the owner of the building or structure, as determined by using the records in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the building or structure is located, that the building is a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article. The notice to the owner shall further state the reason that the building does not meet the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy of a building and that unless the building is put in a condition so that the building is not a dangerous building or structure within a reasonable time not exceeding 60 days (as specified by the building official), then a hearing will be scheduled before the building commission to determine whether the building complies with the minimum standards set forth in this article. The building official, in his sole discretion, may elect not to send this notice to remedy and may instead proceed directly with notice of hearing as set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(6)  Reports of noncompliance. Report to the building commission any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsection (5) of this section. 
(7)  Appearance at hearings. Appear at all hearings conducted by the building commission and testify as to the conditions of the dangerous building or structure. 
(8)  Placement of notice on dangerous buildings; contents of notice. Place a notice on all dangerous building or structures, upon a determination by the building commission, reading as follows: 
This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Building Commission of the City of Stephenville. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given to the owner. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151-113. - Criminal enforcement. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized to commence criminal proceedings whenever he finds that there has been a violation of any subsection of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in control to maintain a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 151.001. All buildings or structures which are determined to be dangerous buildings or structures are declared to be public nuisances. For purposes hereof, the term "maintain" shall mean keep, preserve, use, maintain status quo or permit to exist. 
(c)  After the notice described in subsection 151.112(8) is posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, enter, remain in or occupy such building or structure, or for the owner of such building to normally permit any person to use, enter, remain in or occupy such building. It shall be a defense to any prosecution occurring under this paragraph that entry was made for the sole purpose of repairing, demolishing or removing such building or structure. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface the notice posted pursuant to subsection 151.112(8) until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure regulated by this Code without first obtaining the appropriate permits for each building or structure according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the building code. 
(f)  Any violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal to comply with the enforcement of any the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 10.99 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.114. - Civil enforcement. 
(a)  Assessment lien or civil penalty. If the dangerous building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the allotted time, the city may: 
(1)  Without further action by the building commission, vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building at its own expense, by city personnel or its contractor. Any costs incurred by the city in securing, removing or demolishing the buildings or structures may be charged to the owner. The city may assess the expenses on, and the city shall have a lien against, the property on which the building was located, unless the property is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in which the property is located. The notice of lien must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality, and the balance then due; or 
(2)  Acting by and through the building and standards commission, assess a civil penalty under applicable state law not exceeding $1,000.00 per day for failure to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure. Notice of the hearing in which the civil penalty will be considered shall be given to the owner by personally serving the owner with written notice; or by sending the notice in the United States mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address at least ten days prior to the administrative hearing. Before holding a hearing to consider a civil penalty, the board shall have evidence that the property owner was actually notified of the requirements of the order and his need to comply with such requirements. Any civil penalty assessed shall be imposed as a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of such civil penalty. 
Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city shall file for record, in recordable form in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the land is situated, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must contain a legal description of the land. In addition to the filing of the lien, the city may seek a judgment against the owner for the civil penalty in accordance with applicable state law. 
(b)  Additional remedies. In addition to any remedy set forth in this section, the city may exercise any and all of its rights to abate any nuisance as defined in this article and seek any appropriate relief as authorized by applicable state law. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR NOTICE OF HEARING AND HEARING BEFORE BUILDING COMMISSION 

Sec. 151.131. - Notice to owner, lienholder or mortgagee of hearing. 
    Upon notification from the building official that he, or his designee, has determined that a building or structure is a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article, and does not meet the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy, the building commission shall cause a notice of hearing to be issued to the owner, lienholder and mortgagee of the alleged dangerous building or structure. The notice of hearing must be sent by certified mail at least ten days prior to the hearing and must include a statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required so that the building or structure will not constitute a dangerous building or structure and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. The building official or his designee shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder for purposes of giving them notice and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. The records in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the building or structure is located shall be used to determine, if possible, the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure. The city may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquired such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.132. - Hearing. 
    On the date set forth in the notice, the building commission shall hold a hearing to determine whether the building is a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 26-91. If the building commission determines that the building or structure is a dangerous building or structure, the building commission may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this article. In addition, if there is a mortgagee or lienholder, the building commission may provide in the order an additional reasonable time as provided by this section for the ordered action to be taken by any mortgagee or lienholder in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. No notice to any mortgagee or lienholder shall be required other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. The owner of the building or the lienholder or mortgagee may present proof at the hearing of the scope of any work that may be required so that the building or structure will not be a dangerous building or structure and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.133. - Findings of fact. 
    The building commission shall make written findings of facts from the testimony offered, pursuant to section 26-132, as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 26-91. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.134. - Copy of order to owner. 
    After the hearing, a copy of the order issued by the building commission, if any, shall be promptly mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the building. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.135. - Filing and publishing order. 
    Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city clerk; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing the street address or legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the order and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.136. - Notice to lienholder or mortgagee. 
    After the hearing, if the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, a copy of the building commission order shall be promptly mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each identified mortgagee and lienholder, as set forth in section 26-132. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 151.137. - Time for performance. 
    In conducting a hearing authorized under this article, the building commission shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days secure the building from unauthorized entry; or repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. If the building commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the building commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. The building commission may not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order, unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing and establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. If the building commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the building commission shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the building commission to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the building commission, or its designate, to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(Ord. 2018-O-11 , § 1, 3-6-2018) 
CHAPTER 152. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods, Definitions. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 152.01. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Tex. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulation designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the municipality of Stephenville, Texas does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.02. - Findings of fact. 
(A)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Stephenville are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(B)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.03. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public harm and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(A)  Protect human life and health; 
(B)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(C)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(D)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(E)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(F)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(G)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.04. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(A)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(B)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(C)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(D)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(E)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.05. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex. A point on a alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard. Land area that would be inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard. Land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood. Flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, or AR that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year-also called the "Base Flood." 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM on or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). See "Flood Elevation Study." 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergence preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See "Regulatory Floodway." 
    Freeboard. A factor of safety, which is at least one foot above the base flood elevation. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. It must also be applied to the elevation of all building utilities. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor"; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are the be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a shingle chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river. Including tributaries, stream, brook, and the like. 
    Special flood hazard area. See "Area of Special Flood Hazard." 
    Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was performed. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. This includes the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. For floodplain management purposes, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the improvements to the structure before November 16, 2011. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation. The failure of a structure of other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 152.06-152.19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 152.20. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of City of Stephenville, Texas. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.21. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for City of Stephenville, dated November 16, 2011, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated November 16, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.22. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.23. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.24. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.25. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(A)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(B)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(C)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.26. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.27. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 152.28-152.34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 152.35. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The Floodplain Administrator is appointed by the City Administrator. The appointed Floodplain Administrator is to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.36. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(A)  Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation and/or require a survey from a professional Texas license land surveyor. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 152.21, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction." 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(B)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Ch. 1, § 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.37. - Permit procedures. 
(A)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the forgoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation (in relation to the base flood elevation), of the "freeboard" of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(3)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure shall be flood proofed; 
(4)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proof structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of Section 152.51(B); 
(5)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(6)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Section 152.36(A)(1); 
(B)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate or rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.38. - Variance procedures. 
(A)  The City Council shall hear and render judgment on request for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  The City Council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(C)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(D)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. 
(E)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(F)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 152.37(B) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(G)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
(H)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(I)  Variances may be issued for the repair and rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(J)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(K)  Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in divisions (A)-(I) of this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 152.39-152.49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 152.50 - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(A)  All structures within 100 feet from a 100- and/or 500-year flood zone having new construction or substantial improvements, shall submit an elevation certificate; 
(B)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(C)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(D)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(E)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located to the "freeboard" elevation and so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(F)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(G)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge form the systems into flood waters; and 
(H)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.51. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 152.21, (ii) Section 152.36(A)(8), or (iii) Section 152.52 (D), the following provisions are required: 
(A)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division as proposed in Section 152.37(A)(1), is satisfied. 
(B)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this division. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(C)  Substantial improvements. 
(1)  The development will be evaluated by fair market value will be determined by the developer and the City of Stephenville. If the developer and the city do not come to an agreement, the developer, at their own expenses, may obtain an appraisal of the development by a State of Texas certified real estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the developer and the city. 
(2)  Any permitted construction after November 16, 2011 shall start the effective date of substantial improvements for flood prevention. Construction may be performed in phases, but once the structure meets the 50% of the fair market value from November 16, 2011, then the structure must meet all guidelines within this chapter. 
(D)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting the requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(E)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(3)  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of division (E) of this section be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the freeboard elevation; or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(F)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of Section 152.37(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in division (E) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.52. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(A)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Sectionsec. 152.02, 152.03, and 152.04 of this chapter. 
(B)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Sections 152.22, 152.37, and "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" (this subchapter) of this chapter. 
(C)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 152.21 or Section 152.36(A)(8) of this chapter. 
(D)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(E)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.53. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
(A)  Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 152.21, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
(B)  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures: 
(a)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM; or 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Section 152.37, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 152.54. - Floodways. 
(A)  Located within area of special flood hazard established in Section 152.21, are areas designated as floodways. 
(B)  Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction, within this subchapter, "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction." 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Ch. 1, § 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 152.55-152.98. - Reserved. 
Sec. 152.99. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Stephenville from taking such other lawful action as in necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 9-6-2011) 
CHAPTER 153. - MOBILE HOMES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention standards for mobile homes, see Section 152.36(C); International Plumbing Code, see Section 150.03; Uniform Fire Code, see §§ 91.20 et seq. 
State Law reference- Uniform Standards Code for Mobile Homes, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 5221f 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 153.01. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Home Subdivisions Regulations of the City of Stephenville . 
(1975 Code, § 12-21; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.02. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Agent. Any person authorized by the licensee of a mobile home park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Building inspector. The legally designated inspection authority of the city, or his/her authorized representative. 
    Building permit. A written permit or certification issued by the Building Inspector permitting the construction, alteration or extension of a mobile home park, under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A certificate issued by the Building Inspector for the use of a building, structure and/or land, when it is determined by him/her that the building, structure and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations. 
    City health officer. The legally designated head of the City Health Department, or his/her authorized representative. 
    City official. The legally designated head of a city department, or his/her authorized representative when acting in an official capacity. 
    Common access route. A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Driveway. A minor entranceway off the common access route within the park, into an off-street parking area serving one or more mobile homes. 
    Fire Chief. The legally designated Fire Chief of the Fire Department of the city, or his/her authorized representative. 
    Internal street. Same as "common access route." 
    License. A written license issued by the Building Inspector permitting a person to operate a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
    Licensee. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Mobile homes. A moveable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over state roads and highways under special permit, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation, for year-round living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. 
    Mobile home park. A unified development of ten or more mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single person ownership, meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
    Mobile home subdivision. A subdivision so named by the City Council for the development of mobile home residences, regardless of ownership. 
    Parking space, off-street. A minimum space ten feet in width by 20 feet in length located within the boundary of a mobile home space, or in a common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street. 
    Paving. A wearing surface composed of prime and one or more applications of asphaltic material and aggregate, or asphaltic concrete pavement, constructed on a prepared base course. 
    Pier. That portion of the anchorage system between the (pier) foundation and the mobile home. 
    Pier foundation. That portion of the anchorage system that transmits loads directly to the soil. 
    Plot plan. Graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
    Police Chief. The legally designated Chief of the Police Department of the city, or his/her authorized representative. 
    Replacement. The act of moving one mobile home from its existing stand and replacing it with another mobile home. 
    Service building. A structure housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
    Sewer connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile home park. 
    Sewer service riser pipe. That portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a mobile home space. 
    Site plan. See "plot plan." 
    Space. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home, together with such open space as required by this chapter. This term also shall include the terms "lot," "stand" and "site." 
    Water connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home. 
    Water riser pipe. That portion of the private water service system serving a mobile home park, which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a mobile home space. 
    Zoning ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
(1975 Code, § 12-22; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Secs. 153.03-153.14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS; LICENSES 

Sec. 153.15. - Permit required to locate trailer outside license park. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, maintain or occupy a trailer coach or mobile home outside a licensed trailer park without a permit from the Building Inspector and without complying with existing ordinances pertaining thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 12-4; Ord. passed 3-4-72) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.16. - Permit required to move trailer. 
    No trailer coach or mobile home shall be permitted to move without a permit from the Building Inspector or a person so designated to issue a permit. This includes any trailer coach or mobile home moving into or from a mobile home park, as well as an individual lot. It shall be the duty of the mobile home park operator to notify the Building Inspector of any intention by any occupant to move from such mobile home park. 
(1975 Code, § 12-5; Ord. passed 3-4-72; Ord. passed 2-4-75) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.17. - Permanent residential structures prohibited; exceptions. 
    No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home park, with the following exceptions: 
(A)  One existing residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of the park; or 
(B)  An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for use by the residents of the mobile home park. 
(1975 Code, § 12-31; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.18. - Permit required for construction, alteration or extension. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he/she holds a valid building permit issued by the Building Inspector in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(1975 Code, § 12-32; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.19. - Application requirements. 
    All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the Building Inspector and shall contain the following: 
(A)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(B)  Location and legal description of the mobile home park; 
(C)  To this application shall be attached four copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more, and at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet for sites under 30 acres. The site plan shall include all data required under Sections 153.40 et seq; and 
(D)  One print of the plot plan is to be circulated by the Building Inspector to each of the city departments designated in Section 153.40 of this chapter for approval prior to issuing the building permit. This plot plan does not replace or supercede the subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is located. 
(1975 Code, § 12-33; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.20. - Building permit fee. 
    All applications to the Building Inspector shall be accompanied by a fee set annually by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 12-34; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.21. - Issuance or denial of permit; hearing. 
(A)  When upon review of the application, the Building Inspector is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter, a building permit shall be issued. 
(B)  Any person whose application for a building permit under this chapter has been denied, may request a hearing on the matter under the procedures provided by Sections 153.73 through 153.76 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, §§ 12-35, 12-36; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.22. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he/she holds a valid license issued annually by the City Administrator in the name of such person for the specific park. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms furnished to him/her, by the City Administrator, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 12-37; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.23. - Application for license, renewal. 
(A)  Application for a license. Application for the original or nonconforming license shall be in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the license fee hereinafter provided, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park; 
(3)  A site plan of the park showing all mobile home spaces, structures, roads, walkways and other service facilities; and 
(4)  Before the original or nonconforming license is issued, the City Administrator shall obtain the approval of the Fire Chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, access ways or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(B)  Application for renewal. 
(1)  Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the City Administrator on or before January 1 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
(2)  Before the renewal license is issued, the City Administrator shall obtain the approval of the Fire Chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, access ways or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. 
(1975 Code, §§ 12-38, 12-40; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.24. - Denial of license; hearing. 
    Any person whose application for a license under this chapter has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the proper authority under the procedures provided by Sections 153.73 through 153.76 of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 12-39; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.25. - License fee. 
    All original license applications or renewals thereof shall be accompanied by a fee set annually by the City Council. All renewal fees shall be due on January 1 of each year. 
(1975 Code, § 12-41; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.26. - Transfer of license; fee. 
(A)  Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the City Administrator within ten days after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park. Application for transfer of license shall be made within 15 calendar days after notification of change covered in sentence one of this paragraph. Within 60 calendar days thereafter, the city shall act on the application for license transfer, and it shall be approved if the park is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  All applications for license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee set annually by the City Council. 
(1975 Code, § 12-42; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.27. - Suspension of license. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the Building Inspector after consultation with the city official or officials he/she deems competent to judge, finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this chapter applicable to such park, he/she shall give notice in writing in accordance with Section 153.73, to the licensee or his/her agent that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the Building Inspector shall reinspect the park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he/she shall suspend the license and give notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of the park, except as provided in Section 153.75. 
(1975 Code, § 12-43; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.28. - Temporary license; term. 
(A)  Temporary license. A temporary license, upon written request therefore, shall be issued by the City Administrator, for every mobile home park in existence upon the effective date of this chapter, permitting the mobile home park to be operated during the period ending 180 days after the effective date of this chapter in accordance with such conditions as the City Administrator may require. 
(B)  Term. The term of the temporary license shall be extended, upon written request for a period of 180 days, if the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The licensee shall have filed application for a license in conformity with Section 153.23(A) within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  The site plans accompanying the application for a license shall comply with §§ 153.50, 153.51 and 153.55; 
(3)  The licensee shall have diligently endeavored to make the existing mobile home park conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with application; and 
(4)  Failure to make the existing mobile home park conform fully to such plans and specifications shall have been due to causes beyond the control of the licensee. 
(1975 Code, §§ 12-44, 12-45; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.29. - Nonconforming license. 
    Mobile home parks existing at the time this chapter becomes effective may continue to operate with a nonconforming license providing the following conditions are met: 
(A)  No future expansion, renovation or change in the original site plan as submitted to the City Administrator shall be made unless such renovation or change causes the park to conform more fully with the provisions of this chapter for new mobile home parks; 
(B)  The mobile home park operator will not place or permit to be placed in the park any mobile home that will contribute to the general deterioration of the existing park conditions; 
(C)  Whenever, upon inspection of the mobile home park by a city official it is determined that conditions have been permitted to develop that restrict the proper functioning of the Fire and Police Departments or that generally contribute to unsafe or unsanitary conditions in the park, he/she shall give notice in writing in accordance with Section 153.73 of this chapter to the licensee or his/her agent that unless such conditions are corrected within a reasonable time specified in the notice that the license shall be suspended; and 
(D)  The following sections and subsections of this chapter must be met: Section 153.40; Section 153.41(B)(2), (F) and (H); Section 153.42(A) and (B); Section 153.45(C); Section 153.47(A), (B), (C) and (F); Section 153.49; Section 153.50; Section 153.51; Section 153.53; Section 153.54; Section 153.55; Section 153.56(A)(2)-(8); Section 153.56(B)(2)-(5). 
(1975 Code, § 12-46; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Secs. 153.30-153.39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS; STANDARDS 

Sec. 153.40. - Site plan to be filed and circulated. 
(A)  The site plan shall be filed as required by Section 153.19 and shall show the following: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and boundaries; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces; 
(3)  The location and dimensions of driveways, roadways and walkways; 
(4)  The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes (specifications not required on parks in existence on the effective date of this chapter); 
(5)  The location and specifications of lighting, electrical and gas systems (specifications not required on parks in existence on the effective date of this chapter); 
(6)  The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park (type of construction instead of specifications for those parks in existence on the effective date of this chapter); 
(7)  The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants and any other equipment which may be provided; and 
(8)  Existing and proposed topography of the proposed mobile home park. 
(B)  A print of the site or plot plan shall be circulated to the following city departments by the Building Inspector, and approval obtained from them prior to the issuance of a building permit: building, Fire Chief, health officer and Director of water and wastewater utilities. 
(1975 Code, § 12-53; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.41. - Site requirements. 
    Any mobile home park constructed after the adoption of this chapter, and for any extension or addition to an existing mobile home park in the city, shall be done in compliance with the following site requirements: 
(A)  Location. A mobile home park shall have no less than ten mobile home spaces and shall be located on sites in B-2 or higher classification in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance; 
(B)  Basic mobile home minimum site requirements. 
(1)  Space requirements. Each mobile home space shall provide a minimum area of 4,000 square feet; however, no mobile home space shall have dimensions less than 40 feet on the narrow dimension nor 100 feet on the long dimension; 
(2)  Occupancy limitation. No more than one family unit shall occupy any mobile home space; 
(C)  Open space requirements. 
(1)  The minimum front yard set back shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space; 
(2)  No mobile home shall be closer than five feet to any property line and no closer than 25 feet to the property line adjoining a public street; 
(3)  For other structures on each space, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least ten feet; 
(4)  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 20 feet; 
(D)  Height regulations. 
(1)  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile home park shall be 35 feet; 
(2)  The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90° to the frame, shall not exceed three feet; 
(E)  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material or protected with vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust; 
(F)  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner; 
(G)  Design and location of storage facilities. Unless provided in current mobile home models, storage facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per mobile home space may be provided on the space, or in compounds located within 100 feet of each space. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel steel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability and appearance. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the mobile home shall be permitted only if in such mobile home area; and 
(H)  Mobile home stands. The area of the mobile home space shall provide adequate support and drainage for placement of the mobile home. 
(1975 Code, § 12-54; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.42. - Access; traffic circulation and parking. 
(A)  Internal streets, no-parking area signs and street name signs shall be privately-owned, built and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the mobile home park. The Police Department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provisions hereof and to remove and impound offending vehicles. 
(B)  On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this chapter, the owner or agent shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the City Public Works Director prior to installation. 
(C)  All internal streets shall be constructed and paved to specifications designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with good engineering design and shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. Such streets shall be maintained by the park owner, licensee or his/her agent and shall have a smooth surface, free from cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(D)  All internal streets shall be maintained by the owner or agent and shall have a smooth surface, free of cracks, holes and other hazards. 
(1975 Code, § 12-55; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.43. - Internal street dimensions; parking. 
(A)  An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each mobile home space. Such street shall be paved and have a minimum width of 30 feet if off-street parking is provided in the ratio of two parking spaces for each mobile home space. On-street parking shall be permitted on only one side of the street. The internal streets shall be continuous and connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of 95 feet. No internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length. 
(B)  If no off-street parking is provided or is provided in a ratio of less than two spaces for each mobile home site, the minimum street width shall be 36 feet. All other requirements remain the same as in the preceding division (A) with the exception that parking will be permitted on both sides of the street. 
(C)  If the park is constructed with internal streets having a width less than 36 feet, off-street parking shall be provided on each mobile home space in the ratio of two parking spaces for each mobile home space. Each parking space shall be hard-surfaced with all-weather material, and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other mobile homes and for public parking in the park. 
(D)  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of each mobile home. 
(1975 Code, § 12-56; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.44. - Intersection with public streets. 
    Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90° and at locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets. 
(1975 Code, § 12-57; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.45. - Street name signs, mobile home numbers. 
(A)  Should a mobile home park having internal streets other than the one street that intersects with a named city street, such internal streets shall be named and numbered to conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets and shall be designated on the site plan. All street name signs shall be of reflective materials approved by the Director of Public Works. These street signs shall be of a color contrasting with those on public streets so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
(B)  Within each mobile home park all mobile homes shall be numbered to conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. The numbers shall be located in a plain and conspicuous place on the side abutting the street or internal drive nearest the front of each mobile home. The numbers shall be at least four inches tall and of proportionate width. Mobile homes shall be numbered in accordance with the plat of the mobile home park on file in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(C)  Exceptions provided for a nonconforming license are as follows: 
(1)  Should a mobile home park having internal streets other than the one street that intersects with a named city street, such internal streets shall be named and designated on the site plan. All street name signs shall be of reflective materials approved by the Director of Public Works. These street signs shall be of a color contrasting with those on public streets so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles; or 
(2)  Within each mobile home park all mobile homes shall be numbered in accordance with the plat of the mobile home park on file in the office of the Building Inspector. The numbers shall be located in a plain and conspicuous place on the side abutting the street or internal drive nearest the front of each mobile home. The numbers shall be at least four inches tall and of proportionate width. 
(1975 Code, § 12-58; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.46. - Street lighting. 
    Street lighting within the mobile home park shall be provided along all internal streets. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to insure an average illumination level of not less than one tenth footcandles. 
(1975 Code, § 12-59; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.47. - Fire safety standards. 
(A)  Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In parks in which liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with requirements of the City Plumbing and Fire Codes, as applicable. 
(B)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In parks in which gasoline, fuel oil or other flammable liquids are stored and/or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with the City Fire Code. 
(C)  Access to mobile homes for firefighting. Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for firefighting. 
(D)  Firefighting instruction. The mobile home park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his/her staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire. 
(E)  Water supply facilities for Fire Department operation. All water supply shall be from the city water system. No private water systems will be allowed. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by the Fire Chief. The park owner shall provide standard city fire hydrants following both of the following rules: no structure shall be further away in a direct line than 500 feet from a fire hydrant; and hydrant spacing along a water main shall not exceed 300 feet. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the City Fire Department. It shall be the responsibility of the park licensee to insure that the fire hydrants in need of immediate repair shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner within 24 hours. Nonemergency repairs shall be made within seven days. 
(F)  Flammable brush, leaves and weeds prohibited. The mobile home park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(1975 Code, § 12-60; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.48. - Recreation area. 
(A)  When required. All mobile home parks exceeding 100 spaces in number shall have at least one recreation area. 
(B)  Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings shall be provided which in the judgement of the park licensee or agent will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele which the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and children recreation areas is encouraged. 
(C)  Size. Not less than 5% of the total gross site area of the mobile home park exceeding 100 spaces shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. 
(D)  Playground location. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards. 
(1975 Code, § 12-61; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.49. - Water. 
(A)  Water supply. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile home park or subdivision. Connection shall be made to the public supply of water excepting that nonconforming license holders shall be allowed to maintain their present private water system providing the system delivers an adequate, safe and potable supply. 
(B)  Water distribution system. 
(1)  The water supply system of the mobile home park or subdivision shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. 
(2)  All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements. 
(C)  Conformance to connection requirements. Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be in accordance with requirements of the City Plumbing Code. 
(1975 Code, § 12-62; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.50. - Sewage disposal. 
    From and after the effective date of this chapter, the following shall apply: 
(A)  General requirements. An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all mobile home parks or subdivisions for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Connection shall be made to the city sewer system. The sewer system for a mobile home park shall be constructed in accordance with the City Plumbing Code. All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by the City Plumbing Inspector prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the City Plumbing Inspector and the appropriate regulatory agency of the state; 
(B)  Installation of private sewage disposal facility. Where sewer mains are not available within 1,000 feet of a mobile home park operating under a nonconforming license, a private sewage disposal facility may be installed, which will be in strict accordance with all applicable requirements of the laws of the state and the Plumbing Code of the city; 
(C)  Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be constructed and of materials in accordance with the City Plumbing Code; and 
(D)  Individual sewer connections. 
(1)  Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a three-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each space that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position in accordance with the City Plumbing Code. 
(2)  The sewer connection to the mobile home from the sewer riser pipe and any other sewer connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City Plumbing Code. 
(3)  All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with the City Plumbing Code. 
(4)  Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no mobile home occupies the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. 
(1975 Code, § 12-63; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.51. - Electrical and telephone distribution systems. 
    From and after the effective date of this chapter, the following shall apply: 
(A)  Electrical and telephone wiring. All electrical and telephone wiring in the mobile home park or subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the City Electrical Code; 
(B)  General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures and equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems; and 
(C)  Power distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding. All power distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding of the mobile homes and equipment shall comply with the City Electrical Code. 
(1975 Code, § 12-64; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.52. - Service building and other community service facilities. 
(A)  General application. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities such as the following: 
(1)  Management offices, repair shops and storage areas; 
(2)  Sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Laundry facilities; and 
(4)  Indoor recreation areas. 
(B)  Structural requirements for buildings. 
(1)  All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather; and to comply with all applicable codes of the city. 
(2)  All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and other partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, non-absorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture resistant materials; 
(b)  Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than 10% of the floor area served by them; and 
(c)  Have at least one window which can be opened easily, or mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room. 
(3)  Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. 
(4)  Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows: 
(a)  General seeing tasks-five footcandles; 
(b)  Laundry room work area-40 footcandles; and 
(c)  Toilet room, in front of mirrors-40 footcandles. 
(5)  Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. 
(6)  Service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating equipment permitted by city regulations between the first of October and the first of May. 
(C)  Barbeque pits, fireplaces and stoves. Cooking shelters, barbeque pits, fireplaces and wood-burning stoves shall be located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property and shall conform to all state certification regulations. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
(1975 Code, § 12-65; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.53. - Refuse and garbage handling. 
(A)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park or subdivision shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution and shall conform to all city ordinances and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(B)  Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the park at least twice each week. 
(C)  The licensee or agent shall insure that containers at mobile home spaces are emptied regularly and maintained in a usable sanitary condition. 
(1975 Code, § 12-66; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.54. - Insect and rodent control. 
(A)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the City Health Director. 
(B)  Parks and subdivisions shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(C)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests. Parks and subdivisions shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(1975 Code, § 12-67; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.55. - Fuel supply. 
    From and after the effective date of this chapter, the following shall apply: 
(A)  Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems; 
(B)  Each mobile home space provided with piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when not in use to prevent accidental discharge of gas and shall be in accordance with the City Plumbing Code; and 
(C)  Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an available natural gas system is more than 1,000 feet from the mobile home park or subdivision. The liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city governing such systems and regulations of the Texas Railroad Commission pertaining thereto. 
(1975 Code, § 12-68; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.56. - Responsibilities of park management and occupants. 
(A)  Responsibilities of the park management. 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in the chapter. 
(2)  The licensee or his/her agent shall operate the park in compliance with this and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter. 
(4)  The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of mobile home owners; 
(b)  Mobile home registration data including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number; 
(c)  Location of each mobile home within the park by space or lot number and street address; and 
(d)  Dates of arrival and departure. 
(5)  A new register shall be initiated on the first of January each year, and the old register be retired, but shall be retained on the premises for at least three years following the retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(6)  The licensee or agent shall furnish to the Tax Collector for the city within ten days after the first day of January of each year, a list of all mobile home residents in the park on the first day of January. The list shall contain the owner's name and address; the make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number of the mobile home; and the address or location description of the mobile home within the park. The lists shall be prepared using forms provided by the Tax Collector for the city. 
(7)  Within ten days after the first day of July of each year, the licensee or agent shall furnish to the City Tax Collector the same data required in division (A)(6) on all residents who have moved into the park after the first day of January; and information on mobile homes which have moved out of the park after the first day of January including the foregoing data plus the date on which each mobile home left the park. 
(8)  Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated mobile homes shall not be kept or stored in a mobile home park. The health officer shall determine if a mobile home is damaged or dilapidated to a point which makes the mobile home unfit for human occupancy on either a temporary or permanent basis. Whenever such a determination is made, the mobile home shall be vacated and removed from the premises. 
(B)  Responsibilities of park and subdivision occupants. 
(1)  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this chapter. 
(2)  The occupant shall comply with all requirements of this chapter and shall maintain his/her mobile home space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  The occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his/her mobile home in its mobile home space and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with city codes. 
(4)  Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions: 
(a)  The storage area shall have a base of impervious material; and 
(b)  Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home. 
(5)  Without exception, compliance with anchorage requirements shall be mandatory. Each mobile home shall be anchored in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards. 
(1975 Code, § 12-69; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Secs. 153.57-153.69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 153.70. - Inspections required. 
    The Building Inspector, the city health officer, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the City Administrator are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If owner is not available at mobile home park, such owner must designate some other person as his/her agent to supervise such park and act as liaison with city officials. 
(1975 Code, § 12-76; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.71. - Powers of city officials. 
(A)  Entry on premises. The Building Inspector, the city health officer, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the City Administrator shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(B)  Inspection of register. The Building Inspector, the city health officer, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief and the City Administrator shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park. 
(1975 Code, § 12-77; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.72. - Duties of occupants and mobile home park owner. 
(A)  Duty of occupants. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the licensee, his/her agent or authorized employee access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. 
(B)  Duty of mobile home park owner, licensee or agent. It shall be the duty of the mobile home park owner, licensee or his/her agent to notify the Building Inspector each time a mobile home enters the park and pay a fee set annually by the City Council for inspection of plumbing, electrical and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(1975 Code, §§ 12-78, 12-79; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Cross reference- Penalty, see § 10.99. 
Sec. 153.73. - Notice of violations. 
    Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall meet the following conditions: 
(A)  Be in writing; 
(B)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(C)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires; 
(D)  Be served upon the licensee or his/her agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his/her last known address, or when he/she has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(E)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1975 Code, § 12-80; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.74. - Appeal from denial of building permit. 
    Any person affected by the refusal of the Building Inspector to issue a building permit under the provisions of this chapter as set out in Sections 153.17 through 153.21, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council provided that such person shall file within 30 days after the day the permit was refused, in the office of the Building Inspector a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition, the Building Inspector shall forward it to the City Secretary who shall request the City Council to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn. 
(1975 Code, § 12-81; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.75. - Appeal from notice. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter applicable to such park by the Building Inspector may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City Council; provided that such person shall file within 30 days after the day the notice was served, in the office of the Building Inspector, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under Section 153.76(B) of this chapter. Upon receipt of the petition, the Building Inspector shall forward such petition to the City Secretary who shall request the City Council to set a time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. 
(1975 Code, § 12-82; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.76. - Hearing; order; order without notice. 
(A)  After the hearing, the Building Inspector shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the refusal, which order shall be served as provided in Section 153.73 hereof. Upon failure to comply with an order by the Building Inspector sustaining or modifying a decision thereof, the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked. 
(B)  Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he/she may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he/she may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the chapter, the order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the Building Inspector shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of division (A) of this section shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(1975 Code, §§ 12-83, 12-84; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
Sec. 153.77. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Whenever the standards and specifications in this chapter conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
(1975 Code, § 12-85; Ord. passed 9-4-1984) 
CHAPTER 154. - ZONING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Local legislation current through Ord. 2015-03, passed March 3, 2015. 

ARTICLE I. - ZONING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 154.01. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known, and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Stephenville, Texas." 
As passed on March 1, 2006. 
Sec. 154.02. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts, as herein established, have been made in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the City of Stephenville, Texas. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic or other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
Sec. 154.03. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "building" shall include the word "structure"; the word "lot" includes the words "tract" or "parcel"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive or directory. 
    Abut or abutting. Having lot lines or boundary lines in common or structures that touch or lie adjacent to each other. 
    Accessory building. A subordinate building located on the same lot as the primary building the activity of which is clearly integral to the permitted use of the main building. Container storage shall not be used as an "accessory building." 
    Accessory use. A land use activity that is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
    Adult day care facility. Any place, home or institution which receives three or more adults over the age of 18 years who need care or supervision due to a physical disability or functional impairment; for care apart from their legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time, for less than 24 continuous hours, for compensation. "Adult day care" may include personal care, nursing services, supervision, meal preparation and transportation. 
    Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Animal clinic or hospital . An office or group of offices and accompanying facilities for one or more veterinarians engaged in treating diseases or injuries of domestic animals. 
    Assisted living center. An establishment that furnishes, in one or more buildings, food and lodging to individuals who have contracted with the owner of the establishment; and provides personal care services; and in addition, provides minor treatment or services which meets some need beyond the provision of food, shelter and laundry. "Assisted care" shall not mean full-time nursing care. 
    Attached. Having one or more walls common to a primary building, or joined to a primary building by a covered porch or passageway, the roof of which is a part or extension of a primary building. 
    Automobiles or motor vehicles. A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and persons including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks and vans (one-ton G.V.W. or less), motor scooters, motorcycles and sports utility vehicles. 
    Automobile paint and body repair shop. A building and its premises where motor vehicles undergo body repair and painting. This does not include permanent vehicle storage or mechanical repair except that a vehicle being repaired may be stored on the premises for a period not to exceed 30 days while repairs related to the damage are performed. 
    Automobile repair shop. A building and its premises where motor vehicles undergo repairs and maintenance. This does not include permanent vehicle storage except that a vehicle being repaired may be stored on the premises for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
    Automobile sales facility. A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the purchase, trade, display and sale of automobiles that are in condition to be driven on or off the lot, under their own power. These facilities are not to be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, the dismantling of automobiles or the storage of automobile parts. 
    Automobile salvage or wrecking yard. An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or "wrecked," or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored. 
    Automobile service station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline, oil or other fuels, and automobile accessories; which may include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, minor mechanical repair and other normal servicing of automobiles. 
    Bed and breakfast or boarding house. A building, other than a hotel or motel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by public highways, streets, shoreline of waterways, railway rights-of-way, public parks, cemeteries or boundary lines of municipalities, or a combination thereof. A part of a legal description as continued in an approved plat. 
    Building. Any structure intended for business, shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, moveable property including household goods, inventory, records, furniture, fixtures and equipment. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of the structure so separated will be deemed a separate structure. 
    Building area. That portion of a lot upon which buildings may be placed, excluding required yards, set back lines and limited by the maximum building coverage as specified for each zoning district. 
    Building coverage. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building, excluding all overhanging roofs. 
    Building height. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or a deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
    Building setback line. A line defining an area on the building lot between the street right-of-way or property line and the building line within which no building shall be constructed, encroach or project except as specifically authorized in an adopted ordinance of the City of Stephenville. 
    Carhop. An establishment for employees to physically deliver goods to patrons remaining in their automobiles. 
    Carport. A permanent roofed structure open on at least two sides, designed for the parking and shelter of private vehicles. 
    Car wash. A facility designed primarily for washing automobiles, not including trucks or heavy machinery as defined in this ordinance. 
    Child care facility. Any place, home or institution which receives three or more children under the age of 16 years, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians for regular periods of time for compensation. However, this definition does not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of Texas, custody of children fixed by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree of the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes or engaged in church activities. 
(1)  Day-care center. Twelve or more children. 
(2)  Group day-care home. Seven to 12 children. 
(3)  Registered family home. Six or fewer children plus six or fewer siblings after school hours. 
    Child care institutions. A child care facility which provides care for more than 12 children for longer than a 24-hour period. This does not include specialized treatment programs such as that offered by an emergency shelter, therapeutic camp, residential treatment center, half-way house or institution serving mentally ill or retarded children. 
    Citizen collection station. Facility where the primary intent is to collect solid waste generated by rural and unincorporated residents living within Erath County and such waste is unloaded from collection vehicles or containers for reloading into larger, long-distance vehicles for transport to landfills or other permitted solid waste facilities for final disposal. 
    City. The City of Stephenville, Texas. 
    City council. The governing body of the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
    Clinic. An office or group of offices for one or more physicians, dentists or health care professional engaged in treating the sick or injured, but not including rooms for the abiding of patients. 
    Community home. A dwelling for not more than six disabled persons, regardless of their legal relationship to one another, and having no more than two supervisory personnel residing in the home at the same time as provided, mandated and defined in Texas Human Resources Statute Chapter 123 (Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act). 
    Conditional use. A use which shall be permitted in a particular district only upon fulfillment of the conditions set forth for that use in the use regulations for the appropriate district. 
    Container. A structure constructed for the primary use of transporting goods by ship, rail or truck. Use is prohibited as an accessory building within the city limits. 
    Convalescent, nursing or long-term care facility. An institution, licensed by the State of Texas, where persons suffering from generally permanent types of illness, injury, deformity, deficiency or age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis. 
    Convenience store. Any area of land including the structures thereon (except that the primary building shall not exceed 5,000 square feet) that is used to provide goods and services to a neighborhood including food products, snacks, newspapers, household cleaning supplies, paper goods, lottery tickets and gasoline. Drive-in, drive-thru and/or carhop are not permitted. 
    Detached. Fully separated from any other building. 
    Disabled person. A person whose ability to care for himself or herself, perform manual tasks, learn, work, walk, see, hear, speak or breathe is substantially limited. 
    Double frontage. A lot having lot lines formed by the intersection of two streets, whether public or private; where the interior angle of the intersection is less than 135 degrees shall be considered a corner. 
    Drive-in restaurant. Any establishment where food and/or non-alcoholic beverages are served to the consumers. Motor vehicle parking spaces are provided where patrons may be served in their respective vehicles or inside the establishment. 
    Dry cleaner or laundry. Any attended or unattended building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance(s). 
    Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, condominium. A single dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be conveyed with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building having accommodations for five or more families living independently of each other. This excludes recreational vehicle camps, hotels, motels or resort facilities. Occupancy is restricted to one family per unit. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling townhouse. A single-family dwelling which is attached to one or more similar dwellings by a common fire wall or fire walls, interior to both, and which in combination with the attached dwellings constitutes an architectural whole, on a separate lot, having its principal frontage on a street. Such dwelling units when so constructed may be under separate ownership. 
    Dwelling, two-four family. A building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by at least two, but not more than four families. Occupancy is restricted to one family per unit. 
    Easement. An interest in land granted to the city or other governmental entity, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation for access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Family. A single individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, or a group of no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. 
    Floor area. The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom of seven feet or more, whether above or below the finished lot grade, including basements, penthouses, attic space providing headroom of seven feet or more, interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed covered porches. 
    Foster group home. A child care facility located in a private residence which provides parental care and nurture 24 hours per day for seven to 12 children. 
    Fraternal building. A building occupied and maintained by a social club, organization or an association. The building may have meeting facilities for the members and offices or headquarters for the organization. 
    Fraternity or sorority. A social club or an association having meeting facilities for the members. A fraternity or sorority house may have dormitory facilities for its members. Any such fraternity or sorority house shall be deemed a rooming house or boarding house, depending upon the circumstances in each instance. 
    Frontage. Linear measurement of property adjacent to a street that lies between the property lines running perpendicular to the street. 
    Garage apartment. A dwelling unit for one family attached to a private garage. 
    Garage, private. A separate building or portion of the primary use building, designed for or used for the housing of motor vehicles which are the property of and for the use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is located. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle and not more than one-ton G.V.W. excluding recreational vehicles. 
    Grade. The average elevation of the highest and lowest elevation measured at the finished surface of the ground at any of the exterior edge of the building or structure. 
    Green space. A designated area of land where grass, turf, ground cover, trees, shrubs and the like are maintained. 
    Heavy machinery. A mechanical vehicle (self-propelled or otherwise), whose primary use is in connection with construction, farming and the like and is not designed for use on streets or highways. 
    Home occupation. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit, or in an accessory building to a dwelling unit, by a resident of the premises, which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises zoned for residential purposes. A home occupation must comply with all the following specific criteria: 
(1)  Home occupations shall be allowed without the necessity of a conditional use permit, if such uses relate solely to the use of home areas as further detailed herein by the resident of the premises, and such use does not create on-street parking, significant neighborhood traffic, or other disruption to the residential character of the property. 
(2)  The occupation shall produce no alterations or change in the character appearance of the principal building from that of a dwelling and no signage or advertisement of the home occupation or property address is allowed in the yellow pages advertisements in a telephone directory nor via electronic media, or classified advertisements of the property where the home occupation is being conducted. 
(3)  The occupation shall not require or provide for the employment of more than one additional person other than members of the household in which the home occupation occurs. 
(4)  Not more than two business-related vehicles shall be present at one time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate, paved off-street parking for such vehicles and customer vehicles on the property where the use is located. 
(5)  Such use shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes and shall not utilize an area exceeding 20% of combined gross floor area of the dwelling units and accessory building used for the home occupation and no outdoor/exterior storage (related to the home occupation) will be allowed. 
(6)  The occupation shall not violate any other rules or regulations in the Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  The occupation shall not offer a ready inventory of any commodity for sale on the premises. 
    Hospital (acute care). An institution, licensed by the State of Texas, providing health services primarily for human inpatient, medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities, including but not limited to laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices, which are all integral part(s) of the facilities. The treatment is intended to restore them to health and an active life. 
    Hospital (chronic care). Refer to "convalescent, nursing or long-term care facility." 
    Hotel or motel. A building or group of buildings under single ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed as temporary lodging for compensation. 
    Junk or salvage yard. A building or tract of land where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, used plumbing fixtures and other materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned. A building or tract of land for the storage of salvaged materials and equipment from house wrecking and salvaged structural steel materials and equipment. This excludes establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars in operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture, household equipment and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of a manufacturing operation. 
    Lodging house or rooming house. A building or place where lodging is provided, or is equipped to provide lodging regularly, by prearrangement for definite periods, for three or more persons in contrast to hotels that are open to transients. 
    Lot. Any tract or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or a group of buildings, accessory buildings and uses, which has its principal frontage on a street and bounded by lot lines. This includes such open spaces as required by this ordinance and other laws and ordinances. 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
    Lot corner. A lot that has at least two adjacent sides along its lot lines that abuts on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of the two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot depth. The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear lot line, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of the lot line. 
    Lot interior. A lot whose side lines do not abut upon a street. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a tract or parcel of land described by a metes and bounds description of the exterior boundaries of a particular tract or parcel of land. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, located at the building front set back line, measured as a straight line. 
    Manufactured housing or home. A HUD-Code manufactured home or a mobile home, as defined in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 5221f. This term shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  Industrialized housing or buildings, as defined in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 5221f-1; 
(2)  Ready-built homes or portable buildings built as a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location; and/or 
(3)  Recreational vehicles. 
    Masonry construction or masonry-like construction. Masonry construction is that form of construction composed of stone which is at least one inch in diameter, brick, concrete, structural clay tile, concrete split-face design block materials or combination of these materials laid up unit by unit and set in mortar. Concrete tilt wall, pour-in-place concrete wall and precast wall panel construction will be considered masonry-like construction and shall have an architectural exterior finish. Masonry or masonry-like construction shall be at least two inches thick. 
    Mobile home. A movable, detached single-family dwelling unit conforming to the minimum housing code requirements of both the State of Texas and the City of Stephenville for permanent long-term occupancy; is constructed or fabricated within a factory, complete with an integral utility system capable of being connected to an outside system; can be transported over the road on its own chassis and wheels to the site where it is to be connected semi-permanently to a separate utility system and is not permanently attached to any foundation as required for a permanent conventional dwelling or structure. 
    Mobile home park. Any development site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing long-term occupancy of more than 30 days for the placement of ten or more mobile homes, including all buildings used or maintained for the use of the residents of the development. This term is not to be used in conjunction with any mobile home or trailer sales lots which contain unoccupied units that are intended for purposes of inspection and sale. 
    Nonconformance. A structure or tract of land which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming use. A structure or tract of land occupied by a land use activity that does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district where it is located. 
    Open storage and outside display. 
(1)  Open storage of products or materials. The keeping in an unroofed area of new or used goods, merchandise or any materials used in the production, repair or replacement of goods related to the principal business activity of the property on which the open storage occurs. The term "open storage" shall not apply to primary uses indicated by the use chart, which customarily have open storage, such as automotive sales. 
(2)  Outside display of goods. The display of any product, or item, offered for sale by the occupant of the main use of the property on which the display of goods occurs, in plain view of the public without screening, provided the display meets all of the following conditions: 
(a)  The area used shall not be greater than 10% of the gross floor area of the establishment maintaining such display; 
(b)  Items may not occupy any required parking areas; 
(c)  Items may not be displayed in any required front, side or rear yard setback or public right-of-way; and 
(d)  Items may not obstruct vision sight lines from any public right-of-way or driveway, or be located in any required sight visibility easements. 
    Parking space. An area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, accessible by a sealed surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley, permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. For purposes of this ordinance, the size of a parking space for one vehicle shall be accordance with Section 11 of this ordinance. 
    Planned development or PD. An area of not less than one acre to be developed as a single entity according to a unified site design plan, affording increased compatibility to adjacent property and utilizing innovative land development concepts consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
    Planning and zoning commission. A board, appointed by the City Council as an advisory body, authorized to recommend changes in the zoning and other planning functions as delegated by the City Council. Also referred to as the "commission." 
    Primary use building. A building in which the primary activity associated with the lot is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling will be the "primary building." 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, towed or self-propelled, on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational or sporting purposes. This includes, but is not be limited to, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor homes, converted trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers. 
    Recreational vehicle camping area. Any development, site, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended to be used for the purpose of providing short term occupancy of camper vehicles, recreational vehicles, tents or trailers. 
    Refuse facilities. Containers that are recognized and utilized by the city or the city's refuse collection service, that are used to temporarily store trash and refuse on a lot until a refuse collection truck empties them (including, but not limited to metal dumpsters, plastic refuse carts and individual plastic refuse containers). 
    Residential density. The number of lots, dwelling units or persons located or residing within a residential area. 
(1)  Gross density. The number of lots, dwelling units or persons located within the total acreage of a residential area. 
(2)  Net density. The number of lots, dwelling units or persons located within the total acreage of residential area, exclusive of street right-of-way, easements, non-residential land use sites and acreage unsuitable for development. 
    Restaurant, café or cafeteria. An establishment serving food to the general public where customers are primarily served at tables or self-served. Food is consumed on the premises, which may include a drive-through window. At least 70% of the sales at such establishments shall be for food products. 
    Retirement housing complex. 
(1)  A development providing dwelling units specifically designed for the needs of ambulatory elderly persons. To qualify as a retirement housing complex, a minimum of 80% of the total units shall have a head of household who is 60 years of age or older. The remaining units may qualify by meeting one of the following conditions: 
(a)  A unit is occupied by a household head who is 55 years of age or older; 
(b)  A unit is occupied by a surviving member(s) of a household, regardless of age, and the household head meeting the age requirement has died; and 
(c)  A unit is occupied by management personnel and his or her family. 
(2)  In addition to the dwelling units, a retirement housing complex may include special facilities and services for the exclusive use of the residents. This may include a cafeteria and/or dining room, snack bar, convenience retail shop (food, household and gift items), infirmary, library, game room, swimming pool, exercise room, arts and crafts facilities, meeting room, greenhouse, housekeeping service, beauty and/or barber shop, chapel, transportation service and related uses to provide a comfortable and convenient living atmosphere. 
    Seasonal sales. A facility or site used for the sale of merchandise which is available or needed during certain seasons of the year. Use shall generally require one to three months of operation and be similar to fire wood sales or Christmas tree sales, seasonal plant material or other types of items for sale. 
    Setback. A minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building line. 
    Site development plan. A map, drawing or chart showing the location of all existing and planned structures, landscaping, design, entrance and exit, parking, height of structures, common open space, public facilities, private streets, together with information pertaining to all covenants relating to land use, location and bulk of structures, intensity of use or density of development, private streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities, and all other reasonable information required by the City of Stephenville Subdivision Ordinance regulations which control the review process. 
    Skirting. (As used in reference to the installation of manufactured housing) "skirting materials" shall consist of materials compatible with the design of the home, enhancing its appearance. Unpainted or untreated corrugated metal, screen or wire or lattice-style skirting is prohibited. 
    Small animal clinic. An office or group of offices for one or more veterinarians engaged in treating diseases or injuries to small domestic animals. Structures are to be soundproof and no outside facilities are permitted. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. 
    Street. A public right-of-way which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Cul-de-sac. A street having one end open to vehicular traffic and having one end closed or terminated with a turn-around. A "cul-de-sac" shall not be longer than 600 feet and at the closed end shall have a turn-around provided for, having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. A "cul-de-sac" shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet. 
(2)  Local. A street that is used primarily for access to abutting residential property and circulation of traffic within residential neighborhoods. It is of a width and design to discourage through traffic, thereby protecting the residential area. A LOCAL STREET shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet. 
(3)  Marginal access. A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. A "marginal access street" shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(4)  Major arterial. A street whose primary function is to provide traffic movement between major traffic generators such as principal neighborhoods, commercial centers and industrial areas, and to connect with surrounding municipalities. A major arterial shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet. 
(5)  Major collector. The function of a collector street is to collect and distribute traffic from local access streets and to convey it to the arterial system. "Major collectors" provide limited access to abutting property and parking is generally limited or restricted. A "major collector street" shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 90 feet. 
(6)  Minor arterial. A street whose primary function is to serve secondary traffic generation, such as community shopping areas, office complexes, high schools and larger parks and recreation areas. They also serve to collect and distribute traffic from streets of lower classification to major arterials. A "minor arterial street" shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 100 feet. 
(7)  Minor collector. Minor collectors in residential areas collect traffic from local streets within a residential district and are not intended to continue through several districts. In commercial/industrial areas minor collectors generally serve one district providing access for abutting property and providing the most direct access to other collectors and arterials. A "minor collector street" shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 70 feet. 
(8)  Private or service drive. A vehicular access way under private ownership and maintenance, that has not been dedicated to the city and accepted by the city. A "private street or service drive" shall have a minimum width of 25 feet. 
    Structure. A building of any kind or any piece of work built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof elevation or exterior walls. 
    Trailer, camping, recreational or travel trailer. A mobile living unit used for temporary occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants. 
    Trailer, hauling. A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
    Trucks. A self propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people and having a G.V.W. (gross vehicle weight) in excess of one ton. 
    Variance. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the Board of Adjustment of the City of Stephenville can grant a "variance." 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward. The horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used in measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard. 
    Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projection of the usual steps, unenclosed balconies or open porch. 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On both corner lots and interior lots, the REAR YARD shall in all cases be at the opposite end of a lot from the front yard. 
    Yard, side. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. 
    Zero lot line. The construction of a building on any of the boundary lines of a lot and having no yard requirement on that lot line. 
    Zoning district. A section or sections of the City of Stephenville, Texas, for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Zoning district map. The official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Zoning officer. The City of Stephenville has officially designated the Director of Community Development or his or her designee as the individual responsible for determining and enforcing compliance with the regulations and policies in this ordinance. 
(Am. Ord. 2006-31, passed 11-7-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-28, passed 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-32, passed 12-2-2014; Am. Ord. 2018-O-32 , § 1, passed 8-28-2018) 
Sec. 154.04. - Districts. 
4.A  Description. To promote orderly growth and provide for compatible uses within areas and between areas, Stephenville regulates development through a variety of districts. These districts shall regulate the heights and square footage of structures, the size of lots, the dedication of yards and other open spaces, and the general density of population within given areas. These districts shall govern the location and uses of buildings, structures and land for residences, industry, trade and other purposes. These districts are: 
RE Residential Estate District (43,560 ft 2 ) R-HA Single-Family Residential District (21,780 ft 2 ) R-1 Single-Family Residential District (7,500 ft 2 ) R-1.5 Single-Family Residential District (6,000 ft 2 ) R-2 One and Two Family Residential District R-3 Multiple Family Residential District MH Manufactured Housing District B-1 Neighborhood Business District B-2 Secondary and Highway Business District B-3 Central Business District B-4 Private Club District B-5 Restaurant-Alcoholic Beverage Service I Industrial District DT Downtown District AG Agricultural District PD Planned Development District  
4.B  Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are illustrated on the "Zoning District Map." The District Map and all notations, references and other information shown on or attached to the map are a part of this ordinance. The District Map has the same force and effect as it would if it were printed as a part of this printed ordinance. The map is identified as and bears the title "Zoning District Map-Stephenville, Texas," and will be kept in the municipal building of the city. 
4.C  Zoning of Annexed Territory. All territory annexed to the city shall by unzoned until reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and zoned by the City Council to a classification in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. All territory annexed into the city must be zoned within six months of the date of annexation. No building permit will be issued for unzoned property. 
4.D  Exempt Uses and Prohibited Uses. 
(A)  From the effective date of this ordinance, no land shall be used nor any building erected or converted to any use or physical configuration, other than as provided in the regulations established for the District in which it is located, other than as may be provided as exceptions or exemptions. 
(B)  The following structures and uses are exempt from district regulations: 
(1)  Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or other similar equipment for distribution to consumers of public utility and communication services, but not including substations and towers located on or above the surface of the ground which are permitted only specific districts; 
(2)  Railroad tracks, signals, bridges and similar facilities and equipment located on a railroad right-of-way; and 
(3)  City owned property and municipal facilities. 
4.E  Zoning of Vacated City Right-of-Way. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is lawfully vacated by the Stephenville City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley or public way will be automatically extended to the center of the vacated area. All land included in the vacated area will immediately be subject to the applicable regulations of the extended districts. 
(Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.1. - Residential estate district (RE) (43,560 ft ). 
5.1.A  Description. This residential district provides for low-density development, centered on country-style living. The primary land use allows for single-family dwelling development appropriate to the character of the neighborhood. The estate district consists of lots of not less than one acre in size, and shall be separated and protected from the encroachment of land use activities that do not contribute to and/or sustain the residential environment. 
5.1.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Accessory buildings; 
(3)  Churches, temples, mosques and related facilities; 
(4)  Community home; 
(5)  Park or playground; and 
(6)  SISD school-public. 
5.1.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; and 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision. 
5.1.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 150 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 250 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 50 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: 15 feet; and 
(b)  Corner lot: 50 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 2,400 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory buildings coverage: 30% of main use building. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: two. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 

5.1.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, RE District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.1.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building by more than 50%, or proposing to use a material consistent with the primary structure for any expansion must use primary materials, Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials, for the expansion area. 
5.1.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.2. - Single-family residential district (R-HA) (21,780 ft ). 
5.2.A  Description. This residential district provides for a low density neighborhood development. The primary land use allows for single-family dwelling development appropriate to the suburban character of the neighborhood. Other uses within this district shall contribute to the basic elements of a balanced and attractive neighborhood. Suburban area development is intended to be separate from and protected from the encroachment of land activities that do not contribute to the esthetic and functional well-being of the residential environment. 
5.2.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Accessory buildings; 
(3)  Churches, temples, mosques and related facilities; 
(4)  Community home; 
(5)  Park or playground; and 
(6)  SISD school-public. 
5.2.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; and 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision. 
5.2.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 110 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 180 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 30 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: ten feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 30 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,800 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory buildings coverage of rear yard: 30%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: two. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples, and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 

5.2.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, R-HA District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.2.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building by more than 50%, or proposing to use a material consistent with the primary structure for any expansion must use primary materials, Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials, for the expansion area. 
5.2.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.3. - Single-family residential district (R-1) (7,500 ft ). 
5.3.A  Description. This residential district provides for a generally lesser density city neighborhood development. The primary land use allows for single-family dwelling development appropriate to a city-style neighborhood. Other uses within this district shall contribute to the nature of the neighborhood. Development within this district is intended to be separate from and protected from the encroachment of land activities that do not contribute to the esthetic and functional well being of the intended district environment. 
5.3.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Accessory buildings; 
(3)  Churches, temple, mosques and related facilities; 
(4)  Community home; 
(5)  Park or playground; and 
(6)  SISD school-public. 
5.3.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision; and 
(3)  Child care-registered family home. 
5.3.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 75 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: seven feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,500 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory buildings coverage of rear yard: 30%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: two. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 

5.3.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, R-1 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.3.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building by more than 50%, or proposing to use a material consistent with the primary structure for any expansion must use primary materials, Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials, for the expansion area. 
5.3.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.4. - Single-family residential district (R-1.5) (6,000 ft ). 
5.4.A  Description. This residential district provides for a neighborhood development of medium density. The primary land use allows for single-family dwelling development on smaller lots. Recreational, religious and educational uses normally appropriate to such a residential neighborhood are also permitted to contribute to the natural elements of a convenient, balanced and attractive neighborhood. Development within this district is intended to be separate from and protected from the encroachment of land activities that do not contribute to the esthetic and functional well being of the intended district environment. 
5.4.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Accessory building; 
(3)  Churches, temples, mosques and related facilities; 
(4)  Community home; 
(5)  Park or playground; and 
(6)  SISD school-public. 
5.4.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision; and 
(3)  Child care-registered family home and group day care home. 
5.4.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: single-family dwelling: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,000 ft 2 . 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Single-Family Dwelling 

5.4.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, R-1.5 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.4.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building by more than 50%, or proposing to use a material consistent with the primary structure for any expansion must use primary materials, Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials, for the expansion area. 
5.4.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011; Ord. 2018-O-22 , § 1, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 154.05.5. - One- and two-family residential district (R-2). 
5.5.A  Description. This residential district provides for a neighborhood development of medium density. The primary land use allows for single-family dwellings, along with two family dwelling units. Recreational, religious and educational uses normally appropriate to such a residential neighborhood are also permitted to contribute to the natural elements of a convenient, balanced and attractive neighborhood. Development within this district is intended to be separate from and protected from the encroachment of land activities that do not contribute to the esthetic and functional well being of the intended district environment. 
5.5.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Two-family dwelling units, with each family limited as in division (1) above; 
(3)  Accessory buildings; 
(4)  Churches, temples, mosques and related facilities; 
(5)  Community home; 
(6)  Park or playground; and 
(7)  SISD school-public. 
5.5.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision; 
(3)  Child care-registered family home and group day care home; and 
(4)  Foster group home. 
5.5.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(A)  Single family. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,000 ft 2 . 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory buildings coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples, and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Single-Family Dwelling 

5.5.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, R-2 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(B)  Two-family. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: minimum of 7,500 square feet for two-family dwelling unit. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: six feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 800 (two-family unit = 1,600 ft 2 ; two units of 800 ft 2 each). 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Two-Family Dwelling 

A Two-Family, R-2 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.5.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building by more than 50%, or proposing to use a material consistent with the primary structure for any expansion must use primary materials, Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials, for the expansion area. 
5.4.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.6. - Multiple family residential district (R-3). 
5.6.A  Description. This residential district provides for medium to high-density city neighborhood development. The primary land use allows for single-family dwellings, two-to-four family dwelling units, and multiple family housing buildings and complexes. All R-3 zoning will be appropriate to a city-style neighborhood. Recreational, religious and educational uses are also permitted so as to contribute to the natural elements of a convenient, balanced and attractive neighborhood. Development within this district is intended to be protected from the encroachment of land activities that do not contribute to the esthetic and functional well being of the intended district environment. 
5.6.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing, or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Two-to-four family dwellings, with each family limited as in division (1) above; 
(3)  Townhouse dwellings, with each family limited as in division (1) above; 
(4)  Condominium dwellings, with each family limited as in division (1) above; 
(5)  Multiple family dwellings, with each family limited as in division (1) above; 
(6)  Assisted living center; 
(7)  Convalescent, nursing or long term-care facility; 
(8)  Retirement housing complex; 
(9)  Accessory buildings; 
(10)  Churches, temples, mosques and related facilities; 
(11)  Community home; 
(12)  Park or playground; 
(13)  SISD school-public; 
(14)  Bed and breakfast/boarding house; 
(15)  Group day care home; 
(16)  Registered family home; 
(17)  Day care center; and 
(18)  Fraternity or sorority house. 
5.6.C  Conditional Uses. 
(1)  Home occupation; 
(2)  Common facilities as the principal use of one or more platted lots in a subdivision; 
(3)  Adult and/or children's day care centers; 
(4)  Foster group home; and 
(5)  Residence hall. 
5.6.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(A)  Single family dwelling. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Single family dwelling: 1,000 ft 2 . 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory buildings coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Single-Family Dwelling 

5.6.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, R-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(B)  Two-to-four family. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: six feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Two-to-Four Family Dwelling 

A Two to Four-Family, R-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(C)  Townhouse/Condominium. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet per unit. 
(2)  Minimum average lot width and lot frontage: 30 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40% 
(b)  Minimum area of each Townhouse dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(c)  Minimum area of each Condominium of each dwelling unit: 500 ft 2 for one bedroom or less, plus 125 ft 2 of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Townhouse/Condominium 

A Townhouse/Condominium, R-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this Ordinance. 
(D)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: maximum density of 24 dwelling units per acre, which includes parking, access and all other area improvements. 
(2)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: ten feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(6)  Building size: Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 500 ft 2 for one bedroom or less plus 125 ft 2 of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(8)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Multiple-Family Dwelling 

A Multiple-Family, R-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.6.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed of at least 80% of the total exterior walls of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Any remaining exterior walls of all new dwellings shall construct the remaining exterior walls of alternative materials. See Section 10.E(2): Exterior Building Material Standard-Alternative Materials. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building more than 50%, or proposing to use a material inconsistent with the primary structure for any expansion, must meet the 80% minimum primary materials, Section 10.E: Exterior Building Material Standard, for the total exterior walls of the structure. 
5.6.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

(Am. Ord. 2007-24, passed 12-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 7-1-2008; Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.05.7. - Manufactured housing district (MH). 
5.7.A  Description. The Manufactured Housing District is intended to serve as a residential district for persons living in manufactured homes outside of a mobile home park. The primary use of land is for single-family dwellings, along with related uses to provide the basic elements of an attractive living area. 
5.7.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling, limited to occupancy by a family having no more than three individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, marriage or conservatorship. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit residential use of a dwelling in this district by more than three unrelated individuals; 
(2)  Accessory building to main use; 
(3)  Manufactured homes; and 
(4)  Home occupation. 
5.7.C  Conditional Uses. None. 
5.7.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  (a)  Minimum area of main building: 700 ft 2 . 
(b)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples, and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 

5.7.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, MH District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in this ordinance, Section 11, Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
5.7.F  Development and Installation Regulations. Any property developed within the MH district as a HUD Code Manufactured Home or as a Manufactured Housing Subdivision shall meet the following requirements: 
(A)  The axles, wheels and tow bar or tongue shall be removed. 
(B)  Secured to a permanent foundation or footing and piers, in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. 
(C)  Permanent steps installed at all exits. 
(D)  Skirting will be installed on all sides within 30 days of home installation. Skirting materials shall consist of materials compatible with the design of the home, enhancing its appearance. Unpainted or untreated corrugated metal, screen or wire, or lattice-style skirting is prohibited. 
(E)  A building official of the City of Stephenville must approve any structural alteration or modification made on site. All structural additions shall comply with the city's building codes and ordinances. 
Sec. 154.06.1. - Neighborhood business district (B-1). 
6.1.A  Description. 
(1)  The Neighborhood Business District accommodates trade and personal services facilities that meet the needs and enhance the quality of life of residential neighborhoods throughout the city. 
(2)  The various retail trade and service uses in the Neighborhood Business District are intended to become an integral part of the neighborhood, requirements for open space and off street parking are more restrictive and are compatible with adjacent residential areas. Spacing, air circulation, landscaping and unrestricted sight lines are included as requirements for the Neighborhood Business District to provide a harmonious relationship with other residential, educational, religious and recreational land uses. 
6.1.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Accessory building to main use; 
(2)  Animal grooming; 
(3)  Antique shop/art gallery-sales in building; 
(4)  Assisted living center; 
(5)  Bakery and confectionary-products for retail only; 
(6)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(7)  Bed and breakfast/boarding house; 
(8)  Church, temple, mosque (and the like) and related facilities; 
(9)  Cleaning and pressing-small shop, pick-up and delivery; 
(10)  Clinic; 
(11)  Convalescent, nursing or long term care facility; 
(12)  Convenience/grocery store (without pumps); 
(13)  Day care center (12 or more children); 
(14)  Drapery, needlework or weaving shop; 
(15)  Farmers market; 
(16)  Florist; 
(17)  Fraternal organizations, lodge or civic club; 
(18)  Handcraft shop; 
(19)  Group day care home (7-12 children); 
(20)  Laundry and cleaning (self service); 
(21)  Municipal facilities/state facilities/federal facilities; 
(22)  Neighborhood grocery store (no fuel service); 
(23)  Office-professional and general administration; 
(24)  Park, playground, public community recreation center; 
(25)  Personal service shop (beauty, barber and the like); 
(26)  Private kindergarten; 
(27)  Retail stores and shops-other than listed; 
(28)  Restaurant or cafeteria-without drive-in service; and 
(29)  Retirement housing complex. 
(30)  Restaurant with alcoholic beverage service. 
6.1.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). None. 
6.1.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum 25 feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum 25 feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet 
(8)  Building size: There are no minimum size regulations 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: No rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum setback is 25 feet. 
6.1.E  Miscellaneous Provisions. Wherever a Neighborhood Business District adjoins a residential district and is not separated by a street, a six-foot or taller solid sight-barring fence or landscape barrier will be constructed and maintained along the boundary or property line as permanent screening. All outside lighting features will be placed and reflected so as to not create annoyances, nuisances or hazards. 
6.1.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  At least 80% of the exterior walls of all structures visible from a public street shall be of masonry constructions, with an architectural exterior finish, exclusive of door and window openings. 
(2)  The roofs of all structures shall be pitched with a slope of not less than 4/12. 
6.1.G  Parking Regulations. All Uses Permitted in the B-1 District: See Section 11 for Parking Regulations. 
6.1.H  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.1.I  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.1.J  Garbage Regulations. Neighborhood Business District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.1.K. 
6.1.K  Loading and Unloading Regulations. All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity must be on the premises and will not be permitted in any street. Loading and unloading areas must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
(Am. Ord. 2009-23, passed 12-1-2009; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 3-3-2015; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-25 , § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 154.06.2. - Retail and commercial business district (B-2). 
6.2.A  Description. The Retail and Commercial Business District provides areas for the grouping of retail shops and stores offering goods and services for the residents in general. These shopping areas will generally be more densely concentrated and more traffic intensive than allowed in the Neighborhood Business Districts. 
6.2.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Animal grooming; 
(2)  Antique shop/art gallery-sales in building; 
(3)  Assisted living center; 
(4)  Athletic field; 
(5)  Automobile service station and car care center; 
(6)  Auto parking lot or building (commercial); 
(7)  Auto parts sales; 
(8)  Auto repair/mechanic garage; 
(9)  Auto sales; 
(10)  Automobile rental; 
(11)  Bail bond service; 
(12)  Bakery and confectionery-retail sales only; 
(13)  Bakery and confectionery; 
(14)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(15)  Boat sales; 
(16)  Bottling works (wholesale); 
(17)  Building material sales; 
(18)  Cabinet and upholstery shop; 
(19)  Car wash; 
(20)  Care facility for narcotic, alcoholic or psychiatric patients; 
(21)  Cemetery/mausoleum; 
(22)  Church, temple or mosque; 
(23)  Civic/community center; 
(24)  Cleaning and pressing-small shop, pickup and delivery; 
(25)  Clinic; 
(26)  College or university; 
(27)  Commercial amusement (indoor); 
(28)  Commercial amusement (outdoor); 
(29)  Convalescent, nursing or long term care facility; 
(30)  Convenience/grocery store (without pumps) convenience store (with pumps); 
(31)  Construction equipment rental and sales; 
(32)  Construction yard (temporary); 
(33)  Contractor shop and storage yard; 
(34)  Department store; 
(35)  Discount warehouse store; 
(36)  Drapery, needlework or weaving shop; 
(37)  Farmers Market; 
(38)  Feed, seed and fertilizer store-no bulk storage; 
(39)  Field office (temporary); 
(40)  Florist; 
(41)  Fraternal organization, lodge or civic club; 
(42)  Furniture or appliance store; 
(43)  Golf course or country club, driving range; 
(44)  Greenhouse or nursery for retail plant sales with outside storage; 
(45)  Handcraft shop; 
(46)  Health club, weight and aerobic center; 
(47)  Home improvement center; 
(48)  Hospital-general acute care (human); 
(49)  Hotels and motels; 
(50)  Household appliance service and repair; 
(51)  Kennel; 
(52)  Kiosk; 
(53)  Laboratory (medical); 
(54)  Landscaping service; 
(55)  Laundry and cleaning (self service); 
(56)  Lawn equipment and small engine sales and services; 
(57)  Micro brewery; 
(58)  Mini storage/warehouses; 
(59)  Monument retail sales (outside storage); 
(60)  Mortuary or funeral home; 
(61)  Moving company; 
(62)  Neighborhood grocery store (no fuel service); 
(63)  Office-professional and general administration; 
(64)  Park, playground, public community recreation center; 
(65)  Pawn shop; 
(66)  Personal service shop (beauty, barber and the like); 
(67)  Pet shop-small animals within building; 
(68)  Plumbing shop; 
(69)  Portable building sales; 
(70)  Printing; 
(71)  Produce stand; 
(72)  Psychic/Tarot card reader; 
(73)  Recreational vehicle sales; 
(74)  Recycling kiosk; 
(75)  Research lab (non-hazardous); 
(76)  Restaurant (drive-in type); 
(77)  Restaurant or cafeteria-without drive-in service; 
(78)  Retail shops and stores other than listed; 
(79)  Roofing and siding supply; 
(80)  Schools-public, private and parochial; 
(81)  Shopping center; 
(82)  Storage or repair of furniture and appliances (display inside of building); 
(83)  Studio (photographer, musician, artist); 
(84)  Studio for radio and television; 
(85)  Taxidermy; 
(86)  Theater-indoor; 
(87)  Tobacco shop; 
(88)  Tool and equipment rental shop; 
(89)  Trailer rental and sales; 
(90)  Veterinary clinic or hospital; and 
(91)  Veterinary services. 
(92)  Restaurant with alcoholic beverage service. 
6.2.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). 
(1)  Day care center-12 or more children; 
(2)  Flea market; 
(3)  Frozen foods locker; 
(4)  Scientific and research laboratories; 
(5)  Theater (drive-in); and 
(6)  Trade and commercial schools. 
6.2.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum ten feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum five feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: 20 feet. 
(8)  Building size: There are no minimum size regulations. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: No rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum setback for rear yard is 10 feet and side yard is five feet. 
6.2.E  Parking Regulations. All uses permitted in the B-2 District: See Section 11 Parking Regulations. 
6.2.F  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.2.G  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.2.H  Garbage Regulations. Retail and Commercial District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.2.I. 
6.2.I  Loading and Unloading Regulations. All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity must be on the premises and will not be permitted in any street. Loading and unloading areas must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
(Am. Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-6-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-23, passed 12-1-2009; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-25 , § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 154.06.3. - Central business district (B-3). 
6.3.A  Description. The Central Business District is intended to encourage the redevelopment of the downtown business area, which includes the historic courthouse, all types of offices, retail business and residences. The varying land uses included in the Central Business District are compatible with existing uses to preserve the integrity of the Central Business District and deter urban deterioration. This district also facilitates the maintenance of the area and provides for the vibrant interaction between retail, service, residential and citizens citywide. 
6.3.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Accessory building to main use; 
(2)  Antique shop/art gallery-sales in building; 
(3)  Auto parking lot or building (commercial); 
(4)  Bakery and confectionery shop; 
(5)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(6)  Bed and breakfast/boarding house; 
(7)  Church, temple or mosque; 
(8)  Civic or community center; 
(9)  Cleaning and pressing-small shop, pickup and delivery; 
(10)  College or university; 
(11)  Condominium; 
(12)  Convenience/grocery store (without pumps); 
(13)  Department store; 
(14)  Drapery, needlework or weaving shop; 
(15)  Farmers market; 
(16)  Florist; 
(17)  Fraternal organization, lodge or civic club; 
(18)  Furniture or appliance store; 
(19)  Handcraft shop; 
(20)  Health club, weight and aerobic center; 
(21)  Home occupation; 
(22)  Hotels and motels; 
(23)  Household appliance service and repair (no outside storage); 
(24)  Kiosk; 
(25)  Laboratory (medical); 
(26)  Micro brewery; 
(27)  Multi-family dwelling (five more units); 
(28)  Municipal facilities/state facilities/federal facilities; 
(29)  Office-professional and general administration; 
(30)  Park, playground, public community recreation center; 
(31)  Personal service shop (beauty/barber shop and the like); 
(32)  Pet shop-small animals within building (no boarding); 
(33)  Railroad or bus passenger station; 
(34)  Registered family home (six + six children); 
(35)  Restaurant or cafeteria-without drive-in service; 
(36)  Retail shops; 
(37)  Retirement housing complex; 
(38)  Schools-private/parochial; 
(39)  Schools-public; 
(40)  Single family dwelling; 
(41)  Studio for photographer, musician, artist and the like; 
(42)  Studio for radio and television; 
(43)  Theater-indoor; 
(44)  Townhouse; and 
(45)  Two-four family dwelling. 
(46)  Restaurant with alcoholic beverage service. 
6.3.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). 
(1)  Assisted living center; 
(2)  Auto parts sales; 
(3)  Automobile service station and car care center; 
(4)  Clinic; 
(5)  Day care center (12 or more children); 
(6)  Hospital-general acute care (human); 
(7)  Printing; 
(8)  Plumbing shop; 
(9)  Scientific and research laboratories; 
(10)  Storage, sale or repair of furniture and appliances (inside building); 
(11)  Tobacco shop; 
(12)  Tool and equipment rental shop; and 
(13)  Trade and commercial schools. 
6.3.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(A)  Single family dwelling. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 60 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,000 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 

(B)  Two-four family dwelling. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 7,500 ft for two dwelling units, plus 1,000 ft for each additional dwelling unit. 
(2)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: six feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples, and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Two-Four Family Dwellings 

(C)  Townhouse/Condominium. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet per unit. 
(2)  Minimum average lot width and lot frontage: 30 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Minimum width of rear setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(7)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40% 
(b)  Minimum area of each Townhouse dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(c)  Minimum area of each Condominium of each dwelling unit: 500 ft 2 for one bedroom or less, plus 125 ft 2 of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(8)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Multiple-Family Dwelling 

(D)  Multiple family dwellings. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: maximum density of 24 dwelling units per acre, which includes parking, access and all other area improvements. 
(2)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: ten feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(6)  Building size: Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 500 ft 2 for one bedroom or less plus 125 ft 2 of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(7)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(8)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: Building size for a multiple family dwellings shall have a minimum area for efficiency or one bedroom unit at 350 feet squared. All other dwelling units shall have a minimum of 800 feet squared. 
(E)  All other uses. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: There is no front setback requirement. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum ten feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum five feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: There is no setback requirement. 
(8)  Building Size: there are no minimum size regulations. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: No building shall exceed 75 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. All Other Uses 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: No rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum setback for rear yard is ten feet and side yard is five feet. 
6.3.E  Parking Regulations. 
(1)  A Single-Family, B-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(2)  A Two-Four-Family, B-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(3)  A Townhouse/Condominium, B-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(4)  A Multiple Family, B-3 District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations of this ordinance. 
(5)  All uses permitted in the B-3 District: See Section 11 for Parking Regulations. 
6.3.F  Type of Construction. 
(1)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed of at least 80% of the total exterior walls of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(2)  Any remaining exterior walls of all new dwellings shall construct the remaining exterior walls of alternative materials. See Section 10.E(2): Exterior Building Material Standard-Alternative Materials. 
(3)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building more than 50%, or proposing to use a material inconsistent with the primary structure for any expansion, must meet the 80% minimum primary materials, Section 10.E: Exterior Building Material Standard, for the total exterior walls of the structure. 
6.3.F Exterior Building Material Standards 

6.3.G  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.3.H  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.3.I  Garbage Regulations. Central Business District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.3.J. 
6.3.J  Loading and Unloading Regulations. All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity must be on the premises and will not be permitted in any street. Loading and unloading areas must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
(Am. Ord. 2007-24, passed 12-4-2007; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 7-1-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-23, passed 12-1-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-25 , § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 154.06.4. - Private club district (B-4). 
6.4.A  Description. The B-4 District is intended to provide for private clubs providing on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
6.4.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club; 
(2)  Golf course or country club (private); 
(3)  Hotels and motels; and 
(4)  Private clubs. 
6.4.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). None. 
6.4.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum ten feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum five feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: 20 feet. 
(8)  Building size: There are no minimum size regulations. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: No rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum setback for rear yard is ten feet and side yard is five feet. 
6.4.E  Parking Regulations. All uses permitted in the B-4 District: See Section 11 for Parking Regulations. 
6.4.F  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.4.G  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.4.H  Garbage Regulations. Private Club District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.4.I. 
6.4.I  Loading and Unloading Regulations. All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity must be on the premises and will not be permitted in any street. Loading and unloading areas must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
Sec. 154.06.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-O-25, § 3, passed August 7, 2018, repealed § 154.06.5. Former § 154.06.5 pertained to restaurant-alcoholic beverage service (B-5). 
Sec. 154.06.6. - Industrial district (I). 
6.6.A  Description. The Industrial District is intended to serve as the location for general industrial activities. 
6.6.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Airport, heliport or landing field; 
(2)  Animal grooming; 
(3)  Athletic field; 
(4)  Auto paint and body shop/repair; 
(5)  Auto parking lot or building (commercial); 
(6)  Auto parts sales; 
(7)  Auto repair/mechanic garage; 
(8)  Auto sales; 
(9)  Auto storage; 
(10)  Auto wrecking or salvage yard; 
(11)  Automobile rental; 
(12)  Automobile service station and car care center; 
(13)  Bail bond service; 
(14)  Bakery and confectionery shop; 
(15)  Bakery and confectionery shop-products for retail only; 
(16)  Bakery and confectionery shop-wholesale and distribution; 
(17)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(18)  Boat sales; 
(19)  Bottling works (wholesale); 
(20)  Building material sales; 
(21)  Bulk grain/feed storage; 
(22)  Cabinet and upholstering shop; 
(23)  Car wash; 
(24)  Chemical supply; 
(25)  Civic/community center; 
(26)  College or university; 
(27)  Commercial amusement (indoor and outdoor); 
(28)  Concrete or asphalt batching plant; 
(29)  Convenience store (with pumps); 
(30)  Convenience/grocery store (without pumps); 
(31)  Construction equipment rental and sales; 
(32)  Construction yard (temporary); 
(33)  Contractor shop and storage yard; 
(34)  Feed, seed and fertilizer store-no bulk storage; 
(35)  Feed store; 
(36)  Field office (temporary); 
(37)  Flea market; 
(38)  Frozen foods locker; 
(39)  Health club, weight and aerobic center; 
(40)  Heavy machinery sales and storage; 
(41)  Heavy manufacturing or industrial; 
(42)  Home improvement center; 
(43)  Hotels and motels; 
(44)  Industrial manufacturing/fabrication/assembly (closed); 
(45)  Industrial manufacturing/fabrication/assembly (outside storage); 
(46)  Kennel; 
(47)  Kiosk; 
(48)  Laboratory (medical); 
(49)  Landscaping service; 
(50)  Laundry plant; 
(51)  Lawn equipment and small engine sales and services; 
(52)  Light manufacturing or industrial; 
(53)  Machine shop; 
(54)  Micro brewery; 
(55)  Mini storage/warehouses; 
(56)  Mobile homes/manufactured home parks; 
(57)  Mobile home display and sales; 
(58)  Moving company; 
(59)  Newspaper printing; 
(60)  Office-professional and general administration; 
(61)  Overnight delivery and service center; 
(62)  Pawn shop; 
(63)  Plumbing shop; 
(64)  Portable building sales; 
(65)  Printing; 
(66)  Produce stand; 
(67)  Propane sales (filling stations); 
(68)  Radio, television, microwave or electric generating tower; 
(69)  Recreational vehicle sales; 
(70)  Railroad or bus passenger station; 
(71)  Recycling collection center; 
(72)  Recycling kiosk; 
(73)  Research lab (non-hazardous); 
(74)  Restaurant (drive-in type); 
(75)  Restaurant or cafeteria-without drive-in service; 
(76)  Roofing and siding supply; 
(77)  Sand/gravel/caliche/stone sales (storage); 
(78)  Shopping center; 
(79)  Sign manufacturing; 
(80)  Stone/clay/glass manufacture; 
(81)  Storage or repair of furniture and appliance (inside); 
(82)  Studio for radio and television; 
(83)  Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio; 
(84)  Taxidermy; 
(85)  Tobacco shop; 
(86)  Trade or commercial schools; 
(87)  Tire retreading; 
(88)  Tool equipment rental shop; 
(89)  Trailer rental/sales; 
(90)  Truck stop; 
(91)  Veterinary clinic or hospital; 
(92)  Veterinary services; 
(93)  Warehouse, wholesale (enclosed and outside storage); 
(94)  Welding shop; 
(95)  Wholesale distribution centers; 
(96)  Wholesale production and distribution of ice (mfg. by machine only); and 
(97)  Wrecking yard. 
(98)  Restaurant with alcoholic beverage service. 
6.6.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). 
(1)  Day care center-12 or more children; and 
(2)  Sexually oriented business. 
(3)  Citizen collection station. 
6.6.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 20 feet minimum. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum ten feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum five feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: 20 feet minimum. 
(8)  Building size: There are no minimum size regulations 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: No building shall exceed 75 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: All uses, no rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum set back for the rear yard is ten feet and side yard is five feet. 
6.6.E  Parking Regulations. All uses permitted in the I District: See Section 11 for Parking Regulations. 
6.6.F  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.6.G  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.6.H  Garbage Regulations. Industrial District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.6.I. 
6.6.I  Loading and Unloading Regulations. All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity must be on the premises and will not be permitted in any street. Loading and unloading areas must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
(Am. Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-6-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-23, passed 12-1-2009; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-25 , § 1, 8-7-2018; Am. Ord. 2009-23, passed 12-1-2009; Am. Ord. 2018-O-32 , § 2, passed 8-28-2018) 
Sec. 154.06.7. - Downtown district (DT). 
6.7.A  Description. The Downtown District is intended to encourage the redevelopment of the original township, which includes the historic courthouse, offices, retail business and residences. The varying land uses included in the Downtown District are compatible with existing uses to preserve the integrity of the area Downtown District and deter urban deterioration. This district also facilitates the maintenance of the area and provides for the vibrant interaction between retail, service, residential, government and public use. 
6.7.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Bakery and confectionery shop; 
(2)  Banks or other financial institutions; 
(3)  Bed and breakfast; 
(4)  Bicycle sales and rental; 
(5)  Book and card/gift stores; 
(6)  Church, temple or mosque; 
(7)  Civic or community center; 
(8)  Clinic; 
(9)  Commercial parking garage/lot; 
(10)  Condominium (four or less units); 
(11)  Convenience/grocery store (without pumps); 
(12)  Day spa; 
(13)  Florist; 
(14)  Fraternal organization, lodge or civic club; 
(15)  Health club, weight and aerobic center; 
(16)  Home occupation; 
(17)  Hotels and motels; 
(18)  Library; 
(19)  Micro brewery/winery (retail sales)-without drive-in service; 
(20)  Municipal facilities/state facilities/federal facilities; 
(21)  Museums and galleries; 
(22)  Office-professional and general administration; 
(23)  Personal service shop (beauty/barber shop); 
(24)  Restaurant or cafeteria-without drive-in service; 
(25)  Retail shops; 
(26)  Single family dwelling; 
(27)  Studio for photographer, musician, artist; 
(28)  Theater-indoor; 
(29)  Townhouse (four or less units); 
(30)  Travel agencies; 
(31)  Two-four family dwelling. 
(32)  Restaurant with alcoholic beverage service. 
6.7.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). 
(1)  Restaurant (drive-in type); 
(2)  Micro brewery/winery (distribution); 
(3)  Tobacco shop; 
(4)  Reserved. 
6.7.D  Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements. 
(A)  Single family dwelling. 
(1)  Maximum density: one dwelling unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 60 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of main building: 1,000 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one. 
(c)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(d)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
6.7.D Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Single-Family Dwelling 

6.7.E  Parking Regulations. A Single-Family, DT District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces, with a driveway connecting the parking spaces with a street or alley, and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations. 
(B)  Two-four family dwelling. 
(1)  Maximum density: four family unit per lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet for two dwelling units, plus 1,000 ft 2 for each additional dwelling unit. 
(3)  Minimum lot width and lot frontage: 75 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: six feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40%. 
(b)  Minimum area of each dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples, and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
6.7.D Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Two-Four Family Dwellings 

A Two-Four-Family, DT District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations. 
(C)  Townhouse/Condominium. 
(1)  Maximum density: four family unit per lot 
(2)  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet per unit. 
(3)  Minimum average lot width and lot frontage: 30 feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Minimum width of rear setback: 15 feet. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: five feet. 
(b)  Corner lot: 25 feet from intersecting side street. 
(8)  Building size: 
(a)  Maximum main building coverage as a percentage of lot area: 40% 
(b)  Minimum area of each townhouse dwelling unit: 800 ft 2 . 
(c)  Minimum area of each condominium of each dwelling unit: 500 ft 2 for one bedroom or less, plus 125 ft 2 of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(9)  Accessory buildings: 
(a)  Maximum accessory building coverage of rear yard: 20%. 
(b)  Maximum area of each accessory building: 200 ft 2 . 
(c)  Maximum number of accessory buildings: one per unit. 
(d)  Minimum depth of side setback: five feet. 
(e)  Minimum depth of rear setback: five feet. 
(f)  Minimum depth from the edge of the main building: 12 feet. 
(10)  Maximum height of structures: 35 feet. 
(11)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
6.7.D Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 
Townhouse/Condominium 

A Townhouse/Condominium, DT District lot shall provide a minimum of two vehicle parking spaces per dwelling unit and meet all the pertinent requirements contained in Section 11 the Parking Regulations. 
(D)  All other uses. 
(1)  Maximum density: There is no maximum density requirement. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: There is no minimum area requirement. 
(3)  Minimum lot width: There is no minimum width requirement. 
(4)  Minimum lot depth: There is no minimum depth requirement. 
(5)  Minimum depth of front setback: There is no front setback requirement. 
(6)  Minimum depth of rear setback: There is no minimum rear setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum ten feet is required. 
(7)  Minimum width of side setback: 
(a)  Internal lot: There is no minimum side setback requirement unless the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then a minimum five feet is required. 
(b)  Corner lot: There is no setback requirement. 
(8)  Building size: there are no minimum size regulations. 
(9)  Maximum height of structures: No building shall exceed 75 feet. 
(10)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 60 feet. Churches, temples and mosques may not exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
Height, Area, Yard and Lot Coverage Requirements 

Note: No rear or side yard except when the lot abuts upon a Residential District, then the minimum setback for rear yard is ten feet and side yard is five feet. 
6.7.F  Type of Construction . 
(1)  The exterior facade of all structures visible from a public street shall be of an architectural exterior finish similar to the surrounding structures within the District, exclusive of door and window openings. 
(2)  Exterior siding and trim coloring shall be compatible to the surrounding structures in the District. 
(3)  Exterior metal facades are prohibited in the DT "Downtown District." 
(4)  The exterior walls of all new dwellings to the top plate, shall be constructed exclusively of primary materials, excluding doors, windows, and porches. See Section 10.E(1): Exterior Building Material Standard-Primary Materials. 
(5)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building 50% or less, or modifying the exterior walls, may use the same exterior construction material as the existing primary building. If the material is not available, similar material may be used if approved by the Community Development Director. 
(6)  Existing dwellings expanding the total square footage of the building more than 50%, or proposing to use a material inconsistent with the primary structure for any expansion, must meet the 80% minimum primary materials, Section 10.E: Exterior Building Material Standard, for the total exterior walls of the structure. 
Exterior Building Material Standards 

6.7.G  Miscellaneous Provisions. Wherever a commercial use adjoins a Residential District and is not separated by a street, a six-foot or taller solid sight-barring fence or landscape barrier will be constructed and maintained along the boundary or property line as permanent screening. All outside lighting features will be placed and reflected so as to not create annoyances, nuisances or hazards. 
6.7.H  Parking Regulations. See Section 11 Parking Regulations. 
6.7.I  Sign Regulation. See Section 12 for Sign Regulations. 
6.7.J  Exceptions to Use, Height and Area Regulations. See Section 10. 
6.7.K  Garbage Regulations. 
(1)  Downtown District will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a Residential District, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. Approach areas will meet the requirements of Subsection 6.7.L. 
(2)  Containers, polycarts, receptacles and any other unacceptable waste or recyclables, shall be removed from the curb or other designated collection point by the customer no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day following their scheduled collection day. Each designated area shall be four feet wide and four feet deep (16 square feet), impervious slab. The refuse area will be completely screened by a privacy fence or landscaping. 
6.7.L  Loading and Unloading Regulations. 
(1)  All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity on the premises, must be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced. 
(2)  All loading, unloading and maneuvering of vehicles connected with the activity on city streets, must be loaded and unloaded between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) to 11:00 a.m. The activity must not impede public traffic on city streets. 
6.7.M  Sidewalk. Property with new construction and/or residential use changing to a commercial use, shall construct a sidewalk along the city right(s) of way in accordance with Subdivision Ordinance design standards. 
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 4-5-2011; Am. Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 2-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 3-4-2014; Am. Ord. No. 2018-O-25 , § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 154.07. - Agricultural district (AG). 
7.A  Description. The regulations herein established have been adopted to provide a designation for undeveloped or vacant land together with any improvements situated thereon; the land being located on the outer boundaries of the city and being used for agricultural purposes. The agricultural activities conducted in the District shall be within environmental restrictions and regulations and not be detrimental to adjacent urban land uses. The type of uses and the area and intensity of uses permitted in the District shall encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted. The District is also intended to protect areas that may be unsuitable for development because of physical problems, lack of infrastructure, potential health or safety hazards such as flooding, as well as providing for preservation of natural open space areas. 
7.B  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Farms, ranches, orchards, truck gardens, nurseries for the growing of plants, and similar agrarian activities involving the growing of plants and raising and pasturing of livestock, including accessory feeding pens and dairy operations, which are permitted and conducted in compliance with state and federal guidelines; 
(2)  Single-family dwellings clearly incidental to the operation of the activities listed in No. 1 above including dwellings on the same farm or ranch used exclusively for the housing of employees living on the premises; 
(3)  Single-Family Estates. Semi-Urban estate-type residential properties with large lots or small acreage and are serviced by either or both septic tanks and/or domestic wells; 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures clearly incidental to the above operations including but not limited to barns, stables, arenas, equipment sheds, processing sheds, dairy barns, poultry houses, swine pens, granaries, pump houses, water tanks and silos; 
(5)  Installations owned and operated by the City of Stephenville, Erath County, the State of Texas or public utility companies, which installations are necessary for the public safety, governmental services or the furnishing of utility services including communication equipment and towers into or through the Agricultural District; 
(6)  Public and parochial schools, colleges and universities; 
(7)  Parks, playgrounds, community centers or recreational areas owned and operated by the City of Stephenville, Erath County, the State of Texas or other governmental entity or owned by such agencies and operated under their control and supervision; and 
(8)  Churches and all church property and improvements including, but not limited to houses and structures of worship, fellowship and recreation. 
7.C  Conditional Uses (Special Use Permit required). 
(1)  Cemeteries public and private including accessory building and structures; 
(2)  Country club; and 
(3)  Golf course. 
7.D  Area Regulations. All buildings and structures must be set back from the street or road right-of-way lines a minimum of 30 feet. 
7.E  Intensity of Use. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than two acres, except that if a lot or tract should have less area than is herein required and its boundary lines along their entire length should touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of this ordinance and shall not have changed since the date, such parcel of land may be used for a primary use in the zoning district. 
7.F  Height Regulations. 
(1)  No building shall be erected to exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(2)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, permitted in this district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each two feet additional height above the height limit in this district. 
(3)  Chimneys, fire towers, monuments, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spired church steeples, radio-television-telephone and all communication towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
Sec. 154.08. - Planned development district (PD). 
8.A  Description. 
(1)  Planned development districts are designed for greater flexibility and discretion in the application of residential and non-residential zoning and for increased compatibility and the more effective mitigation of potentially adverse impacts on adjacent land than in possible under standard district regulations. It is recognized that it is desirable for certain areas of the city to be developed in accordance with development plans prepared and approved as a part of the ordinance authorizing the zoning necessary for the proposed development. 
(2)  Improvements in a "PD" District are subject to conformance with a development plan approved by the City Council on Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation and after public hearing thereon. No development plan may increase gross density in excess of that allowed by the base district. 
8.B  Permitted Uses. In a PD Development District, no land shall be used and no building shall be installed, erected for/or converted to any use other than a hereinafter provided. 
    NON-RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS. Considered appropriate where the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  The project utilized innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use plan and the goals and objectives of the city; 
(2)  Non-residential uses are situated such that an appreciable amount of land is available for open space or joint use as parking space and is integrated throughout the planned development; 
(3)  The site exhibits environmentally natural features which should be considered for preservation and/or enhancement; 
(4)  Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not economically feasible to provide in conventional non-residential projects; and 
(5)  The project provides a compatible transition between adjacent existing single-family residential projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future single-family projects into adjacent undeveloped areas. 
    RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Considered appropriate where the following conditions prevail: 
(1)  The project utilized innovative land development concepts and is consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use plan and the goals and objectives of the city; 
(2)  Dwelling units are situated such that an appreciable amount of land for open space is available and is integrated throughout the planned development; 
(3)  The project utilizes an innovative approach in lot configuration and mixture of single-family housing types; 
(4)  Higher densities than conventional single-family projects of the same acreage is achievable with appropriate buffering between existing conventional single-family developments and increased open space; 
(5)  The site exhibits environmentally natural features which should be considered for preservation and/or enhancement; 
(6)  Aesthetic amenities may be provided in the planned development design which are not economically feasible to provide in conventional single-family projects; and 
(7)  The project provides a compatible transition between adjacent existing conventional single-family residential projects and provides a compatible transition for the extension of future conventional single-family projects into adjacent undeveloped areas. 
8.C  Prohibited Uses. 
(1)  Any building erected or land used for other than the use shown on the Planned Development Site Plan, as approved by the City Council. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot size; front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width, or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acreage as shown in the development's recorded Planned Development Site Plan, as approved by City Council. 
(3)  Any use deemed by the City Council as being detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of Stephenville. 
8.D  Ownership. An application for approval of a Planned Development Plan under the Planned Development District regulations may be filed by a person having legal ownership of the property to be included in the Development Plan. In order to ensure unified planning and development of the property, the applicant shall provide evidence, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, prior to final approval of the Development Plan, that the property is held in single ownership or is under single control. Land shall be deemed to be held in single ownership or under single control if it is in joint tenancy, tenancy in common, a partnership, a trust or a joint venture. The Development Plan shall be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the property, which shall be included in the application. 
8.E  Development Schedule. 
(1)  An application for a Planned Development District shall be accompanied by a development schedule indicating the approximate date on which construction is expected to begin and the rate of anticipated development to completion. The development schedule, adopted and approved by the City Council, shall become part of the Planned Development Ordinance and shall be adhered to by the owner, developer and their assigns of successors in interest. 
(2)  Annually, upon the anniversary date, or more frequently if required, the developer shall provide a written report to the Planning and Zoning Commission concerning the actual development accomplished as compared with the development schedule. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may, if in its opinion the owner or owners of the property are failing or have failed to meet the approved development schedule, initiate proceedings to amend the Official Zoning map or the Planned Development District by removing all or part of the Planned Development District from the Official Zoning Map and placing the area involved in another appropriate zoning district. After the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning commission and for good cause shown by the owner and developer, the City Council may extend the development schedule as may be indicated by the facts and conditions of the case. 
8.F  Plat Requirements. No application for a building permit for the construction of a building or structure shall be approved unless a plat, meeting all requirement of the City of Stephenville has been approved by the City Council and recorded in the official records of Erath County. 
8.G  Concept Plan. The applicant for any PD Planned Development shall submit a concept plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review prior to submitting a Development Plan. The concept plan shall contain appropriate information to describe the general land use configuration, proposed densities or lot sizes, proposed amenities and proposed regulation. 
8.H  Development Plan Approval Required. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued and no use of land, buildings or structures shall be made in the "PD" District until the same has been approved as part of a development plan in compliance with the procedures, terms and conditions of this section of the ordinance. 
8.I  Approval Procedures. 
(1)  An application for development plan approval shall be filed with the Director of Community Development accompanied by a development plan. 
(2)  The procedures for hearing a request for a zoning change to "PD" shall be the same as for a requested change to any other district as set forth Section 20 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Any substantive revision to a development plan between the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the public hearing before the City Council shall necessitate the development plan being referred back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and evaluation unless the revision constitutes a minor change as provided below, or the change was condition of the approval. 
(4)  Any revisions to the development plan after the public hearing before the City Council shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for distribution, review and written evaluation by city staff prior to submission to and approved by the City Council. 
(5)  Minor changes to an approved development plan, which will not cause any of the following circumstances to occur, may be authorized by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee: 
(a)  A change in the character of the development; 
(b)  An increase in the gross floor areas in structures; 
(c)  An increase in the intensity of use; 
(d)  A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings; 
(e)  Any adverse changes in traffic circulation, safety, drainage and utilities; 
(f)  Any adverse changes in such external effects on adjacent property as noise, heat, light, glare, vibration, height scale or proximity; 
(g)  A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines; 
(h)  An increase in ground coverage by structures; 
(i)  A reduction in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space; and 
(j)  A change in the size, height, lighting or orientation of originally approved signs. 
(6)  The decision of the Director of Community Development or his or her designee as to whether minor changes are being requested may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any change deemed not to be minor change, as indicated above, shall be processed as a new application in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section 20.1 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
8.J  Development Plan Requirements. The development plan submitted in support of a request for development plan approval shall contain sufficient information delineating the characteristics of the site, changes in those characteristics as may be proposed by the development, how the development will relate to public services and facilities and what protection features are included to insure that the development will be compatible with existing and allowable development on adjacent property. The development plan shall show at least the following items of information: 
(1)  The location of all existing and planned non-single-family structures on the subject property; 
(2)  Landscaping lighting and/or fencing and/or screening of common areas; 
(3)  General locations of existing tree clusters, providing average size and number and indication of species; 
(4)  Location and detail of perimeter fencing if applicable; 
(5)  General description/location of ingress and egress with description of special pavement treatment if proposed; 
(6)  Off-street parking and loading facilities, and calculations showing how the quantities were obtained for all non single-family purposes; 
(7)  Height of all non-single-family structures; 
(8)  Proposed uses; 
(9)  Location and description of subdivision signage and landscaping at entrance areas; 
(10)  Street names on proposed streets; 
(11)  Proposed minimum area regulations including, set-backs, lot-sizes, widths, depths, side-yards, square footage or residential structures; 
(12)  Indication of all development phasing and platting limits; and 
(13)  Such additional terms and conditions, including design standards, as the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council deem necessary. 
8.K  Conditions for Development Plan Approval. 
(1)  A development plan shall be approved only if all of the following conditions have been found during the review and process: 
(a)  That the uses will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or impair property values with the immediate vicinity; 
(b)  That the establishment of the use or uses will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvements of surrounding vacant property; 
(c)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided; 
(d)  That the design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments; 
(e)  That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration; 
(f)  That directional lighting will be provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties. 
(2)  In approving a development plan, the City Council may impose additional conditions necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community. 
8.L  Additional Conditions. Every Planned Development District approved under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered as an amendment to the Ordinance as applicable to the property involved. In an approved Planned Development District, the City Council may impose conditions relative to the standard of development, and such conditions shall be complied with before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of the land or any structure which is part of the Planned Development District; and such condition shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be constructed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. 
8.M  Revocation. 
(1)  Approval of a development plan may be revoked or modified, after notice and hearing, for either of the following reasons: 
(a)  Approval was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; or 
(b)  That one or more of the conditions imposed by the City Council on the development plan has not been met or has been violated. 
(2)  Development controls: 
(a)  The City Council may impose more restrictive requirements than those proposed in the development plan in order to minimize incompatibilities; 
(b)  A "PD" District shall have a minimum lot area of not less than one acre under unified control; 
(c)  The parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to all uses in the "PD" District unless otherwise specified on the development plan; and 
(d)  "PD" provisions may vary setbacks with approval. 
Sec. 154.09. - Sexually oriented businesses (SOB). 
9.A  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. Sexually oriented businesses are allowed in I "Industrial District" zoning classifications with a special use permit granted by the Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
9.B  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, or projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which as its business purpose offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial: 
(1)  Establishment which at any time features; 
(2)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(3)  Live performers which are characterized by the exposure or specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(4)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult encounter parlor. An establishment whose business is at any time the provision of premises where customers either congregate, associate or consort with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the presence of such customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customers. 
    Adult lounge. An adult cabaret, as defined above, which is a permitted or licensed premise, pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, where alcoholic beverages may be served or sold. 
    Adult modeling studio. An establishment whose business is at any time the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
    Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which at any time features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performers which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Applicant. The applicant for a permit shall be the operator of the sexually oriented business. 
    Arcade device. Any coin or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or effectuates the dispensing of entertainment that is intended for the viewing of five or fewer persons to exchange for any payment of any consideration. 
    Chief of Police. The Chief of Police of the City of Stephenville or his or her designated agent. 
    Church. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Conduct any business in a sexually oriented business. Any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting a business in a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the sexually oriented business premises where cash funds or records of credit cards or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the sexually oriented business or the activities conducted therein are kept; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Supervises or managers other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the sexually oriented business premises. 
    Customer. Any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a regulated sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a regulated sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and is on the premises of a regulated sexually oriented business operating as a private club. 
    Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a regulated sexually oriented business or who works in or about a regulated sexually oriented business and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the regulated sexually oriented business or from the customers therein. 
    Entertainment. Any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors or customers. The term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses or other employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers. 
    Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity of displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity. That appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast. 
    Operator. That manager or other natural person principally in charge of a regulated sexually oriented business. 
    Owner or owners. The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. The term "owner" shall not include any such person who has given to the operator a statement under oath that he or she does not desire to be listed on the permit application and that he or she waives any right to any notice that is required or permitted to be given under this ordinance. 
    Permit. A current, valid permit issued by the City Inspector pursuant to the terms of this ordinance to an operator for a sexually oriented business. 
    Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Regulated establishment. Any sexually oriented business, ad defined herein. 
    Residential. Pertains to the use of land, whether situated within the city or not, for premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for no transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. A premise which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. 
    Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or nude model studio. 
    Specified anatomical areas. 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
(b)  Buttock; 
(c)  Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(d)  Any combinations of the foregoing. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities. Any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) above. 
    Tract. A contiguous parcel or land under common ownership, whether situated within the city or not. 
9.C  Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(a)  A church; 
(b)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(c)  Residentially zoned property; 
(d)  A public park; 
(e)  A lot devoted to residential use; 
(f)  Another sexually oriented business; 
(g)  Licensed day care center. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if he or she operates or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business without a permit for said business issued by the designated agent of the City of Stephenville. 
(4)  For the purpose of division (1) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district or residential lot. 
(5)  For purposes of division (1)(f) above, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(6)  Any sexually oriented lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this ordinance, which is in violation of division (1) or (2) above shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period of not to exceed six months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) in nonconforming. 
(7)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use after the effective date of this ordinance is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the operation of the sexually oriented business, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. 
9.D  Additional Regulations for Adult Motels. 
(1)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebut table presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this section. 
(2)  For purpose of division (1) above, the terms RENT or SUB-RENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
9.E  Permit-Required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any sexually oriented business located within the city unless there is a permit for the sexually oriented business. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any sexually oriented business located within the city unless the permit is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the sexually oriented business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises. 
(3)  In any prosecution under division (1) above, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then posted as provided in division (2). 
9.F  Application for Permit. 
(1)  Application for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the designated agent of the City of Stephenville by the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications must be submitted by hand delivery to the City Hall during regular business hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, city holidays excepted). Application forms shall be supplied by the City of Stephenville. The intended operator shall be required to give the following information. 
(a)  The name, street address (and mailing address if different) and Texas driver's license number of the intended operator, and any and all aliases. Notification required within 48 hours of change of operator. Information required as stated above. The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the owner(s). Corporations shall be required to have written authorization from the president of chief executive officer. 
(b)  The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided; 
(c)  The telephone number of the sexually oriented business; 
(d)  The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located; 
(e)  The date on which the owner(s) acquired the sexually oriented business for which the permit is sought, and the date on which the sexually oriented business began operations at the location for which the permit is sought; and 
(f)  A list of all employees or contractors involved in providing the services to be provided by the sexually oriented business. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the sexually oriented business showing a plan thereof and designating any portion of the sexually oriented business in which patrons will not be permitted. Such diagram shall also designate the place at which patron the permit will be posted if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the sexually oriented business. The designated agent of the City of Stephenville shall waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the sexually oriented business has not been altered since it was prepared; 
(b)  Original application fee; (Fee to be set annually by the City Council. Payment of application fee to be made by certified check, cashiers check or money order, which fee shall not be refundable under any circumstances.) 
(c)  Renewal application fee; (Fee to be set annually by the City Council. Payment of application fee to be made by certified check, cashiers check or money order, which fee shall not be refundable under any circumstances.) 
(d)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  That applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions hereof. 
(e)  A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually oriented business. 
9.G  Issuance of Denial or Permit Application. 
(1)  Within 20 days of receipt of any application, either original or renewal, the designated agent of the City of Stephenville shall grant or deny the requested permit and have written notice to the applicant as to the decision. 
(2)  The designated agent of the City of Stephenville shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,000 feet of any school, church, licensed day care center, residentially zoned property, public park, lots devoted to residential use, or another sexually oriented business. Measurements shall be made as outlined in divisions (4) and (5) of 9.C; 
(b)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(c)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(d)  The application or the sexually oriented business does not meet any other requirement of this ordinance; 
(e)  The applicant has not fully complied with all state, federal and local laws or regulations affecting he or she conduct of its business; or 
(f)  The operator has had a permit revoked for the same sexually oriented business within the 180-day period next proceeding the date that the application was filed. 
9.H  Term of Permit. Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the anniversary of its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, or surrendered. Each permit shall be subject to renewal as of the expiration date by the filing of a renewal application with the designated agent of the City of Stephenville. Renewal applications must be filled at least 20 days prior to the expiration date of the permit that is to be renewed. 
9.I  Revocation or Suspension of Permit. The designated agent of the City of Stephenville shall have the authority to revoke a permit for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The owner of operator of the permitted sexually oriented business knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter a sexually oriented business; 
(2)  The permitted sexually oriented business does not conform to the provisions of 9.K; 
(3)  Three or more cumulative violations of any of the offenses contained in Chapter 21, Chapter 43, §§ 22.011 or 22.021 of the Texas Penal Code or of the offenses contained in this article have occurred on the premises of the permitted sexually oriented business. These violations must have occurred in a consecutive period of 12 months, and the owner or operator must have knowingly allowed such violations to occur or did not make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of such violations; 
(4)  The operator of the permitted sexually oriented business gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the original, or renewal application form; 
(5)  The sexually oriented business has been closed for business for a period of 30 consecutive days, unless such closure is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all attendant circumstances, to reopen the establishment. 
9.J  Other Permit Provisions. 
(1)  Permit is valid only at the location for which it is issued. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a permit. 
(3)  A permit may be cancelled upon written request of the owner(s) or operator and surrender of the permit itself to the designated agent of the City of Stephenville. Permits shall be surrendered at the same place and at the same time a permit applications as provided herein. The surrender of a permit shall be effective upon its filing in the office of the designated agent of the City of Stephenville. 
9.K  Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible form any point outside such sexually oriented business. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portions of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner. 
9.L  Enforcement. 
(1)  Except as provided by division (4) below, any person violating division (4)(c), upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Except as provided by division (4) below, any person any provision of this ordinance other than division (4)(c) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then a violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. 
(4)  It is a defense to prosecution under division (4)(c) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(a)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(c)  In a structure: 
(1)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
(2)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
Sec. 154.10. - Additional use, height and area regulations. 
10.A  Use Regulations. On all existing right-of-way of railroad companies, regardless of the zoning district in which such rights-of-way are located, railroad track age and accessories to railroad movement may be constructed or maintained. 
10.B  Area and Density Regulations. 
(1)  In a district in which commercial buildings are built with one or more stories for residential purposes above commercial uses, no side yards will be required for the residential portions of the building. 
(2)  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purposes of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be used as a yard or an open space for another building. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed by buildings except for accessory buildings in the rear yard and except in the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental features which may project into such yards a distance of not more than two feet. 
(3)  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or landing places not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into the yard for a distance not exceeding six feet. 
(4)  Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into a required side yard, provided these projections be a distant of at least two feet from the adjacent side of the lot line. 
(5)  Front yard: 
(a)  Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed (with a variation of five feet or less), a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall be erected closer to the street than the front yard so established by the existing buildings. 
(b)  Where 40% or more frontage on one side street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not observed a front yard as described above, then: 
(1)  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest corners of the adjacent buildings on the two sides; 
(2)  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building; and 
(3)  In determining such front yard depth, buildings located entirely on the rear one-half of a lot shall be counted. 
(c)  On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign or other structure, or any plant growth shall be permitted or maintained higher than two feet above the curb level within 15 feet of the intersection of the property lines. 
(6)  Side yards: 
(a)  The minimum width of a side yard of a corner lot in all Residential Districts shall be not less than ten feet. If the street side line of a corner lot is in the same block frontage with a lot or lots, whose street line is a front yard of the lot or lots, the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of the buildings along the same side of the street, unless the buildings are more than 25 feet back from the street line, in which case the side yard need not be more than 25 feet. 
(b)  A side yard of not less than 25 feet on the side of the lot adjoining on any Residential District shall be provided for all schools, libraries, churches, community houses, clubs and other public or semi-public buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(c)  A garage, detached or attached to the main use building entering on the side street of a corner lot shall maintain a side yard of 25 feet in front of the garage. 
(7)  Rear yard: In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into a alley, one-half of the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required yard. 
10.C  Garbage Collection and Refuse Receptacles. R-3, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5 and I District businesses will provide a serviceable area specifically for refuse collection designed for refuse canisters. Each designated canister area will be nine feet wide and eight feet deep (72 square feet), with a cement slab base. If the location of the cement slab is adjacent to a residential district, the slab must be at least five feet from the property line. The refuse area will be enclosed on three sides by a privacy fence. 
10.D  Wind Energy Conversion Systems. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or install a wind energy conversion system within the city limits of Stephenville, Texas. A wind energy conversion system is defined as aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc. in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy, wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine. 
10.E  Exterior Building Materials Standard. 
(1)  Primary materials: 
(a)  Natural stone; 
(b)  Brick; 
(c)  Stucco; 
(d)  Exterior wood siding (stained or painted); 
(e)  Concrete masonry units (architectural finish); 
(f)  Concrete fiber siding (painted);and 
(g)  Shiplap metal siding. 
(2)  Alternative materials: 
(a)  Galvanized metal; 
(b)  Aluminum; 
(c)  Metal coating; 
(d)  Zinc-aluminum; 
(e)  Metal coating; 
(f)  Glass block; and 
(g)  Ceramic tile. (Am. Ord. 2009-18, passed 11-3-2009; Ord. 2011-26, passed 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 154.11. - Parking spaces for vehicles. 
11.A  General Intent and Application. 
(1)  These parking regulations set minimum standards for off street parking for all districts. Each land use activity creates specific needs for safe and adequate parking areas. The basis of the regulations reflects these parking demands. The parking regulations apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  No parking is allowed on any yard area. Parking spaces and driveways will be paved with a sealed surface (concrete/asphalt) pavement and maintained so that no dust will be produced. 
(a)  Residential parking. All residential dwelling units, regardless of district, will provide two vehicle parking spaces. Each space, enclosed, or unenclosed, will be not less than ten feet by 18 feet sufficient in size to store one automobile. Each parking space will connect by a driveway to a street or alley. 
(1)  Single and two family dwelling units (DT, RE, R-HA, R-1, R-1.5, R-2, R-3 and B-3) will provide a double width driveway for each dwelling unit as the connecter to the street or alley. 
(2)  Two-four family and multiple family dwellings in the DT, R-3 and B-3 Districts will maintain two parking spaces on the lot for each dwelling unit in the building. Each space will be connected by a driveway with a street or alley. 
(b)  Joint parking facilities. Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be met by providing a permanent common parking facility cooperatively established and operated, which contains the required number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided cannot be less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
(c)  Other. If the use of any building or premises is not specifically mentioned herein, the parking space provisions for a similar use listed in this section shall apply. If no similar use is listed the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the parking space requirements for said use subject to approval by the City Council. 
(d)  Downtown District (DT). All commercial uses permitted in the Downtown (DT) District are not subject to Section 11: Parking Regulations on-site parking. If new construction provides on-site parking it shall be located behind buildings, out of view from the street. This area will be paved with asphalt, concrete or brick. 
(e)  Spaces provided. For each permissible use hereinafter stated or implied in all other districts, unless served (or ever having been served) by parking meters, parking spaces will be provided on the property or on a site within 300 feet from the principal use property according to the following use classifications: 
Use Number of Parking Spaces Required for Each RESIDENTIAL Single-family 2 Dwelling unit Two-four family 2 Dwelling unit Multi-family (five or more) 2 Dwelling unit Hotels, motels, rooming houses, boarding houses 1 Sleeping room INSTITUTIONAL Child care facility 3+1 Four supervised children Day care centers (private kindergarten) 1 150 sq. ft. of floor area Churches 1 Four seats in auditorium Assisted living centers 1 1-1/2 beds, plus one for each staff member at maximum level School Elementary and middle 1 650 sq. ft. of floor area High schools 1 150 sq. ft. of floor area College or university 1 150 sq. ft. of floor area Resident housing 1 Student the dorm is capable of housing Gymnasiums, athletic fields and stadiums 1 Four seats Funeral homes 1 Four seats in the chapel Hospitals 1 Two patient beds, excluding bassinets Medical, dental or veterinary clinics (inside facility) 10 Doctor Convalescent, rest, nursing or extended care facility 1 Four patient beds Fraternal lodge or service organization 1 100 sq. ft. of floor area used for assembly or recreation COMMERCIAL RECREATION Theaters, baseball parks, stadiums, athletic fields 1 Four seats Commercial amusement; indoor 1 125 sq. ft. of floor area Commercial amusement; outdoor 1 Four seats, plus one space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor or ground area used for amusement or assembly, but not containing seats Country club 1 125 sq. ft. of floor area Dancing studio 1 125 sq. ft. of floor area Golf course 4 Hole on the course GENERAL SERVICE AND PERSONAL SERVICE (NO RETAIL) Cabinetry and upholstery 1 100 sq. ft. of floor area used by the public, plus one space for each 300 sq. ft. of additional floor area Drapery, needlework or weaving shop Dry cleaning and pressing Furniture and appliance repair and storage Printing Newspaper printing Plumbing shop Studio for radio and television Studio for photographer, musician or artist Barber shop and beauty shop 2 Beauty or barber chair Self-service laundry 1 Three washing machines FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES AND SERVICE Bakery and confectionery 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area Grocery store Restaurant Restaurant; drive-in Private club; on-premises consumption 1 50 sq. ft. of floor area GENERAL RETAIL Antique shop 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area, exclusive of designated storage areas Auto parts sales (within building) Discount or department store Drug store Feed store Furniture or appliance store Florist or garden shop Handcraft shop Machinery sales and storage News stand Plumbing supply shop Paint shop Pawn shop Pet shop; small animals within building Retail and service uses Stationery shop Trailer rental Tool and equipment rental shop Retail/warehouse 1 1,000 sq. ft., including outdoor area AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICE Auto painting and body repair 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area, exclusive of designated storage areas, and service are shall have one space per service bay New or used car lot Public garage Service station Seat cover or muffler installation shop Trailer or mobile home display and sales 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area, exclusive of designated storage areas, and service are shall have one space per service bay Truck terminal BUSINESS SERVICE Bank 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area Office or professional building  

(Am. Ord. 2009-18, passed 11-3-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 154.12. - Sign regulations.[6] 
ARTICLE I. ADMINISTRATION 
12-1  Purpose. This chapter regulates the location, size, construction, erection, duration, use and maintenance of all signs within the jurisdiction of the City of Stephenville, Texas. The purpose of this chapter is: 
1.  To promote the creation of an attractive visual environment that promotes a healthy economy by: 
a.  Permitting businesses to inform, identify and communicate effectively; and 
b.  Directing the general public through the use of signs while maintaining attractive and harmonious application of signs on the buildings and sites. 
2.  To foster public safety along public and private streets within the community by assuring that all signs are in safe and appropriate locations and cause minimum driver distractions. 
12-2  New signs. All new signs and face changes on existing signs will follow the regulations of this chapter and shall be required to obtain appropriate permits per section 12-10. 
12-3  Nonconforming signs. All nonconforming permanent signs, legally existing on January 1, 2018, may continue to exist and shall be allowed the changing of advertising copy or message on theater marquee signs and similar signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, change of face panel, or where the sign frame was designed for replaceable plates. In addition, all non-conforming signs shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming sign. 
2.  Shall not be structurally altered so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign; except where alterations are necessary to abate a threat to public safety. This does not include a structural modification whereby an upgrade to a sign's existing electronic changeable message technology is made pursuant to section 12-3. 
3.  Shall not be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction cost. 
4.  Any structural change, alteration, modification, or change in the name, design, letters, message or other matter on the nonconforming sign, other than a face (copy) change, shall require the sign to be brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise exempt by section 12-10. This does not include a structural modification whereby an upgrade to a sign's existing electronic changeable message technology is made according to the following: 
a.  Overall sign area and height do not increase; 
b.  Changeable message sign area does not increase; 
c.  Total number of changeable message signs do [not] exceed one per premise; and 
d.  Changeable message sign operates in conformance with section 12-70. 
12-4  Noncommercial messages. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, any sign authorized in this chapter is allowed to contain a noncommercial message in place of any other authorized message. 
12-5-12-9  Reserved. 
12-10  Sign permits. 
(a)  No sign, unless excepted by this chapter, shall be located, constructed, altered attached, or painted until a building permit has been approved by the building official in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  All signs shall be built in accordance with the drawings attached with the permit application and as approved by the building official. 
(c)  Sign permit applications shall contain or be submitted with the following: 
(1)  A completed application form; 
(2)  The appropriate fees; 
(3)  A dimensioned site plan showing: 
a.  The location of the proposed sign in relation to all other structures on the property and the property line itself; 
b.  All adjacent properties and location of signs within 200 feet of the proposed sign; 
c.  An elevation of the sign showing industry specifications and construction details if necessary. 
(d)  Window signs, restricted or incidental parking signs, "A"-frame signs, residential yard signs, and movable signs do not require a permit but are required to follow all other provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(e)  The following signs are exempt from the provisions and regulations of this chapter: 
(1)  Public signs. Signs specifically required by any law, statute or ordinance. Such public signs may be of any type, number, area, height, location or illumination as required by the law, statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Signs on vehicles. 
a.  Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles or trailers where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer as transportation. 
b.  Signs attached or affixed to vehicles being displayed on vehicle sales or rental lots are deemed to be exempt from these regulations, if the purpose of the attached or affixed sign is to advertise the sale or rental of the vehicle upon which it is attached or affixed. 
c.  Temporary construction trailers and vehicles located on construction sites that bear the contractor advertising are exempt from these regulations. 
d.  Signs on vehicles passing through town for the purpose of advertising at a destination outside city limits are deemed to be exempt from these regulations. 
(3)  Vehicle signs. Attached, affixed or painted on vehicles when primary use of the vehicle is for the daily transportation of products or the delivery of services in connection with the business. 
(4)  Warning signs. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger but containing no advertising material; to be removed within three days upon the subsidence of danger. Such warning signs may be of any type, number, area, height, location, or illumination as deemed necessary to warn the public of the existence of danger. 
(5)  Governmental signs. Signs of duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, and other instructional or regulatory signs having to do with health, hazards, parking, swimming, dumping, etc. 
(6)  Address numerals. Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by and placed in accordance with law or governmental order, rule or regulation. 
(7)  Athletic signs. Signs used as scoreboards in athletic stadiums. 
(8)  Directional signs. Signs which direct vehicles and pedestrian traffic, which may display arrows, words, or other symbols to indicate direction of facilities. 
(9)  Directory signs. Signs that are located in or adjacent to entrances or foyers. 
(10)  Instructional signs. Signs, providing no advertising of any kind, which provide direction or instruction to guide persons to facilities intended to serve the public, including, but not specifically limited to, the signs identifying restrooms, public telephones, public walkways, parking areas and other similar facilities. 
(11)  Decorations. Seasonal, holiday or festival decorations in residential districts. 
(12)  Flags. Flags of any state, nation, political subdivision or entity, any non-profit group, corporation or entity, or any flag displaying any other noncommercial message. 
(f)  The building official shall review a permit application and make a decision on whether to grant or deny the permit within 14 days of submittal of a fully completed application. If additional information is required of an applicant in order to complete an application, the applicant shall be notified of that fact within 7 days. Thereafter, the building official shall make a decision on whether to grant or deny the permit within 14 days of receiving the additional information or a written certification from the applicant that the application is complete. 
(g)  If the work authorized by a permit issued under this chapter has not been commenced within 180 days after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(h)  Any decision rendered by the building official under this chapter may be appealed to the board of adjustment by any person, agent, or representative affected by such decision. The decision of the board of adjustment shall be final. 
12-11  Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following signs are prohibited from installation, construction, repair, alteration or relocation within the city and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) except as otherwise permitted in this chapter: 
(1)  Permanent off-premises signs (billboards), inflatable signs, bandit signs and portable signs shall be prohibited in the city or ETJ unless permitted through a special exception. 
(2)  Any search lights, bullhorns, spinners (rotating signs), streamers, string lights or strip lighting (except those allowed as holiday and festival decorations as temporary signs in this chapter), pennant, hot air balloon or similar device that is intended to move freely in the wind. Examples of such signs are shown below in Figure A. 
Figure A: Examples of prohibited rotating, spinning and streamer signs 

(3)  Moving/whirling and flashing signs except for reader boards, which convey a message. Any light source that produces a revolving beam or beacons that resemble emergency vehicle lights shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Parked vehicles as temporary signs: except as allowed by section 12-86, signs mounted, bolted, or constructed on a vehicle, truck beds or trailers, where the sole apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. 
(5)  Signs extending into Stephenville Clark Regional Airport Runway Protection Zone or which have external illumination that is directed upward and toward aircraft. 
(6)  Signs that resemble traffic control signs or emergency information signs. 
(7)  Signs attached to utility poles or other surfaces which are not the properties of the utility or which serve a public purpose and are located within a public right-of-way or easement. 
(8)  Any sign, which is not included under the types of signs, permitted in this chapter. 
(9)  Any signs, advertisement, poster, placard or handbill upon any lamp post, electric light, railway, telephone or telegraph pole, fire hydrant, shade tree, stone cliff or other natural object, or boxing covering public utilities, or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(10)  Any sign, advertisement, poster, or other matter on privately or publicly owned property without having obtained the written permission of the owner, agents, or occupants of the premises, and without having complied with other provisions of this chapter that apply. 
(11)  Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public safety or health. 
(12)  Any sign that obstructs free ingress or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required exit way. 
(13)  Any sign that interferes with any opening required for ventilation, or that obstructs openings intended as a means of entrance or exit, or signs that obstruct light or air from any room or building, or block (physically/visually) any public governmental or warning signs. 
(14)  Any sign, which makes use of words such as stop, look, one way, danger, yield or any other similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse the vehicular traffic. 
(15)  Any structure or part thereof, or any device or representation attached to, painted on, or represented on a building, fence, pole or other structure, which is used as or in the nature of an announcement, direction, advertisement, or other attention-getting purposes, and which is not originally designed or intended to be a sign. 
(16)  Home occupation signs that advertise for a business operated in the home. 
(17)  Signs placed on property without permission of owner or agent. 
(18)  Any sign displayed, installed or erected without the approval of the governing body that owns or controls publicly owned property, street rights-of-way, roadway medians, public parks, fire stations, police stations, libraries, city hall facilities and other buildings and lands owned by a government authority. 
(19)  Roof signs as defined in section 12-20 of this chapter. 
12-12  Variances. 
(a)  Variance authorized. The Board of Adjustment (BOA) may authorize a variance to any restriction set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the number, type, area, height or setback of signs, or any other aspect involved in the sign permitting process. 
(b)  Approval standards. In granting any variance, BOA shall consider the following criteria and shall grant the variance only if: 
(1)  Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and are not applicable to other lands, buildings or structures in the same vicinity. The city may attach such conditions to granting all or a portion of any variance necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter; and 
(2)  The strict interpretation of the provisions of the chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity under the terms of the chapter; and 
(3)  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant and such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute pecuniary hardship or inconveniences; and 
(4)  Granting the variance will meet the objectives of the chapter and not be injurious to the adjoining property owners or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; and 
(5)  The request will be the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the special hardship or practical difficulties faced by the applicant in meeting the requirements of this chapter; and 
(6)  Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(7)  In granting special exceptions under this section, the Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent property owners and to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to conditions specifying the period during which the nonconforming use may continue to operate or exist before being conformed to the standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
12-13-12-19  Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. SIGN STANDARDS
DIVISION 1. DEFINITIONS 
12-20  Definition of sign types. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Architectural element sign means a freestanding sign that is attached to an architectural element (a structure such as a pergola, freestanding canopy, fence, or retaining wall) that is built for the purpose of serving as an architectural enhancement of the site, is architecturally compatible to the main building and the overall site but not including sign structures for other sign types and/or structures for antennas or similar type structures. 
    Awning sign means a wall sign attached to an awning structure (a structure made of metal or other material with frames affixed to a building and carried by a frame, but which does not have supports to the ground other than the main building). If the sign projects over the surface of the awning then it is considered a roof sign. 
    Bandit signs means signs that are placed on public rights-of-way, public property, public infrastructure, or equipment by a nongovernmental agency for any purpose. 
    Banner sign means a sign made of flexible materials (paper, plastic, or fabric), with or without a frame, and supported along one or more sides, or at two or more corners, by one or more fixed, rigid supports such as poles or rods. Banner does not include a flag or a pennant. 
    Bow banner means a freestanding, lightweight, and usually vertically-oriented banner with minimal framing that curves outward at the top to match the curved shape of the fabric, also known as a fin, shark, feather banner or teardrop sign, which by design allows some movement to attract attention whether by pivoting or by movement of the material while still allowing for readability. 
    Canopy sign means a wall sign attached to a canopy structure (a structure made of metal or other material with frames affixed to a building and carried by a frame, which has supports to the ground other than the main building). If the sign projects over the surface of the canopy then it is considered a roof sign. 
    Changeable message sign means a sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means including time and temperature. 
    Channel letter sign means a wall sign or a freestanding sign that is made of only text, symbols, or logos and the sign may or may not be illuminated. 
    Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, or development on the same premises as the sign. 
    Electronic billboard means a sign that can change its copy or sign face by changing or altering a fixed display screen composed of electrically illuminated elements; that also directs attention to a business, product, service, conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Exempt sign means a sign that is not required to follow the regulations included in this Code. 
    Flag sign means a freestanding sign, which displays a commercial message on a flag. 
    Flashing sign means a sign that creates the perception or actual change in color, brightness, intensity or reflectivity or an illuminated sign on which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color when the sign is illuminated. For the purpose of this Code, any moving sign displaying alternating illumination being turned on and off which induces a strobe or pulsing effect shall be deemed to be a flashing sign. 
    Freestanding sign means any non-movable sign not attached to a building and that is not a temporary sign. 
    Homebuilder sign means a sign that advertises the name of the builder of single-family residential homes who owns one or more lots in a particular subdivision. 
    Human sign means a person dressed in costume, holding a sign, or having a sign affixed to the person where the sign or costume has a commercial message. 
    Inflatable sign, including lighter-than-air or gas-filled inflatable objects that may be connected with a tether. The term includes balloons but does not include inflatable gyms or games. 
    Kiosk sign means a freestanding sign structure located in or adjacent to public right-of-way that features a city identification panel at the top of each structure and displays directional information according to the requirements of section 12-53. 
    Light pole sign means a temporary sign that attaches to the specified dimensions of a light pole designed for the purpose or has been approved for the modified purpose of displaying a vertically oriented banner sign of no less than 24 inches and no more than 30 inches in height and is attached to the light pole. 
    Marquee sign means a wall sign that is attached to a marquee structure and comprised of non-permanent letters, numerals, or symbols which may be changed electronically or manually by adding, removing, or rearranging the letters, numerals, or symbols. 
    Message Board means a sign, display or device, including a digital electronic sign and LED (light emitting diode) sign that changes its message or copy by programmable electron or mechanical processes, regardless of size. Also, a sign utilizing a fixed light source to provide a message in text, images, pictures, and/or symbols that may appear to move or may appear as an on/off message. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features supported by masonry base (no poles or columns) on the ground. 
    Movable sign means any temporary sign, made of vinyl, paper, cloth or fabric, polyboard, coroplast or corrugated plastic, poster board, plastic core, cardboard, lightweight plastic, plywood or similar material including signs with wood or wire framing, posts or stakes, supported by the ground but not permanently attached to the ground, which can be regularly moved from a location at periodic intervals. The term includes "A"-frame or sandwich board signs and bow banner or swooper flags. The term does not include residential yard signs. A movable sign is not considered to be a portable sign. Examples of movable signs are shown in figure B below. 
Figure B: Examples of movable signs attached to the ground 

    Moving/whirling sign means a sign which has any actual or apparent moving, revolving, flashing or rotating parts activated by electric, electronic, kinetic or mechanical devices, or by wind current, and shall include, but not be limited to, balloons, signs which are constructed of or faced with reflective tape or other similar materials, signs which change color, and signs where the intensity of lighting changes or appears to change, this definition does not include the display of time and/or temperature on a sign face. Certain signs and devices of this type are prohibited as described in subsection 12-11 of this Code. 
    Mural sign means a wall sign that is a part of a graphic displayed on the exterior of a building, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, including but not limited to a painting, fresco, or mosaic. 
    Pennant means any cloth, paper, plastic, or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to any structure, staff pole, line, framing, tether, or vehicle. 
    Permanent sign means a sign that is fixed in the nature that is erected, affixed, or maintained on the premises and is not a temporary sign as defined in this chapter. 
    Pole sign means a freestanding sign that is affixed, attached, or erected on a column, pole, upright or brace placed in or upon the ground and is not part of a building. This term does not include light poles. 
    Political sign means a sign pertaining to any national, state, county, or local election involving a candidate for a public office, taxation or bond proposal, legal or legislative amendment, an issue being considered for public referendum, or for a similar purpose or cause. 
    Portable sign means a temporary sign supported by the ground but not permanently attached to the ground, which is mounted on a trailer or wheels, or is part of a trailer, and by its design can be towed from one location to another by the use of attached wheels or by attaching an axle to existing mounts. 
    Poster sign means a wall sign that is static, not electronic and is mounted flat against and projecting less than 12 inches from, or painted directly on an exterior wall of, a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall to which it is attached. 
    Projection sign means a wall sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part between 12 inches and four feet beyond the exterior surface of the building. 
    Pylon sign means a permanent freestanding sign which has at least 25 percent of the sign structure width in contact with the ground and in which the sign face is separated from ground level by means of one or more supports such as poles, pole covers or columns. Poles and supports shall be concealed. 
Figure C: Example of pylon signs 

    Residential yard sign means a sign for the purpose of advertising the sale or rent of real estate, and also including signs advertising yard sales, estate sales, garage sales, or children's lemonade or similar stands, and only when the sign is on the same premises as the location of the residential use. 
    Restricted or incidental parking sign means a temporary or permanent sign in a parking lot, or curbside parking area, which designates restricted parking of any type, including, but not limited to, customer parking only, employees of the month, time-limited parking, emergency parking, and similar restricted designations. (See figure D below for examples.) 
Figure D: Example of signs used to restrict parking 

    Roof sign means a wall sign erected in whole or in part on a roof, or against, or directly above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, fascia of the building or above the surface of an awning or canopy. 
    Seasonal, holiday and festive decoration. "Holiday" or "festive" shall mean a calendar date or dates associated with a specific event or season, including, but not limited to, New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Valentine's Day, Easter, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Halloween, Thanksgiving, and Christmas; "decorations" shall mean ornaments, figures, statues, signs, inflatable characters, seasonal lighting, and related products that are placed on a building or in a yard for a temporary period of time in observance of a holiday or festival. 
    Sign means any name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, logo, balloon, streamer, valance, advertising display, poster, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, project, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. A sign includes any or all of the following, the advertisement, copy, face, structure or any [appurtenances] in erecting or attaching the sign. Except for signs included in the definition of "human signs," the term does not include words or images depicted on clothing or pickets, posters, signs or other items that are carried or held by one or more persons that are not attached, placed into, or rested on the ground. 
    Sign base means the footing, foundation, or similar support to support the sign but not including poles. 
    Sign cabinet means a wall or freestanding sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet, which may or may not be illuminated. 
    Sign structure means the structure or other means whereby the sign face or copy is attached in one or more points. Attachments include, but are not limited to, poles, brackets, concrete footings, framework, uprights, catwalks, etc. 
    Temporary sign means a non-permanent sign made of non-rigid material, designed and displayed for a seasonal or brief activity such as, but not limited to, sales, specials, promotions, holidays, auctions, business grand openings, and signs advertising the lease or vacancy of rental units in residential developments. 
    Vehicle sign means a sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a truck, bus, car, boat, trailer or other vehicle or equipment and used in such a manner that the sign is visible from a public street or right-of-way. Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction or repair projects, and the on-premises storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the general public for rent or lease, shall not be considered to be vehicle signs. The term does not include bumper stickers, window stickers, or license plate frames. 
    Wall sign means a sign mounted flat against and projecting less than 12 inches from, or painted directly on an exterior wall of a building or a structure that is attached to the building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall to which it is attached. 
    Wayfinding sign means a directional sign that is part of a sign system for the purpose of directing traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, to the public's desired location. 
    Wind sign means a cloth or plastic or other flexible light material made in strips, triangles or other shapes, figures, or objects which are fastened together or to ground by wire, rope, cord, string or other means in such manner as to move by wind pressure. 
    Window sign means a sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on the exterior or interior of a window or door, of a building, which is intended for viewing from the exterior of such building. 
12-21  Definitions of ancillary terms and performance standards. 
    Accessory building. An accessory building as that term is defined in section 3 of this Code. 
    Area of sign. The area of the smallest rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other fixtures, material, or color forming part of the sign. Structural supports bearing no sign copy shall not be included in gross surface area; however, if any portion of the required structural supports becomes enclosed for decorative or architectural purposes, that portion will be included in the total gross surface area of the sign. Gross surface area shall be measured on one side only of a two-faced (back-to-back) sign carrying the same image and message on both faces. Two-faced signs carrying different messages and images on each side shall be considered as separate signs. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy as approved by the Building Official 
    Commercial message. Any message contained on any sign that advertises, promotes, solicits, or endorses a product or service of an establishment, organization, corporation, company, or individual for the purpose of encouraging a consumer to purchase said product or service. This term does not include messages that contain a specific public or civic announcement that do not advertise, endorse, display, or encourage any purchase of a service or product offered by any establishment, corporation, company, or individual. 
    Election day. Any day or days that are scheduled for city residents to vote in an election at a selected polling place in the city. Such day or days may include, but not be limited to, uniform local, state and federal election dates, early voting day(s), absentee voting days, general election days, special election days, run-off election days, and other voting days established and defined by federal, state or local laws. 
Figure E: Illustration depicting various wall planes composing each building elevation 

    Elevation. An architectural drawing that shows the style, shape, and complexity of a building or structure. It is the view of a building elevation, and its various wall planes, when viewing the entire building straight on-where a horizontal line passing through your shoulders would be parallel to the face of the building. Figure E above shows the various wall planes that compose a building elevation for each side of a building. 
    Entertainment venue. A public entertainment facility property, as defined as the building(s) and land that is primarily designed and used for live entertainment events other than sports. 
    Facade. The exterior cladding of a building or structure. 
    Face change. The change of the copy or when in order to change copy the sign face must be changed too. Face change shall include converting a traditional billboard to an electronic billboard (including the structure changes needed to allow for the face change). 
    Face of sign. The entire area of sign that the copy should be attached but is not the copy, itself. 
    Footcandle. A measure of illumination on a surface that is one foot from a uniform source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
    Height of sign. The vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the average grade immediately below the sign, including its base or the top of the nearest curb of the street on which the sign fronts, whichever measurement is the greatest (see section 12-100, measurement standards, for how to measure height). 
    Length of frontage. The length of any primary or secondary frontage shall be the sum of all wall lengths parallel, or nearly parallel, to such frontage, excluding any such wall length clearly unrelated to the frontage criteria. For buildings with two or more frontages, the length and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each such frontage. The building frontage for a building unit shall be measured from the centerline of the party walls defining the building unit. 
    Marquee. A structure that is attached to, in any manner, or made a part of any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather projecting above an exterior door and over a sidewalk, terrace, or similar waiting area, including, but not limited to, a theater or restaurant. 
    Motion. The perceived or actual occurrence of movement generally created by a change in shape, size, color, luminosity, reflectivity, or animation, not static or fixed. 
    Nits. A measure of lumination or luminance that is used to compare the brightness of a digital or LED sign. One nits is equal to one candela per meter squared. 
    Noncommercial message. Any message or speech that does not meet the definition of "commercial message" as defined in this section. 
    Nonconforming sign. A sign that was a legally permitted sign when installed but does not conform to the existing ordinance due to the amendments made after the permit was issued. 
    Off-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, activity, commodity, service, or entertainment other than one conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
    Payload capacity. The manufacturer's payload capacity rating for the vehicle, or can be determined by the gross vehicle weight rating. The curb weight, typically the payload capacity or weights can be found inside the driver side door jamb of the vehicle. 
    Premises. A tract of land including its existing buildings. 
    Premises sign. A sign which is located upon the premises where the business, profession, activity, commodity, service or entertainment referred to by the sign is located. 
    Primary and secondary frontage. The frontage of any building or site shall include the elevation(s) facing a public street, facing a primary parking area for the building or tenants, or containing the public entrance(s) to the building or building units. For multi-tenant buildings, the portion of such building that is owned or leased by a single tenant shall be considered a building unit: 
(1)  The primary frontage shall be considered the portion of any frontage containing the primary public entrance(s) to the building or building units. 
(2)  The secondary frontage shall include frontages containing secondary public entrances to the building or building units, and all walls facing a public street or primary parking area not designated as the primary frontage. (See figure F below.) 
    Prohibited sign. A sign that is not allowed in the city. 
    Roofline. The horizontal line where the wall ends and the roof begins. 
    Shopping center. A retail site that has at least one 75,000-square feet or more single retail user or for a retail site that is minimum five-acres with at least 100,000 square feet of rentable retail space. 
    Shopping center sign plan. A plan showing all signage for a shopping center as defined in this section and approved per the regulations of this chapter. 
    Sports venue. A public entertainment facility property, as defined as the building(s) and land that is primarily designed and used for live sporting events. 
    Street grade. The average elevation of the projected corners of a property, adjacent to a dedicated street right-of-way or roadway easement, the elevation of the corners being measured at the top of curb, or centerline of street if no curb is present. 
    Visibility triangle. Also referred to as a "corner clip," it is an area located at the intersection of a public street with another public street, a driveway, an access easement or an alley, which must remain unobstructed by permanent or temporary objects at heights between two and seven feet above ground level or top of curb, whichever is more critical. See Code of Ordinances, City of Stephenville, for size and dimensional requirements specified for visibility triangles.) 
F: Illustrating typical locations for primary and secondary building frontages 

Figure G: Illustration of various types of permitted signs and their typical locations 

12-22-12-29  Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. WALL SIGNS 
12-30  Generally. 
(a)  All wall signs on a building elevation shall not exceed 30 percent of the area of that elevation. 
(b)  Wall signs shall be allowed on all building elevations. 
(c)  Wall signs shall not be allowed on accessory buildings. 
(d)  Each elevation shall be allowed to cover a maximum of 30 percent of the area of the elevation with any combination of wall signs. 
12-31  Awning sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to the elevation of the awning. If signs project above the structure of the awning they will be considered roof signs. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the awning elevation. 
(c)  Number of signs. Shall not exceed the total area of all awning signs on each awning elevation does not exceed 30 percent of the area of that awning elevation. 
12-32  Canopy sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to the elevation of the canopy. If signs project above the structure of the canopy they will be considered roof signs. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the canopy elevation. 
(c)  Number of signs. Unlimited as long as the total area of all canopy signs on each canopy elevation does not exceed 30 percent of the area of that canopy elevation. 
12-33  Channel letter sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to the elevation of the building. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the building elevation to which it is attached. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per elevation per certificate of occupancy. 
12-34  Marquee sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to a marquee on theatres, sports venues and other entertainment venues. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 60 percent of the area of the marquee to which it is attached. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per building elevation. 
12-35  Mural sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be painted directly on the surface of the building. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 100 percent of the area of the building elevation on which it is painted. Words and/or symbols may only be ten percent of the size of the entire mural. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per building structure. 
12-36  Poster sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached directly to the surface of the building. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the building elevation to which it is attached. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per elevation per certificate of occupancy. 
12-37  Projection sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Sign shall be attached to the building and extending in whole or part between 12 inches and four feet beyond the exterior surface of the building but not protruding into the ROW or another property. 
(b)  Area. The surface area of the sign where text and graphics are displayed shall not exceed a maximum of 30 percent of the area of the building elevation to which it is attached. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per building elevation. 
12-38  Sign cabinet. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached directly to the surface of the building. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the building elevation to which it is attached. 
(c)  Number of signs. One per elevation per certificate of occupancy. 
12-39  Window sign. 
(a)  Location. Signs must be premises signs. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 30 percent of the area of the window. 
12-40-12-49.  Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. FREESTANDING SIGNS 
12-50  Generally. 
(a)  All freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum ten feet from the property line. 
(b)  Combination of freestanding sign types allowed on a premises at any given time is as follows: 
(1)  A premises may either have a pole sign, or a pylon sign or a monument sign if permitted by this chapter; 
(2)  A premises may combine architectural element sign or a vehicle sign with any other freestanding signs; 
(3)  A premises may combine flag signs only with monument signs. 
12-51  Architectural element sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to the surface of the architectural element. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 200 square feet. 
(c)  Height. May not extend beyond the surface of the architectural element to which it is attached. 
(d)  Number of signs. One per elevation of the architectural element. 
12-52  Flag sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs may only display logos, symbols, tag lines and name of business. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 200 square feet. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Maximum 35 feet 
(d)  Number of signs. One per premises. 
12-53  Kiosk signs. 
(a)  The city council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant the exclusive right to design, erect and maintain kiosk signs within the city limits of the city. 
(b)  Kiosk signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance to the specifications contained in the aforementioned license agreement and in this section. 
(c)  Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the director of community development for approval. The sign location map shall contain the location, orientation, and number of individual location signs available for each kiosk sign. 
(d)  Kiosk sign installation shall include break-away design features as required for traffic signs in the street right-of-way. 
(e)  Advertisement of price information shall be prohibited on kiosk signs. 
(f)  No additional or extraneous signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or other appurtenances shall be attached to kiosk signs. 
(g)  Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated. 
(h)  Individual sign panels on kiosks shall have a uniform design and color. 
(i)  Kiosk signs shall not: 
(1)  Interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails; 
(2)  Obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians or traffic control signs; and 
(3)  Be installed in the immediate vicinity of street intersections. 
(j)  Signs shall comply with the visibility triangle requirements contained in the subdivision regulations or other visibility easements provided by code or subdivision plat. 
(k)  Kiosk sign plazas may be located on private premises along the 377, 281, and Hwy 8 corridors, or other state-maintained roadways, provided written permission is obtained from the premises owner. 
(l)  Kiosk signs are intended to create a uniform coordinated method of providing direction for prospective patrons of local businesses, prospective purchasers of houses, and parties interested in school or municipal events and facilities within the city limits while discouraging the placement of other unsightly and hazardous off-site directional signs. 
(m)  In accordance to the specifications contained in the aforementioned license agreement a percentage of the kiosk sign panels shall be reserved for the city to use as directional signage to municipal or community facilities, or locations for community events. 
(n)  The licensee shall be responsible for all construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the kiosk signs at no cost to the city. 
(o)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any sign authorized under this section to contain commercial copy may contain noncommercial copy in lieu of commercial copy. 
(p)  The licensee shall administer the kiosk signs and shall fill the individual location sign spaces in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The spaces shall be filled according to the date the requesting location submits an application or request is received by the licensee on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(2)  The number of kiosk signs and spaces on each sign shall be set by the sign location map approved by the director of community development. The licensee may request the placement of additional kiosk signs only if the number of unserved requests will fill an additional sign. 
(3)  The licensee shall have no discretion to award or not award a space on a kiosk sign based on the type of organization or business that requests placement on a kiosk sign. 
(4)  The locations listed on a kiosk sign must be within the city limits of the city and the property line of the location must be no less than 1,000 feet from the kiosk sign. 
12-54  Monument sign. 
(a)  Location. Signs must be on-premises signs. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Maximum 300 square feet for single tenant sign constructed along 377, 281, and Hwy 8. 
(2)  Maximum 400 square feet for multi-tenant sign constructed along 377, 281, and Hwy 8. 
(3)  Maximum 100 square feet for single tenant sign constructed along all other roadways. 
(4)  Maximum 150 square feet for multi-tenant sign constructed along all other roadways. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Sign base shall be between two feet and four feet. 
(2)  Maximum 14 feet for multi-tenant sign constructed along 377, 281, and Hwy 8. Sign height is measured from bottom of the sign base at grade to the top of the sign. Where the average grade of the lot on which a sign is placed is at or above the adjacent street grade, the sign shall be measured from the grade level adjacent to the sign. Where the average grade of the lot is below the adjacent street grade, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(3)  Maximum ten feet for single tenant sign constructed along 377, 281, and Hwy 8. Sign height is measured from bottom of the sign base at grade to the top of the sign. Where the average grade of the lot on which a sign is placed is at or above the adjacent street grade, the sign shall be measured from the grade level adjacent to the sign. Where the average grade of the lot is below the adjacent street grade, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(4)  Maximum 12 feet for multi-tenant sign constructed along all other roadways. Where the average grade of the lot on which a sign is placed is at or above the adjacent street grade, the sign shall be measured from the grade level adjacent to the sign. Where the average grade of the lot is below the adjacent street grade, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(5)  Maximum nine feet for single tenant sign constructed along all other roadways. Where the average grade of the lot on which a sign is placed is at or above the adjacent street grade, the sign shall be measured from the grade level adjacent to the sign. Where the average grade of the lot is below the adjacent street grade, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(d)  Number of signs. One per street frontage, two maximum. 
(e)  A landscaping bed shall not be required around the base of the monument sign; however landscaping and xeriscaping shall be considered and is encouraged to help beautify the property and the community. Any landscaping shall be maintained include mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, etc. 
(f)  Monument signs must be wrapped in masonry material to match or compliment building, exposed sign cabinets or poles are prohibited. The masonry material wrapping the advertising area shall not exceed 100 percent nor fall below 30 percent of the commercial advertising area. 
12-55  Permanent off-premises signs (billboard). 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  The construction of new permanent off-premises signs shall be prohibited in any zoning district or the extraterritorial jurisdiction without a special exception. The existing, nonconforming permanent off-premises signs in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that are adjacent to interstate highways and federal-aid primary highways, as those terms are defined in the Highway Beautification Act, are subject to the regulations in this section. All Texas Department of Transportation regulations for permanent off-premises signs shall apply in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Electronic billboards. 
a.  Converting an existing sign to digital sign shall be considered a face change and will be allowed, but will not change the nonconforming status of the sign. 
b.  Message changes on digital signs shall be allowed at two-second transition with an eight-second hold time. 
(3)  No sign shall extend into any area identified as an airport air hazard zone as defined by Stephenville Clark Regional Airport Runway Protection Zone 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Each panel or sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in total area. 
(2)  No more than two panels or sign faces will be allowed for each sign. 
(3)  No off-premises sign shall exceed 60 feet in length, inclusive of border and trim. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Maximum 30 feet. 
(2)  Signs must maintain a fifteen-foot clearance from ground to sign. 
(d)  Illumination. 
(1)  Signs shall be shielded upward to prevent beams or rays from being directed at any portion of a traveled roadway or an occupied residential area and shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision. 
(2)  Each display must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness as ambient light conditions change. 
(3)  Digital billboards shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.3 footcandles above ambient light, as measured using a footcandle meter at a pre-set distance. 
a.  Pre-set distances to measure the footcandle's impact vary with the expected viewing distances of each size sign. 
b. Measurement distance criteria: Distance to be measured from: 12' × 25' 150' 10'6" × 36' 200' 14' × 48' 250' 20' × 60' 350'  
12-56  Pole sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall not be allowed in residentially zoned districts. 
(3)  Signs shall maintain a 100-foot separation from an adjacent pole sign on each premises and minimum of 50 feet on adjacent premises on the same side of the street. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Maximum 150 square feet. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Maximum 35 
(2)  Signs must maintain a eight-foot clearance from ground to sign. 
(d)  Number of signs. One per premises. 
12-57  Pylon sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Maximum 150 square feet for multi-tenant. 
(2)  Premises adjacent 377, 281, and Hwy 8-Maximum 300 square feet. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Maximum 35 feet. 
(2)  Signs must maintain a fifteen-foot clearance from ground to bottom of sign cabinet. 
(3)  Where the average grade of the lot on which a sign is placed is at or above the adjacent street grade, the sign shall be measured from the grade level adjacent to the sign. Where the average grade of the lot is below the adjacent street grade, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent street grade. 
(d)  Number of signs. One per premises. 
(e)  A landscaping bed shall not be required around the base of the monument sign; however landscaping and xeriscaping shall be considered and is encouraged to help beautify the property and the community. Any landscaping shall be maintained include mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, etc. 
(f)  A minimum of 25 percent of the sign structure width must be in contact with the ground. Poles and supports shall be concealed. Pylon signs shall be of similar color, material and design so as to be consistent with the architectural design of the primary structure. 
12-58  Directional sign. 
(a)  Location. Must be premises signs. 
(b)  Area. Maximum ten square feet. 
(c)  Height. Maximum four feet. 
(d)  Number of signs. One per driveway entrance. 
12-59-12-69  Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. OTHER SIGNS 
12-70  Changeable message signs. 
(a)  These may be manual or electronic. 
(b)  Changeable message signs: 
(1)  Shall be allowed on all permitted signs. 
(2)  May be a part of a wall sign or a freestanding sign. 
a.  Shall not comprise an area greater than 50 percent of the allowed area of the monument or pylon sign. 
b.  If constructed as part of a monument or pylon sign, the changeable message sign cabinet must be wrapped in material to match or compliment building. 
(3)  Shall not be allowed on temporary signs. 
(c)  Number of signs. Only one sign per premises shall be allowed as a changeable message sign. 
(d)  Illumination of changeable message signs shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision. 
(e)  All electronic changeable message signs shall have an auto dimmer photo eye installed in the sign. 
(1)  Maximum daytime (7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) brightness shall be 5.000 nits; and 
(2)  Maximum nighttime (6:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m.) brightness shall be 500/660 nits. 
(f)  Message changes shall be allowed at two-second transition with an eight-second hold time. 
Figure I: Example of permitted and prohibited changeable message signs constructed on freestanding signs 

12-71  Signs in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  All signs in public right-of-way shall have a right-of-way agreement or a license agreement between the sign owner and the city council. 
(b)  The application for a right-of-way agreement or license agreement shall include the types, locations, size, area, height, number, materials, design and construction of all proposed signs. 
(c)  This data shall be a part of the agreement and will be attached to the agreement. 
(d)  The process for right-of way agreement or license agreement shall be as follows: 
(1)  The application will be submitted to the Planning and Building department, will be reviewed, and shall be placed on a planning and zoning commission agenda. 
(2)  The city manager will then place the item on a city council agenda. 
(3)  The director of community development department shall put a notice in the newspaper 15 days before the day of the meeting for both the planning and zoning commission meeting and city council meetings (this notice may be sent at one time). The planning and zoning commission shall review the sign details and design and make a recommendation to the city council. 
(e)  The sign placement agreement shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The sign will be placed in right-of-way adjacent to and in the frontage of the business location or other establishment referenced in the sign. 
(2)  There would be an unnecessary hardship if the business location or establishment were not allowed to place the sign in the right-of-way due to lack of visibility from the right-of-way due to the placement of other existing structures. 
12-72  Shopping center sign plan. 
(a)  A shopping center sign plan application shall be a written and/or illustrated document to depict all temporary and permanent proposed signs on site which shall include: 
(1)  Proposed sign palette, which may include any combination of wall, freestanding, and changeable message sign types that are allowed in this chapter; 
(2)  Location of all proposed signs included in the sign palette; 
(3)  Size and number of all proposed signs including maximum area, letter height, number, and height; 
(4)  Materials proposed for all signs and sign structures; 
(5)  Color and style palette for all signs (letter colors, background colors, text fonts, etc.) including context of where signs are to be placed on any given facade; 
(6)  Type of illumination proposed, and whether external or internal; 
(7)  Landscaping or ornamental structures including fences, fountains, public art, ground cover, and other landscaping elements that are intended to complement the proposed sign palette and design; and 
(8)  Any other information as required by the decision-making bodies. 
(b)  Design guidelines. 
(1)  The sign design guidelines are designed to help ensure quality signs that communicate their message in a clear fashion; however, the "guidelines" are not as strict as sign "standards." The Building Official may interpret the design guidelines with some flexibility in their application to specific signs/projects, as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each sign or project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the review authority to be more important in the particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed. 
a.  Compatibility with surroundings. 
1.  Proportional size and scale. The scale of signs should be based on the building facade on which they are placed and the area in which they are located. The size and shape of a sign should be proportional with the scale of the structure. Large storefronts such as big boxes will be allowed to have proportionally larger signs than smaller storefronts. Signs should not overwhelm the section of the building facade on which it is placed upon. 
2.  Integrate signs with the building. Signs should be designed so that they are integrated with the design of the building. A well designed building facade or storefront is created by the careful coordination of sign and architectural design, and a coordinated color scheme. Signs in multiple-tenant buildings should be designed to complement or enhance the other signs in the building. Sign placement and design should be reviewed within the context of building design. 
3.  Corporate franchise signage. Corporate franchise signage should conform to the community's visual desires while maintaining some elements of corporate identity. Corporate logos should fit the context, color, scale and building elements. 
b.  Location and mounting. 
1.  Signs should be mounted in locations that respect the design of a building and site, including the arrangement of bays and openings. Signs should not obscure windows, (including second-story windows), window trim/molding, grillwork, piers, pilasters, and other ornamental features. 
2.  Attached signs on fascias above storefront windows should be sized to fit within existing friezes, lintels, spandrels, and other such features and not extend above, below, or beyond them. Typically, attached signs should be centered on horizontal surfaces (e.g., over a storefront opening). 
3.  When a large building contains several storefronts, signs for the individual businesses should relate well to each other in terms of locations, height, proportion, color, and illumination. Maintaining continuity will reinforce the building's facade composition while still retaining each business's identity. 
c.  Color. 
1.  Avoid using too many colors. Colors or color combinations that interfere with legibility of the sign copy or that interfere with viewer identification of other signs should be avoided. 
2.  Use contrasting colors. Contrast is an important influence on the legibility of signs. A substantial contrast should be provided between the color and material of the background and the letters or symbols to make the sign easier to read in both day and night. Light letters on a dark background or dark letters on a light background are most legible. Light letters on a dark background work best for both day and night time use. 
d.  Materials. 
1.  Compatibility of materials. Sign materials should be compatible with the design of the facade on which they are placed. Consider the architectural design of the building's facade and select materials that complement the design. The selected materials should also contribute to the legibility of the sign. For example, glossy finishes are often difficult to read because of glare and reflections. 
2.  Appropriate materials. Sign materials should be extremely durable. Paper and cloth signs are not suitable for exterior use (except on awnings) because they deteriorate quickly. If wood is used, it should be properly sealed to keep moisture from soaking into the wood and causing the sign's lettering to deteriorate. 
e.  Sign legibility. 
1.  Concise name identification. A concise name or limited lines of copy should be used whenever possible given the limited amount of time the vehicle traveling public has to identify and read the sign. The fewer number of words, the more effective the sign. A simple and succinct sign is easier to read and looks more attractive because it is less cluttered. 
2.  Use symbols and logos. Symbols and logos can be used in place of words whenever appropriate. Pictographic images will usually register more quickly in the viewer's mind than a written message. And they can be an expression of the owner's creativity. 
3.  Limit the number of letter styles. The number of lettering styles that are used on a sign should be limited in order to increase legibility. As a general rule, limit the number of different letter types to no more than two for small signs and three for larger signs. Intricate typefaces and symbols that are difficult to read reduce the sign's ability to communicate. 
f.  Sign illumination. 
1.  Internal illumination. Individually illuminated letters, either internally illuminated or backlit solid letters (reverse channel) are a preferred alternative to internally illuminated plastic cabinet signs. Signs comprised of individual letters mounted directly on a structure can often use a distinctive element of the structure's facade as a backdrop, thereby providing a better integration of the sign with the structure. 
2.  Use a projected light source. Signs along roadways with slower moving traffic or in pedestrian-oriented environment should consider illumination by a projected light source (e.g., spotlight). Projection lighting is usually a better alternative because the sign will appear to be integrated with the building's architecture. Light fixtures supported in front of the sign cast light on the sign and generally a portion of the building's face as well. Projected lighting emphasizes the continuity of the structure's surface and signs become an integral part of the facade. The use of small, unobtrusive fixtures for external (projection) lighting is encouraged. Avoid the use of oversized fixtures that are out of scale with the sign and structure. Whenever projection lighting is used (fluorescent or incandescent), care should be taken to properly shield the light source to prevent glare from spilling over into residential areas and any public right-of-way. Signs should be lighted only to the minimum level required for nighttime readability. 
3.  Cabinet signs. The use of internally illuminated cabinet signs is discouraged. When such signs are proposed, the background field is required to be opaque so that only the lettering appears illuminated (e.g., routed or push-through lettering/graphics). When the background is not opaque, the entire sign face becomes bright and the sign becomes visually separated from the building. As a result, this type of sign can disrupt the continuity of the facade. 
4.  Electrical raceways and conduits. Electrical transformer boxes and raceways are required to be concealed from public view. If a raceway cannot be mounted internally behind the finished exterior wall, the exposed metal surfaces of the raceway should be finished to match the background wall, or integrated into the overall design of the sign. If raceways are necessary, they should be as thin and narrow as possible and should never extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign's lettering or graphics. All exposed conduit and junction boxes should also be concealed from public view. 
5.  Neon signs. Neon/L.E.D. or similar types of lighting are discouraged. 
12-73  Restricted or incidental parking signs. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Can be affixed to a pole at the curb. 
(2)  Can be vertically mounted or suspend from a pole or affixed to a building. 
(3)  Must be located on private property only. 
(b)  Area. Maximum two square feet. 
(c)  Height. If vertically mounted or suspended cannot be more than 60 inches above the ground floor or paving surface. 
(d)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  Signs that restrict the use of a parking space that is wholly or substantially located within public right-of-way are prohibited even if the sign is located on private property. This subsection does not apply to signs required by other law outside this chapter. 
(2)  Notwithstanding section 12-3, non-conforming signs, the building official may require removal of signs that violate this subsection. To require immediate removal the building official must render a decision and give notice as provided by subsection 12-10. The owner or tenant must remove the sign or appeal the decision of the building official as provided by subsection 12-10. 
12-74-12-80  Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. TEMPORARY SIGNS 
12-81  Banner sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs may be premises or non-premises signs. 
(2)  Signs shall be attached to a main building or on light poles. 
(3)  Signs may be allowed in the public right-of-way for large community events. 
(4)  Banners shall not be allowed on accessory structures/buildings or fences. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Maximum 80 square feet; except: 
(2)  Maximum 35 square feet each when located on light poles, letters, symbols, logos, etc., shall be allowed to cover only 15 percent of the total area of each light pole banner. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  On light poles: 
a.  Minimum ten feet from the ground; and 
b.  Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Number. 
(1)  Two vertical banners per light pole. 
(e)  Time limitations. 
(1)  Grand openings. 
a.  Once for each separate certificate of occupancy; 
b.  Within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy; 
c.  Maximum for 15 consecutive days. 
(2)  Special events. Banner signs are allowed with a special event permit for 14 days prior to the event and two days after the event is over. 
(3)  There is no time limitation for banners on light poles. 
12-82  Construction sign. 
(a)  Location. Signs must be premises signs. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Maximum 50 square feet in residential districts. 
(2)  Maximum 100 square feet in nonresidential districts. 
(c)  Height. Fifteen feet as measured from the sign base. 
(d)  Number of signs. One sign for each abutting street. 
(e)  Time limitation. Maximum 60 days prior to construction up to 14 days after completion (issuance of certificate of occupancy). 
12-83  Movable sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Except for "A"-frame or sandwich board signs, must be ten feet from curb or edge of paving and 15 feet from access drive. 
(3)  Fifty feet from any other movable signs. 
(4)  Movable signs are prohibited in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Generally: Maximum eight square feet. 
(2)  Bow banners or swooper flags: 15 square feet. 
(3)  "A"-frame or sandwich board signs: 25 square feet. 
(c)  Height. 
(1)  Generally: Maximum four feet from ground. 
(2)  Bow banners or swooper flags: Maximum ten feet from the ground. 
(3)  "A"-frame or sandwich board signs: Maximum five feet from the ground. 
(d)  Number of signs. Each business may display one movable sign per street frontage, regardless of the size of the premises. 
(e)  Time limitation. "A"-frame or sandwich board signs shall only be allowed during business hours. 
(f)  Illumination. Movable signs shall not be illuminated. 
12-84  Pennants. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Pennants are only allowed for grand openings and for holidays and festivals. 
(b)  Time limitation. 
(1)  Grand openings. 
a.  Once for each separate certificate of occupancy (CO). 
b.  Within 30 days of the issuance of the CO. 
c.  Maximum for 15 consecutive days. 
(2)  Holiday and festivals. Forty days prior to the holiday event and up to two days after the holiday event for each premises. 
12-85  Residential yard sign. 
(a)  Location. Except for noncommercial signs, signs must be premises signs; except for garage sale signs. 
(b)  Area. Maximum ten square feet; except for garage sale signs. 
(c)  Height. Maximum four feet. 
(d)  Number of signs. One sign per premises. 
(e)  Time limitation. For the duration of the activity but removed 30 days following completion; except for garage sale signs 24 hours following completion. 
12-86  Vehicle sign. 
(a)  Permits. A permit for a vehicle sign shall be issued for both a sign and its location. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Vehicle signs shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a location permitted in the previous three-month period. 
(2)  Vehicles upon which signs are displayed shall have current license and inspection according to the licensing and inspection regulation of the state. 
(3)  Vehicles upon which signs are displayed are maintained in operable condition. 
(4)  Vehicles (moving or parked) may have a sign, if the sign is: 
a.  Securely mounted on a two-ton payload capacity truck and the sign faces are soft face and secured to the vehicle using a keder welt bead and mounting track. 
b.  Not a changeable message sign. 
(c)  Area. Minimum 20 feet to maximum 22 feet in length. 
(d)  Height. Minimum eight feet to maximum ten feet in height. 
(e)  Number of signs. Two signs citywide at any given time on a first come first serve basis. 
(f)  Time limitation. 
(1)  Maximum 15 days with an ability to file for an extension of an additional 15 days; and 
(2)  Maximum of 30 days every three months would be allowed for each individual sign. 
(g)  Purpose. The primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is for the display of such signage if the vehicle/equipment is any one of the following: 
(1)  Not properly parked in a designated parking space, unable to fit in a parking space, except that a passenger vehicle with a curb vehicle weight of less than 6,500 pounds may be parked on private property on a hard, paved surface outside of a designated parking space, provided it does not interfere with the circulation of traffic into, out of, or within said property and displays one or more signs that are magnetic, decals, or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle as originally designed by the manufacturer and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle; or 
(2)  Used primarily as a static display for the display of such signage. 
12-87  Wind sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Signs must be premises signs. 
(2)  Wind signs are only allowed for grand openings and for holidays and festivals. 
(b)  Time limitation. 
(1)  Grand openings. 
a.  Once for each separate certificate of occupancy (CO). 
b.  Within 30 days of the issuance of the CO. 
c.  Maximum for 15 consecutive days. 
(2)  Holiday and festivals. Forty days prior to the holiday event and up to two days after the holiday event for each premises. 
12-88  Residential subdivision development sign. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Sign may be non-premises or premises within 250 feet of the subdivision entrance and within the subdivision boundaries. 
(2)  Sign shall be located: 
a.  On property of the subdivision where the lots of the homebuilder are located or on property of an earlier phase of the subdivision where the lots of the homebuilder are located; or 
b.  Within 250 feet of the entrance to the subdivision. 
(3)  No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Area. Maximum 32 square feet. 
(c)  Height. Maximum 12 feet. 
(d)  Number of signs. One sign per homebuilder per subdivision entrance. 
(e)  Time limitation. After 100 percent of the homebuilder's sites are completed, and then they have 48 hours to remove the sign. 
12-89  Political signs. 
(a)  Political signs not exceeding 36 square feet may be erected on private real property only with the permission of the property owner. Private real property does not include real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows a municipality to use the property for a public purpose. 
(b)  Political signs shall be removed within ten days after completion of the election in question. 
(c)  In the case of a run-off election, signs advertising those candidates who are in the run-off election may be continued to be displayed during the interim period, but must be removed within ten days after the run-off election. 
(d)  A political sign shall not require a sign permit and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The total signage area for political signs shall not exceed 36 square feet in area, shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  Political signs shall not be located in the city rights-of-way or in roadway medians, nor be placed on city-owned property such as city parks, fire stations, police stations, libraries, city hall and other city-owned buildings. However, such signs may be placed on public property designated as an official polling place on a designated election day, with such signs being located outside the specified distance from the polling place entrance as permitted by state election laws. 
(3)  Political signs may not be placed in the state rights-of-way situated within the city. 
(4)  Political signs shall not be installed in any manner that may result in a potential safety hazard of any type. 
(5)  Political signs shall not be placed in visibility triangles as defined in the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(6)  Political signs shall be kept in repair and proper state of preservation. 
(7)  Political signs may be erected no earlier than 90 days before the date of the election for which the sign is designated. 
(8)  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, if a political sign is authorized to be placed or erected under this section, a temporary sign with any other noncommercial message is allowed to be erected in its place provided it otherwise complies with the provisions of this section. 
12-90  Human signs. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Each sign shall be located on private property where a sale, event, promotion, or a similar limited-duration event is taking place. 
(2)  Human signs shall not be permitted in residential districts. 
(3)  Human signs are prohibited within any public right-of-way. 
(4)  A person acting as a human sign is not permitted to hold or carry wind devices, flags or balloons. Podiums, risers, stilts, vehicles, roofs, or other structures or devices shall not support a human sign. 
(b)  Area. Eight square feet. 
(c)  Height. May not extend 12 feet above ground. 
(d)  Number of signs. 
(1)  No more than one human sign per business location. 
(2)  A human sign counts as a type of moveable sign for purposes of the number limitation set forth in subsection 12-83. 
(e)  Time limitation. Human signs shall only be allowed during business hours. 
12-91-12-99  Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
12-100  Measurement standards. 
(a)  Sign area measurement. 
(1)  For a wall sign, which is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area and dimensions, shall include the entire portion within such background or frame. 
(2)  For a wall sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, the area and dimensions of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric shape (rectangle, circle, trapezoid, triangle, etc.), or a combination of regular geometric shapes, which form, or approximate, the perimeter of all elements in the display, the frame, and any applied background that is not part of the architecture of the building. When separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but are separated by open space, the sign area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining the geometric form, or combination of forms, which comprises all of the display areas, including the space between different elements. (See figure J below for walls signs, and figure K for freestanding signs.) 
Figure J: Example of geometric area applied to sign area calculations 

Figure K: Example of calculation for freestanding sign area 

(3)  For a vehicle sign the area and height of the sign does not include the vehicle, itself. 
(4)  For a freestanding sign, the sign area shall include the frame, if any, but shall not include: 
a.  A pole or other structural support unless such pole or structural support is internally illuminated or otherwise so designed to constitute a display device, or a part of a display device. 
b.  Architectural features that are either part of the building or part of a freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the sign, and which may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms complementing the site in general. 
(5)  When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of one of the two faces. When the sign has more than two display surfaces, the area of the sign shall be the area of largest display surfaces that are visible from any single direction. The area of a sign with more than two faces would be calculated as the area of the largest rectangular plane of the panels that are visible from any single location. (See figure L below.) 
Figure L: Example of a sign area with multiple faces 

(6)  In the event of a dispute in determining the area or dimensions of any sign, the decision of the building official may be appealed by the applicant through the submittal of a formal application to the director of community development department in accordance with the variance process described in this chapter. 
(7)  Determining sign height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base of the sign or supportive structure at its point of attachment to the ground, to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding sign on a manmade base, including a graded earth mound, shall be measured from the grade of the nearest pavement or top of any pavement curb. 
(8)  Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments. 
Figure M: Indicated method for measuring sign height from street level 

12-101  Construction standards. 
(a)  Design required. Before a sign permit shall be granted, the applicant shall submit to the building official a design or plan containing information as to the type, size, shape, location, construction, lighting/illumination, and materials of the proposed sign. 
(b)  The design and erection of all signs shall be constructed as specified in sections 1609 (wind), 1604 (working stress), and 2204 and 2304-2306, respectively, of the latest adopted edition of the International Building Code: 
(1)  Signs shall be structurally sound and located so as to pose no reasonable threat to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  All permanent freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on, or permanently attached to, concrete foundations. 
(3)  If possible, signs should not be in locations that obscure architectural features such as pilasters, arches, windows, cornices, etc. 
(4)  The signs should not be in locations that interfere with safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation or public safety signals and signs. 
(5)  No signs shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening used as a means of egress. 
(6)  Signs shall be structurally designed in compliance with ANSI and ASCI standards. All elective signs shall be constructed according to the technical standards of a certified testing laboratory. 
12-102  Lighting standards. Signs may be illuminated-by external or internal means-and in addition to the requirements and regulations of the ordinance codified herein, provided that: 
(1)  The brightness and intensity shall not be greater than necessary to meet reasonable needs of the business or use served; 
(2)  Light sources shall be shielded from all adjacent buildings and streets; and 
(3)  The lighting shall not create excessive glare to pedestrians and/or motorists, and will not obstruct traffic control or any other public informational signs. 
12-103  Enforcement and maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
(b)  The property owner shall maintain the sign; in a condition appropriate to the intended use; to all city standards; and has a continuing obligation to comply with all building code requirements. 
(c)  If the sign is deemed by the code enforcement officer to be in an unsafe condition, the owner of the business shall be immediately notified in writing, and shall, within 48 hours of receipt of such notification, respond to the city with a plan to correct the unsafe condition, remove the unsafe sign, or cause it to be removed. If after 30 days the unsafe condition has not been corrected through repair or removal, the code enforcement officer may cause the repair or removal of such sign at the expense of the property owner or lessee. If the total costs are not paid in full within 30 days of the repairs or removal, the amount owned shall be certified as an assessment against the property of the sign owner, and lien upon that property, for collection as prescribed for unpaid real estate taxes. 
(d)  In cases of emergency, the code enforcement officer may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. 
(e)  Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these regulations, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair, re-lettering or repainting, the same may be done without a permit or without any payment of fees provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  There is no alteration or remodeling to the structure or the mounting of the sign itself; 
(2)  There is no enlargement or increase in any of the dimensions of the sign or its structure; 
(3)  The sign is accessory to a legally permitted, conditional or nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 2018-O-05 , 1-2-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-O-12 , 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-26 , passed 8-7-2018) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-O-05 , passed January 2, 2018, repealed § 12 and enacted a new § 12 as set out herein. Former § 12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2011-05, passed April 5, 2011. 

Sec. 154.13. - Landscape requirements. 
13.A  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish regulations pertaining to landscaping within the city for all multi-family dwellings and nonresidential uses located in residential districts and all uses located in the business and industrial zoning districts. These regulations provide standards and criteria for new landscaping and the retention of existing trees, which are intended to: 
(1)  Preserve the value of property, enhance the welfare, and improve the physical appearance of the city; 
(2)  Reduce the negative effects of glare, noise, erosion and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious and un-vegetated surfaces within the urban environment; 
(3)  Preserve and improve the natural and urban environment by recognizing that the use of landscaping elements and retention of existing trees can contribute to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, abatement of noise, glare and heat, and enhance the overall beauty of the city. 
13.B  Landscape Plan Requirements-Landscape Plan Required. 
(1)  The landscape plan may be prepared by the applicant, or applicant's designee. The landscape plan is not required to be prepared by a registered or certified professional. 
(2)  The landscape plan shall be submitted as a part of the site plan. A landscape plan meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be provided and approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  The landscape plan shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Drawn to scale; 
(b)  North arrow; 
(c)  Date of plan submittal; 
(d)  Location, size and species of all trees to be preserved. The method of preservation during the construction phase of development shall be according to Section 13.F, Tree Protection; 
(e)  Location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including paving, benches, screens, fountains, statutes, topography, ponds/lakes, or other landscape features; 
(f)  Size and type of all plant material to be used; 
(g)  Spacing of plant material where appropriate; 
(h)  Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler or water system; including placement of water sources; 
(i)  Description of maintenance provisions of the landscape plan; 
(j)  Persons responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. 
13.C  Landscape Installation Required. 
(1)  Fifteen percent of the total land area in any proposed development or construction that occurs for any use after the effective date of this ordinance shall be landscaped. This 15% requirement shall apply to each phase as it is developed. 
(2)  The minimum plantings for every 1,000 square feet of required landscape, shall be one three-inch caliper or larger canopy tree and either two ornamental trees or six shrubs. 
(3)  Where the construction is to be a single phase of a multi-phase development, only the area being constructed in the current phase need be subject to the landscape regulations. However, each phase will be required to meet the landscaping requirements as they may hereafter be amended when that phase is developed. 
(4)  The use of drought tolerant plants is encouraged to meet requirements of this section. 
(5)  Artificial plants or turf are expressly prohibited. 
(6)  Alternative species of trees may be used upon approval by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee. 
(7)  An irrigation system must be provided. 
13.D  Location Criteria. 
(1)  No less than 30% of the total landscaping area and planting materials shall be located in the designated front yard. Parcels that are adjacent to more than one roadway may count the street yards of all adjacent roadways towards satisfying the front yard requirement. 
(2)  In the I "Industrial" zoning district, only the front-yard 30% of the total 15% of required landscaping shall be required. The rear and side yard landscape requirements may be waived upon submittal of a landscape plan showing compliance with all other requirements. 
(3)  There shall be a 15-foot landscaping buffer located along the right-of-way of U.S. Hwy. 377, Hwy. 67, Hwy. 281, Hwy. FM 8, and Hwy. FM 988. All landscaping that occurs within this 15-foot foot buffer shall be included within the landscape calculation toward meeting the landscape requirements contained in this Section 13, Landscape Requirements. 
(4)  The required landscaping around monument signs shall count towards total landscaping requirements and towards front yard landscaping requirement. 
(5)  All landscape material shall comply with visibility requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance regulations. 
13.E  Tree Survey. A tree survey shall be provided for any new construction prior to permit issuance. A tree survey will also be required for any remodeling or construction that proposes to enlarge the footprint of the structure and/or requires a building permit: 
(1)  This requirement is limited to sites which are located in any non-residential district or for any non-residential use located in a residential district. 
(2)  The tree survey shall be provided prior to any construction, including any earthwork on any site. 
(3)  The survey shall be submitted with the building permit application, or may be submitted prior to the building permit application if the applicant so desires. As soon as the Director of Community Development approves the tree survey, earthwork may be initiated at the discretion of the Director of Community Development; however, no work may be initiated on structural elements of the building without an approved building permit. 
(4)  The tree survey shall show the exact location of the tree, size of the tree measured by diameter, and the common name of all trees of a six-inch caliper or height of seven feet. 
13.F  Tree Protection. The following procedures shall be followed on all construction projects to protect existing trees, to be preserved, in order to satisfy the requirements of this section: 
(1)  All preserved trees shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl tape wrapped around the main trunk at a height of four feet or more so that the tape is visible to workers operating construction equipment. 
(2)  A protective fencing shall be required for trees to be preserved if the trees are located so close to the construction that construction equipment will infringe upon the root systems. The fence will be placed between the trees and the construction activity in a manner to ensure that the tree roots, up to the drip line, will be protected from construction equipment. 
13.G  Additional Requirements Adjacent to Residential. The following standards shall apply to all multifamily and nonresidential developments. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site of six inches caliper or more, measured 12 inches above grade, or by planting new trees from the approved tree list contained in this section. Minimum requirements for development located within the multifamily, business and industrial districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  A landscape buffer of 20 feet will be required along any property line abutting a RE, R-HA, R-1, R-1.5, R-2, R-3, and B-3 residential district. 
(2)  Not less than 15% of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space, including required yards and buffer areas. Open space shall not include areas covered by structures, parking areas, driveways, and internal streets. 
(3)  Landscaping consisting of the planting of new or retention of existing shrubs, trees, and flowering plants shall be placed in the yard facing any public roadways. 
(4)  The method of irrigation must be indicated on site plan. 
13.H  Landscaping Within the City Rights-of-Way. Landscaping requirements pertaining to the city rights-of-way shall apply only to non-residentially zoned property and non-residential development located in residential districts. 
(1)  At the option of the owner-developer, and issuance of a permit by the city, the owner-developer may landscape the city rights-of-way easements, including parkways and medians, on public streets adjoining the subject property in accordance with this section and with the following limitations. 
(2)  Trees located in the public right-of-way shall be located on an average of 25 feet on center, and shall be a minimum of three inches in diameter at the time of planting. Trees planted in street rights-of-way must be maintained such that the lowest branches are no lower than nine feet above the ground in order to allow adequate visibility. 
(3)  The trees located in the right-of-way shall not be arranged in a manner to interfere with traffic flow or traffic view. 
(4)  Trees shall not be permitted in rights-of-way containing city water and sanitary sewer mains. 
(5)  No trees or vertical plants shall be permitted within five feet of any fire hydrant. 
(6)  The owner recognizes that the city or any franchised utility will not be responsible for damage to any landscaping while performing repairs or maintenance to its system. 
(7)  An irrigation system must be provided. 
(8)  If the owner-developer elects hereunder to provide landscaping within the right-of-way, this landscaping will count toward the total landscaping required. For each one square foot, exclusive of driveways, sidewalks and paved areas, there shall be allowed a four square foot credit against the overall landscaping requirement of 15% of the total land area in the development up to a maximum and not to exceed 5%. 
13.I  Parking Area Requirements. Landscaping requirements pertaining to parking areas shall apply only to non-residentially zoned property, non-residential development located in residential districts, and multifamily development. 
(1)  Landscape planting shall not be erected or installed in such a manner to interfere with traffic view or impose safety hazards. 
(2)  Interior parking lot landscaped areas must be provided in each parking lot at a minimum average density of one shade tree a minimum of three inches in caliper for each 12 parking spaces. Additionally, interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
(a)  One landscaped parking island (9' x 18') shall be provided for each 12 parking spaces located in the parking lots. 
(b)  Parking lot landscaping shall be met for all customer and employee parking. Parking lot landscaping requirements do not apply to storage or standing parking spaces incidental to uses such as sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, trailers or other similar uses. 
(3)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee where the shape and size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(4)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs, tire stops/parking blocks or similar barriers sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
(5)  The requirements listed in this section shall not apply to single family and two to four family residential development. 
13.J  Credits Towards Landscaping Requirements. 
(1)  Grass is an appropriate landscape material. However, a variety of plant material is recommended. Additional Enhancement Credit may be obtained by providing the optional landscaping elements listed in the Landscape Area Credit table. 
(2)  In no instance shall the total amount of landscaping on a lot be reduced through credits by more than 50% of the landscaped area required by this section. 
(3)  Xeriscaped area and methodology shall be clearly located and detailed on the site plan. 
(4)  A flower bed is any area where the soil has been specifically prepared for the planting of flowering plants. In order to be considered for credit calculations, at least 80% of the prepared area must be covered with flowering plant material at the time of peak growth. 
(5)  Caliper of trees are to be measured at a point 12 inches above top of ground. 
(6)  In order to receive credit for protecting and keeping existing trees, the area within the dripline of the tree must be protected by fencing during grading and construction. 
Landscape Area Credit Landscape Element Amount of Area Credit (Square Feet) For each existing 6-inch tree protected and kept 800 For each 6-inch tree 400 For each 3-inch tree 200 For each 5-gallon shrub 25 For each 1-gallon shrub 10 For each square foot of Xeriscape area 5 For each square foot of flowering beds 2.5 For each square foot of landscaped R.O.W. 0.5  
13.K  Non-Conforming Landscape. All landscaping, in existence at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, which does not meet the landscape requirements of this section, will be considered a nonconformity. Nonconforming landscaping will be subject to nonconforming uses and structures, unless otherwise provided in the section. 
13.L  Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping-General. 
(1)  All required landscaped area shall be permanently landscaped with living plant material and be served with an automatic irrigation system. Water conservation measures are highly encouraged. 
(2)  Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such material or plants not a part of the landscaping. 
(3)  All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Maintenance shall include mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, and the like. 
(4)  Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size within 90 days, with a one time extension not exceeding 90 days being provided upon approval of the Director of Community Development or his or her designee. 
13.M  Certificate of Occupancy. 
(1)  All landscaping shall be completed and installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. A one time temporary certificate of occupancy, not to exceed 90 days, may be granted based upon documentation of a hardship. 
(2)  If a temporary certificate of occupancy is granted and the landscaping requirements have not been satisfied within the 90-day period from when the temporary certificate of occupancy is issued, the property owner shall be considered in violation of this Ordinance. 
13.N  Approved Tree List. Trees preserved or planted to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance must be according to the following approved tree list: 
APPROVED TREE LIST Common Name Scientific Name Ash, Texas Fraxinus texensis Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia Cedar, Eastern Red Juniperus virginiana Cypress, Bald Taxodium distichum Elm, Lace Bark Ulmus parvifolia Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora Maple, Bigtooth Acer gradidentatum Maple, Caddo Acer saccharum Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpa Oak, Chinquapin Quercus muhlenbergil Oak, Escarpment Live Quercus fusi formis Oak, Lacey Quercus glaucoides Oak, Live Quercus virginiana (Escarpment) Oak, Post Quercus stellata Oak, Red Quercus shumardi Oak, Texas Red Quercus texana Osage Orange Maclura pomifers (thornless and fruitless) Pecan (native) Carya illinoinensis Pistache, Chinese Pistacia chinenis Soapberry, Western Sapindus drummondii Walnut, Black Juglans nigra * Dwarf Varieties shall not be counted as an ornamental tree but as a shrub.  
APPROVED ORNAMENTAL TREES Common Name Scientific Name Buckeye, Mexican Ungnadia speciosa Buckeye, Texas Aesculus glabra var. arguta Buckthorn, Carolina Rhamnums caroliniana Chaste Tree Vitex agnus-castus Crabapple, Prairie Pyrus ioensis Crape Myrtle Largerstroemia indica Eves Necklace Sophora affinis Goldenball Leadtree Leucaena rietusa Hawthorne Crataegus phaenopyrum Hawthorne Cratoegus crus-galli Holly, Possumhaw Ilex decidua Indigo, False Hawthorne Mountain Laurel, Texas Sophora secundiflora Persimmon, Texas Diospyros texana Plum, Mexican Prunus mexicana Redbud Cercis canadensis Smoketree Cotinus obovatus Smoketree Cotinus caggyria Sumac, Praire Flame-leaf Rhus lanceolata Viburnum, Rusty Blackhow Viburum rufidulum Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera Willow, Desert Chilopsis linearis Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria * Dwarf Varieties shall not be counted as an ornamental tree but as a shrub.  
Sec. 154.14. - Non-conforming uses. 
14.A  Non-Conforming Use of Land. The non-conforming use of land where no building is involved existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued for a period of not more than two years therefrom, provided that no such non-conforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property, and that if the non-conforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of the land shall be in conformity with regulations of the district in which it lies. 
14.B  Non-Conforming Use of Buildings. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the non-conforming use of a building existing at the time this ordinance becomes effective may be continued, and the use of a non-conforming building may be changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification, but where the use is changed to a more restricted classification it shall not thereafter be changed back to a use of a less restricted classification. A non-conforming building which is or may hereafter become vacant and which shall remain unoccupied or its non-conforming use discarded for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to regulations of the district in which it is located. A non-conforming building may be maintained or kept in good repair except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)  No existing non-conforming building may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or altered unless its use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building is located except in the event the enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration is required by court decision, law or ordinance. 
(3)  No non-conforming building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of the building is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(4)  A non-conforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy to the extent of 50% or more of its reasonable value may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 154.15. - Permits-Plans. 
(A)  No permit for the erection, alteration or enlargement of any building shall be issued by the Building Inspector unless there first be filed in his or her office by the applicant, a plan, drawn to scale and in such form as may be prescribed by the Building Inspector, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the building to be erected, altered or enlarged, together with a true statement in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which the building is arranged, intended or designed, and furnishing, such other information as the Building Inspector may require in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, and any failure to comply with the provisions of the ordinance shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit by the Building Inspector. A record of the applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(B)  All outstanding permits shall be valid for a maximum period of six months after adoption of this ordinance. All building permits issued after the adoption of this ordinance shall be valid for a period of six months. 
Sec. 154.16. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(A)  No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector. 
(B)  No premises shall be used and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector in compliance with all applicable codes and the provisions of this ordinance. 
(C)  Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of the buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector. 
(D)  No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
Sec. 154.17. - Boundaries of districts. 
    Rules where uncertainty may arise; where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply: 
(A)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the zoning map are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(B)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots. The district boundaries shall be into blocks and lots. The district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the zoning map are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(C)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
Sec. 154.18. - Changes and amendments. 
(A)  The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established. 
(B)  Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the City Council shall submit the same to the City Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation and report. 
(C)  A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adopting any proposed supplement, amendment or change. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication once in the official publication of the City of Stephenville, Texas, stating the time and place of the hearing, which time shall be before the 15th day before the date of the hearing. 
(D)  Unless the proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or a protest against the amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the Building Inspector, duly signed and acknowledged, by the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots included in the proposed change, or those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots, the amendment, supplement or change shall not become effective except by a three-fourths vote of the City Council. 
(Am. Ord. 2014-31, passed 12-4-2014) 
Sec. 154.19. - Enforcement and penalty for violation. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and to refuse to issue any permit for any building, or for the use of any premises, which would violate any of the provisions of the ordinance. 
(B)  In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or converted or any building or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Building Inspector is authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to any such violation. 
(C)  Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000, and each day the violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The Owner or Owners of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as hereinbefore provided. 
Sec. 154.20.1. - Planning and zoning commission-Proposals. 
20.1.A  Creation. A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created as provided in Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code. 
20.1.B  Purpose. 
(1)  To identify community needs and to advise the City Council of their short-range and long-range implications for the total development of the city; 
(2)  To recommend achievable community goals as a basis for long-range planning and development programs; 
(3)  To recommend plans, programs and policies that will aid the entire community in achieving its defined goals; 
(4)  To interpret the adopted plans and programs to concerned citizens so that private activities and desires may be accomplished in harmony with public needs and policies; and 
(5)  To exercise all the powers set out in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances of the City of Stephenville. 
20.1.C  Written Proposal Required. Every proposal submitted for Commission action shall be made in writing. Where appropriate application forms are provided by the city. The proposal shall be filed on the forms, shall be accompanied by all prescribed fees, and shall be complete in all respects before being accepted for filing. 
20.1.D  Filing Deadline. Every proposal shall be filed with the Community Development Division not later than 21 days prior to the next regular meeting date. Proposals filed after the deadline shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting. When the filing deadline falls on a city holiday the following workday shall be observed as the filing deadline. 
20.1.E  Notices. Public notice of any proposal affecting a specific property shall be given as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance by means of a written notice deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. The notice shall identify the applicant, the location of the property in question, the nature of the proposal and the applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements. (Publication of the agenda to serve as the "Notice of Public Hearing"). 
20.1.F  Submission of Supporting Evidence. Information supporting a request or recommendation to approve or disapprove any proposal before the Commission shall be submitted only through the Community Development Division in writing or to the Commission in public meeting. 
20.1.G  Withdrawal of Proposal. When any applicant desires to withdraw his or her proposal he or she may do so by filing a written request to that effect with the Secretary. The request shall be effective upon the date of its official receipt, provided, however, that no request shall be valid after notices have been mailed, except on action of the Commission. Withdrawal of the proposal at any stage of its processing shall terminate all consideration of it by the city, and the case file thereon shall be closed. 
20.1.H  Powers. The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby invested with the authority to: 
(1)  Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its responsibilities under the laws of the State of Texas and of the City of Stephenville; 
(2)  Formulate and recommend to the City Council for its adoption a city plan for the orderly growth and development of the city and its environs, and from time to time recommend the changes in the plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, recreation, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(3)  Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan; hold public hearings and make recommendations to the City Council relating to the creation, amendment, and implementation of zoning regulations and districts as provided in Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code, authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass regulations; all powers granted under the Act are specifically adopted and made a part hereof; 
(4)  Exercise all powers of a Commission as to approval or disapproval of plans, plats or replats and vacations of plans, plats or replats set out in Chapter 212 of the Local Government Code; 
(5)  Study and recommend on the location, extension and planning of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places, and on the vacating or closing of same; 
(6)  Study and recommend on the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other structures and appurtenances. Study and recommend on the design or alteration and on the location or relocation of works of art which are, or may become, the property of the city; 
(7)  (1)  Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearing all proposals: 
(a)  For the opening, vacating or closing of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places; 
(b)  For the original zoning of annexed areas; and 
(c)  For the change of zoning district boundaries on an area-wide basis. 
(2)  No fee shall be required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the City. 
(8)  Formulate and recommend to the City Council for its adoption policies and regulations consistent with the adopted City Plan governing the location and/or operation of utilities, public facilities and services owned or under the control of the city; 
(9)  Keep itself informed with reference to the progress of City Planning in the United States and other countries and recommend improvements in the adopted plans of the city; and 
(10)  Submit a progress report each January to the City Council summarizing its activities, major accomplishments for the past year, and a proposed work program for the coming year. The report shall contain for the year the attendance record of all members and the identity of Commission Officers. 
Sec. 154.20.2. - Planning and zoning commission-Rules of procedure. 
    Roberts Rules of Order , the latest revision, shall be the Commission's final authority on all questions of procedures and parliamentary law not covered by these Rules of Procedures. 
20.2.A  Membership and Appointment. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be composed of ten qualified voters of the City of Stephenville. The City Council will consider for appointment to the Commission only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the City Council that members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a Commission which is broadly representative of the community. 
20.2.B  Terms of Office. The terms of five of the members shall expire on January 15 of each odd-numbered year and the terms of five (5) members shall expire on January 15 of each even-numbered year. The members of the Commission shall be identified by place numbers one through ten. The odd-numbered places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall expire in the even-numbered years. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no members shall be appointed for a term in excess of two years. Newly-appointed members shall be installed at the first regular Commission meeting after their appointment. 
    A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
20.2.C  Officers. 
(1)  A Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be elected annually from among the Commissions' membership at the first meeting in January and at such other times as these offices may become vacant. In the absence of both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the Commission shall elect an Acting Chairperson. 
(2)  A Secretary shall be appointed from the members of the Commission or from staff personnel assigned by the city's Chief Executive Officer to serve the Commission. 
20.2.D  Duties. 
(1)  The Commission shall advise the City Council on those matters falling within its charged responsibilities in a manner reflecting concern for the overall development and environment of the city as a setting for human activities. 
(2)  The members of the Commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Commission and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(3)  The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings, shall decide all points of order or procedure. All letters of transmittal from the Commission to the City Council shall be over the signature of the Chairperson. 
(4)  The Secretary shall be custodian of the minutes and other official records, shall attend to the correspondence of the Commission, and shall cause to be given such notices as are required and in the manner prescribed by law. 
20.2.E  Quorum. A quorum for the conduct of business shall be a majority of the members of the Commission. 
20.2.F  Meetings. All meetings shall be held in full compliance with the provisions of the Open Meetings Law, V.T.C.S., Section 551, the zoning ordinance, and these Rules of Procedure. Any party in interest may appear in his or her own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent. 
(1)  Regular meetings shall be held on the third Wednesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. in City Council Chambers at City Hall or at such place as the Commission may direct on its notices. 
(2)  Special meetings for any purpose may be held on: 
(a)  On the call of the Chairperson; 
(b)  On request of two or more members and by giving written notice to all members deposited in the mail at least 48 hours before the meeting; or 
(c)  As may be scheduled by a majority of the Commission at any previous meeting. The time and place of the special meeting shall be determined by the convening authority. 
(3)  The members of the Commission shall call the Secretary as far ahead of the meeting date as possible when they are unable to attend a meeting. 
(4)  Three consecutive absences from meetings of the commission shall be considered voluntary resignation. In addition, four absences in any twelve-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
20.2.G  Planning Sessions. The Commission may be convened as a committee of the whole for the purpose of holding a planning session, provided that no official business shall be conducted there at and no quorum shall be required. 
20.2.H  Agenda. 
(1)  An agenda shall be prepared by the Secretary for each meeting of the Commission. There shall be attached to each agenda a report of matters pending further action by the Commission. A copy of the agenda shall be posted in the City Hall as required by law for a period of three full calendar days not counting the day of the meeting or the day of the posting. 
(2)  The agenda shall be published as the "Notice of Public Hearing." 
20.2.I  Order of Business. 
(1)  The Chairperson shall call the Commission to order, and the members present and absent shall be recorded. The minutes of any preceding meeting shall be submitted for approval. The public shall be advised of the procedures to be followed in the meeting. The Executive Secretary shall publicly advise the Commission of any communications received pertaining to any matter before the Commission. 
(2)  The Commission shall then hear and act upon those proposals scheduled for consideration or public hearing together with such other matters of business and reports as the Commission or Executive Secretary finds to require Commission consideration. 
20.2.J  Procedure of Hearing. 
(1)  The Commission shall call, or cause to be called by the Executive Secretary, each proposal in the order as to be in accord with the hearing time specified in the notice of public hearing. 
(2)  The Chairperson shall next call on the staff for a factual summary and presentation relative to the proposal and shall afford the staff an opportunity to call to the attention of the Commission any additional pertinent communications. 
(3)  The Chairperson shall then call on persons present who wish to speak to the proposal and shall direct that they speak in the following order: 
(a)  The applicant or his or her representative; 
(b)  Those persons in support; and 
(c)  Those persons in opposition. 
(4)  Whenever necessary the Chairperson shall direct that all remarks shall be germane to the proposal. No rebuttal shall be permitted by either side, but the Commission may direct questions to any speaker in order to clarify statements and facts presented. 
(5)  The Chairperson shall then declare the public presentation or hearing closed, as to that proposal. 
20.2.K  Motions. 
(1)  A motion may be made by any member other than the presiding officer. 
(2)  A motion to approve any matter before the Commission or to recommend approval of any request requiring Council action shall require two-thirds favorable votes of the members present. 
(3)  (a)  When fewer than all the members are present for the voting and when all motions to recommend on a given application fail to carry by two-thirds votes, consideration of the application shall be continued to the next regular meeting upon motion carried by a majority of those present. 
(b)  Provided further that no request or application shall be continued under this rule beyond the next regular meeting; failure of the Commission to secure two-thirds concurring votes to approve or recommend approval at the next regular meeting shall be recorded in the minutes as a denial of the proposal under this rule. 
20.2.L  Recording of Vote. The minutes of the Commission's proceeding shall show the vote of each member, or if absent or failing to vote shall indicate that fact. 
20.2.M  Disqualification From Voting. 
(1)  A member shall disqualify himself or herself from voting whenever he or she finds that he or she has a personal or monetary interest in the property under appeal, or that he or she will be directly affected by the decision of the Commission. 
(2)  A member shall disqualify himself or herself from voting whenever any applicant, or his or her agent, has sought to influence the vote of the member on his or her application, other than in the public hearing. 
20.2.N  Official Records. The official records shall be these rules and regulations and the minutes of the Commission together will all findings, decisions and other official records of the Commission. 
20.2.O  Files-Retention. All matters coming before the commission shall be filed in the city's records. Original papers of all requests and proposals shall be retained as a part of the permanent record. 
20.2.P  Public Record. The official records and citizens requests filed for Commission action in regular or special meetings shall be on file in the City Hall and shall be open to public inspection during customary working hours. 
(Amd. Ord. 2018-O-43, § 6, passed 11-6-2018; Amd. Ord. 2018-O-44, § 6, passed 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 154.20.3. - Planning and zoning commission-Conditional use permit. 
20.3.A  Definition. A conditional use permit is defined in Section 154.03. The terms "Conditional Use Permit" and "Special Use Permit" may be used interchangeably. 
20.3.B  Effective Date. A Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed effective upon the date approved by the City Council. 
20.3.C  Termination of Conditional Use Permit. A Conditional Use Permit shall terminate and become null and void as follows: 
(1)  Failure to Commence the Use: Upon a finding by the City Manager that the conditional use for which the Conditional Use Permit was issued has not commenced within 180 calendar days after the effective date of the Conditional Use Permit or the date set forth in the Conditional Use Permit, whichever is applicable. For purposes of this paragraph, the use shall be deemed to have commenced: 
a.  If no new construction or renovation of an existing building is required, when actual use for the purposes described in the permit commences; or 
b.  If new construction or renovation of an existing building is required before the use can commence, when a completed application for a building permit, all required construction drawings, and the applicable permit fees have been delivered to the City Building Inspections Department; 
(2)  Failure to Commence Actual Use Within Two Years of New Construction or Renovation: If new construction or renovation of an existing building is required before the use can commence, upon a finding by the City Manager that actual use of the property has not commenced within two (2) years after the effective date of the Conditional Use Permit or the date set forth in the permit, whichever is applicable; 
(3)  Cessation of Use Not Related to Destruction of Property: After commencement of the actual use of the property for the purpose set forth in the permit, upon a finding by the City Manager that actual use of the property for the purpose for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved: 
a.  Has not occurred for a period of 180 consecutive days after the commencement of the actual use for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved; and 
b.  That the conditional use ceased for reasons other than destruction of buildings due to fire, flood, or windstorm; 
(4)  Cessation of Use Related to Destruction of Property: After commencement of the actual use of the property for the purpose set forth in the permit, upon a finding by the City Manager that actual use of the property for the purpose for which the Conditional Use Permit was approved has not occurred for a period of two consecutive years after the date of destruction by fire, flood, or windstorm of the buildings in which the use was occurring; 
Upon a finding of the City Manager that the use of the property has not been or is not in compliance with the provisions of the permit, the City Manager shall send written notice that the permit will be terminated fifteen (15) days from the date of the receipt of the notice, said notice to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the last known address indicated on the property rolls of the Erath County Appraisal District, a copy of which notice shall also be placed on the property. Said notification shall contain a summary of the findings by the City Manager citing the provisions of the permit or City Code which have been violated. 
20.3.D  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeal of Termination for Non-Compliance: The owner of the property may file a written appeal of the City Manager's decision with the City Council by delivering to the City Secretary a summary of the property owner's basis for appeal not later than ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the City Manager's notice. The appeal shall be heard at the next regular City Council meeting which occurs on or after the tenth calendar day following the receipt of the notice of appeal. The appeal to the City Council shall be conducted in accordance with procedures adopted by the City Council. 
On appeal, the City Council may: 
a.  Uphold the decision of the City Manager and terminate the permit; 
b.  Uphold the decision of the City Manager, but grant additional time for compliance, after which date the permit shall terminate if the City Council determines that compliance has not been achieved during the additional time; or 
c.  Overrule the decision of the City Manager. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(2)  Failure to File an Appeal: If the owner of the property fails to file an appeal as set forth in Section 1, above, on the fifteenth day following delivery of written notice to the owner of the property for which a Conditional Use Permit is issued that the City Manager has determined that violates the provisions of the permit, the conditional use permit will be terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-28 , 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 154.21.1. - Board of adjustment-Appeals. 
21.1.A  Creation. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established as provided in Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code. 
21.1.B  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the enforcing officer. The appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceeding shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(3)  No appeal shall be taken to the Board until and unless the Enforcing Officer has first refused a permit for plans submitted or has rendered an interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  Every appeal shall be filled on application forms provided by the city, shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee, and shall be complete in all respects before being accepted for filing. The application shall bear the signature of the owner of the property under appeal or shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner acknowledging taking of the appeal. An incomplete application or a communication purporting to be an application and not made in the form prescribed shall be regarded only as a notice of intent to appeal, and shall not be considered or acted upon by the Board. 
(5)  Every appeal shall be prepared by the applicant and shall be considered by the Board according to the guidelines contained in this ordinance for the type of appeal under consideration. Where two or more different types of appeals are included in the same application, each set of guidelines shall apply to the consideration of the appeals. 
(6)  An appeal shall be filed with the Board within ten days after the date of decision of the Enforcing Officer. Every appeal shall be filed with the Executive Secretary of the Board not later than 15 days prior to the regular meeting date of the Board. Appeals filed after the deadline shall be scheduled for the next regular meeting. When the filing deadline falls on a city holiday the following workday shall be observed as the filing deadline. 
21.1.C  Notices. 
(1)  Public notice of any appeal affecting a specific property shall be given as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance by means of a written notice deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. The notice shall identify the applicant, the location of the property in question, the nature of the request and the applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements. 
(2)  Public notice of any appeal seeking an interpretation of Zoning Ordinance regulations which would apply throughout the city, shall be given by means of a legal advertisement appearing in the official newspaper of the city not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. Written notice shall also be given to the applicant and his or her agent as provided in division (A) above. The notices shall identify the applicant, the nature of the question involved, and the affected provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Notice of any appeal seeking a special use or variance affecting a specific property shall be given to all persons within 200 feet of the property in question by means of a written notice deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
21.1.D  Withdrawal of Appeal. Any appeal may be withdrawn upon written notice to the Executive Secretary; but no appeal shall be withdrawn after giving of public notice and prior to Board action thereon without formal consent of the Board. 
21.1.E  Appeal After Board Denial. No appeal that has been denied shall be further considered in a new appeal resulting from the filing of new plans and the obtaining of a new decision from the Enforcing Officer, unless the new plans materially change the nature of the case. 
21.1.F  Expiration of Granted Appeal. Approval of any appeal shall expire 90 days after the Board's decision unless authorized construction or occupancy permits have been obtained or unless a greater time is requested in the application and is authorized by the Board. Any approval may be granted one extension of an additional 90 days on written request filed with the Board before expiration of the original approval. The time limit for every granted appeal shall commence on the first day of the month succeeding the month in which the Board renders its decision. 
21.1.G  Interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  For interpretation of the meaning or intent of the Zoning Ordinance. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(a)  Papers required. An appeal shall include: 
(1)  A statement by the applicant describing the way it is alleged the regulation should be interpreted, together with diagrams and charts illustrating the erroneous and the proper application of the may or text provisions. 
(2)  A statement by the Enforcing Officer giving his or her reasons for his interpretation of the Zoning Regulations. 
(b)  Basis for action. 
(1)  Before acting on an appeal for interpretation the Board shall consider: 
a.  The facts and statements filed in the application; 
b.  The testimony presented at the public hearing; 
c.  The city staff's technical report on the appeal; and 
d.  The Board's independent investigation of the language of the ordinance and of related ordinance bearing thereon. 
(2)  The Board shall make such interpretation as should be made provided the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that one or more of the following conditions exist and that the decision of the Board would be in the interest of the community and would carry out the spirit and intent of the Zoning Regulations: 
a.  That there is reasonable doubt of difference of interpretation as to the specific intent of the regulations or map; 
b.  That an appeal of use provisions would clearly permit a use which is in character with the uses enumerated for the various zones and with the objectives of the zone in question; and 
c.  That the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to one property inconsistent with other properties or uses similarly situated. 
21.1.H  Special Exceptions. 
(1)  Expansion of a nonconforming use within an existing structure a maximum of 20% provided that, in the case of a nonconforming residential use, such expansion does not increase the number of dwelling units to more than the number existing when the use first became nonconforming. 
(2)  Expansion of the gross floor area of a nonconforming structure, a maximum of 20%. 
(3)  Change from one nonconforming structure that has been totally destroyed, or resumption of a nonconforming use previously abandoned only upon finding that the failure to grant the special exception deprives the property owner of substantial use or economic value of the land. 
(4)  In granting special exceptions under this section, the Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect adjacent property owners and to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to conditions specifying the period during which the nonconforming use may continue to operate or exist before being conformed to the standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
21.1.I  Variance. 
(1)  A variance from the literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance in order to achieve a reasonable development of property. Whenever, owning to exceptional and extraordinary conditions, the literal enforcement of the zoning regulations will result in unnecessary hardship in the development of the property, an appeal for a variance may be filed with the Board of Adjustment. 
(2)  When a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon him or her practical difficulties or particular hardship, the Board may consider and allow variations of the strict application of the terms of this ordinance if the variations are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and the Board is satisfied, under the evidence heard by it, that a granting of the variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great as a to warrant a variation from the Zoning Regulations. 
(3)  The Board may authorize a variance where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of specific piece of property of record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, or by reason of exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, the strict application of a provision of this ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties and particular hardship upon the owner of the property and amount to a practical confiscation of the property as distinguished from a mere inconvenience to the owner, provided the variation can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good, and without substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan as established by the regulations and provisions contained in this ordinance. 
(a)  Papers required. An appeal for a variance shall include: 
(1)  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and dimension of the lot and of all existing and proposed improvements: 
a.  When an appeal is based upon hardship resulting from sharp changes in topography or unusual terrain features, the site plan shall include topographic information related to known base points of surveys, and profiles of the particular problem involved, including relationship to topographic features of adjoining properties. 
b.  When an appeal is submitted for variance of side yard or rear yard requirements, the applicant shall provide the same information for the properties adjoining the common lot line as may be applicable to the appealed requirements. 
c.  When an appeal is submitted for a variance from front yard setback, or for side yard setback on a side street, the applicant shall furnish a strip map showing the setback of main walls of all buildings on the same side of the street within a distance of 200 feet of the applicant's property. 
(2)  A statement of facts and reasons why the Zoning Regulations should not be applied to the property in question and how the standards governing the Board's action would be satisfied; and 
(3)  A statement by the Enforcing Officer citing the reasons for refusing to issue a permit under the plans submitted. 
(b)  Basis for action. 
(1)  Before acting on an appeal for variance the Board shall consider: 
a.  The facts filed with the application; 
b.  The testimony presented at the public hearing on the appeal; 
c.  The City Staff's technical report on the appeal; and 
d.  The Board's findings in its field inspection of the property. 
(2)  The Board may grant an appeal, subject to such terms and conditions as it may fix, provided the applicant has demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that the conditions governing the granting of a variance as set forth in the Zoning Regulations are satisfied and that the decisions of the Board would be in the interest of the community and would carry out the spirit and intent of the Zoning Regulations. 
21.1.J  Files-Retention. All appeals and other matters coming before the Board shall be filed in the city's records. Original papers of all appeals shall be retained along with other special matter as the Executive Secretary deems essential for the permanent record. 
(Am. Ord. 2014-33, passed 12-4-2014) 
Sec. 154.21.2. - Board of adjustment-Rules and regulations. 
21.2.A  Roberts Rules of Order. Roberts Rules of Order , latest revision, shall be the Board's final authority on all questions of procedure and parliamentary law not covered by these Rules of Procedure. 
21.2.B  Organization. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council and who are qualified voters of the City of Stephenville, each to be appointed for terms of two years and removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The City Council may appoint four alternate members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and shall be subject to removal as the regular members. 
    A member of this board will not be eligible for reappointment after they have served three consecutive terms until after they have taken a one-year hiatus. Members may apply for another board or commission without taking a one-year hiatus. The city council may appoint members to additional terms past the term limit if no applications have been received to fill a vacancy. 
21.2.C  Quorum. A quorum shall consist for four members. 
21.2.D  Officers. A Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be elected from among the Board's membership at the annual meeting of the Board and at such times as these offices may become vacant. The city's Chief Executive Officer shall designate his or her representative to serve the Board as Executive Secretary. 
21.2.E  Duties. 
(1)  The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings, shall decide all points of order or procedure, and as necessary shall swear in witnesses or compel their attendance. 
(2)  The Executive Secretary shall be custodian of the minutes and other official records, shall attend to the correspondence of the Board, and shall cause to be given notices as are required and in the manner prescribed by law. 
21.2.F  Meetings. All meetings shall be held in full compliance with the provisions of the Open Meetings Law, V.T.C.S., Article 551, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Stephenville, and these Rules of Procedure. Any party in interest may appear in his or her own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent. 
(1)  Regular meetings shall be held on the second Thursday of each month at 4:00 p.m. in City Council Chambers at City Hall or at such place as the Board may direct on its notices. 
(2)  Special meetings for any purpose may be held: 
(a)  On the call of the Chairperson; 
(b)  On request of two or more members by giving written notice to all members deposited in the mail at least 48 hours before the meetings; or 
(c)  As may be scheduled by a majority or the Board at any previous meeting. 
(3)  The members of the Board shall call the Secretary as far ahead of the meeting date as possible when they are unable to attend a meeting. 
(4)  Three consecutive absences from meetings of the commission shall be considered voluntary resignation. In addition, four absences in any twelve-month period shall be considered a voluntary resignation. The council shall fill vacancies created by voluntary resignations in the same manner as all other vacancies. 
21.2.G  Agenda. An agenda shall be prepared by the Executive Secretary for each meeting of the Board. The agenda shall include appeals and other matters scheduled for consideration by the Board. There shall be attached to the agenda a list of matters pending further action by the Board and pending report of disposition by the Executive Secretary. A copy of the agenda shall be posted in the City Hall as required by law for a period of three full calendar days not counting the day of the meeting or the day of posting. 
21.2.H  Order of Business. The Chairperson shall call the Board to order and the Executive Secretary shall record the members present and absent. The Chairperson shall publicly advise those present of the procedures followed in the hearing and disposition of appeals; he or she shall call each appeal in the order filed and shall announce the name of the applicant, the location of the property involved and the nature of the request. The Executive Secretary shall publicly advise the Board of any communications received. Supporting evidence for and against each case shall be presented to the Board. Each case may be taken under advisement until all have been heard. 
21.2.I  Procedure for Hearing. 
(1)  The Chairperson shall first call upon the applicant to present his or her case and all evidence supporting his or her plea. The Chairperson shall then inquire of the applicant if there are others affected who support the appeal. 
(2)  The Chairperson shall next call on those opposed to the granting of the appeal to present their arguments. The applicant shall then have the right of rebuttal to arguments presented by the opposition. Following the rebuttal the Chairperson shall order the hearing closed. 
(3)  Each side shall proceed without interruption by the other, and all arguments and pleadings shall be addressed to the Board. No questioning or arguments between individuals will be permitted. During the hearing no member shall discuss, debate or argue an issue with the applicant, nor indicate his probable vote on the appeal. 
(4)  The Board shall not continue hearing on any appeal for which the applicant or his or her representative fails to appear unless the applicant has requested that the Board act without his or her being present at the hearing. However, the Board shall hear those persons appearing in response to the notice of hearing. 
(5)  The Board shall set and announce publicly a "specified date" for the continuance of the hearing. If a specified date cannot be set, then new notices will be required and the same time intervals will apply as with a new application. There shall be only one continuance hearing per applicant. 
21.2.J  Board Questions. The Chairperson may direct any question to the applicant or any persons speaking in order to bring out all relevant facts, circumstances and conditions affecting the appeal, and shall call for questions from other members of the Board and from the staff before closing the hearing on each appeal. 
21.2.K  Decision. After all appeals have been heard each appeal shall be reviewed and acted upon. During its review the Board may call back any applicant for clarification of facts presented by him or her in the hearing. 
21.2.L  Disposition of Appeals. The Board may grant, may grant with modifications, or may deny an appeal. The Board may also defer action on any appeal whenever it concludes that additional evidence is needed or that alternate solutions need further study. An appeal may be dismissed when the Board finds that the appeal has been improperly filed or, upon notification by the enforcing officer, that permits have been issued for a conforming use or development of the property. 
21.2.M  Vote Required. The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to grant, or to grant conditionally, any matter appealed to the Board. When a motion in favor of an applicant fails to receive four affirmative votes, the Executive Secretary shall record that fact and shall spread on the minutes an entry stating that the Board has denied the appeal. 
21.2.N  Recording of Vote. The minutes of the Board's proceedings shall show the vote of each member on each decision of the Board, or if absent of failing to vote shall indicate that fact. 
21.2.O  Definition. The official records shall include these rules and regulations, and the minutes of the Board together with all findings, decisions and other official actions. Stenographic notes of the Recording Secretary and tape recordings of proceedings and discussions shall not constitute the official record of the Board. 
21.2.P  Files-Retention. All appeals and other matters coming before the Board shall be filed in the city's records. Original papers of all appeals shall be retained along with other special matter as the Executive Secretary deems essential for permanent record. 
21.2.Q  Certified Copy. A certified copy of these Rules and Regulations and of any amendments thereto will be placed on record in the office of the City Secretary within ten days following their date of adoption. 
(Amd. Ord. 2018-O-43, § 7, passed 11-6-2018; Amd. Ord. 2018-O-44, § 7, passed 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 154.21.3 - Board of adjustment-Variances. 
21.3.A  Definition. A variance is defined in Section 154.03. The terms "Variance" and "Special Exception" may be used interchangeably. 
21.3.B  Effective Date. A variance shall be deemed effective upon the date approved by the Board of Adjustment. 
21.3.C  Variance for the Construction of a Carport 
(1)  Granting a Variance without a Public Hearing: 
a.  Upon receipt of an application to construct a carport, the city manager or his designee shall determine the following: 
i.  The carport is compatible with the existing home and other homes in the neighborhood. 
ii.  The carport is within the minimum setbacks. 
iii.  The carport is no larger than 25 feet in width by 30 feet in length. 
b.  If the above criteria are met, the city manager or his designee will mail notice of the proposed carport to every property owner within 200 feet of the property. The letter must include the procedure and time limits for protest. 
c.  Within 14 days from the date of the notification letter, a petition with signatures from 35% of the property owners within the notification area must be returned to the city manager or his designee or the special exception is considered granted without a hearing before the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Granting a Variance with a Public Hearing: 
a.  If the criteria listed above are not met, or if a petition is filed with the city manager or his designee as described above, a public hearing will be scheduled by the board of adjustment to determine if a variance will be granted. 
b.  Notice of a public hearing to allow the construction of a carport shall be mailed to every property owner within 200 feet of the property for which the special exception is requested at least ten days prior to the meeting date. 
c.  Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the newspaper of record at least ten days prior to the meeting date. 
d.  The concurring vote of 75% of the members of the board will be required to grant the special exception. 
(3)  The city manager or his designee shall issue to the applicant appropriate documentation showing the grant of the special exception. Such documentation and grant may contain restrictions, use limitations, building requirements, and other matters determined to be appropriate and/or necessary to meet the terms of this section. 
21.3.D  Variance for Off-Premises Signs (Billboards). 
(1)  In considering whether to grant a special exception from the regulations specified in 154.12-11 Prohibited Signs, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The effect on public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; 
b.  The effect on the value of the surrounding property; 
c.  The potential for interference with the enjoyment and/or use of surrounding properties; 
d.  Aesthetics; 
e.  The necessity of the special exception for the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, or for governmental purposes; and 
f.  The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the special exception is sought. 
21.3.E  Variance for Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(1)  In considering whether to grant a special exception from the regulations specified in 154.74 Wireless Communication Facilities, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The effect on public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; 
b.  The effect on the value of the surrounding property; 
c.  The potential for interference with the enjoyment and/or use of surrounding properties; 
d.  Aesthetics; 
e.  The necessity of the special exception for the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, or for governmental purposes; and 
f.  The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the special exception is sought. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-29 , passed August 7, 2018) 
Sec. 154.22. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of building on premises, and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that, if this ordinance imposes a greater restriction, this ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 154.23. - Validity. 
(A)  If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(B)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Secs. 154.24-154.73. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154.74. - Wireless communication facilities. 
A.  Purpose. Certain radio equipment used in transmitting and receiving signal energy are essential and are deemed to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. Such equipment shall be located so that the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetic quality of the community shall not be compromised. The regulations governing the location of such equipment shall also consider the aesthetic quality of the city as a significant aspect of the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. The antennas, masts, and towers hereinafter enumerated shall be installed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities definitions. The following definitions shall apply: 
Antenna. A device used in communications which transmits or receives electromagnetic waves. 
Antenna, building attached. Antenna attached to existing structures in two general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the roofs of buildings, or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas are mounted to the sides of buildings. These antennas can also be mounted on structures such as water tanks, billboards, church steeples, electrical transmission towers, etc. 
Antenna facility. A building or independent support structure and the antennas mounted thereon, including any associated and necessary equipment building. 
Co-location. The act of locating wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single antenna facility. 
Equipment storage. A small unmanned, single story equipment building less than 500 square feet in size used to house radio transmitters and related equipment. 
Monopole. An antenna facility composed of a single spire used to support communications equipment. No guy wires are used or permitted. 
Lattice tower. A tower having three or four support steel legs and holding a variety of antennas. These towers range from 60 to 200 feet in height and can accommodate a variety of users. 
Satellite receive-only antenna. An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed on a television monitor. Such antennas are commonly known as a satellite dish, television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite earth station antenna. 
Stealth facility. An antenna facility that is virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include totally enclosed antennas, wireless facilities that replicate or duplicate the construction of common structures such as flagpoles, and camouflaged wireless facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment. 
C.  Residentially zoned districts ((RE), (R-HA), (R-1), (R1.5), (R-2), (R-3), (MH))-Amateur radio equipment, communications equipment and tv antennas. Amateur radio equipment, including ham radio and CB equipment and personal use TV antennas or Communications antennas, shall be allowed in the residential zoning districts if they comply with the following regulations: 
1.  In the residential districts, a special exception must be obtained from the board of adjustment for any antenna facility which does not comply with the regulations in this section. 
2.  Telescoping antenna support poles, i.e. push-up poles, monopoles or lattice towers shall not require a permit when installed in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations 
3.  Up to three antenna facilities may be located on a lot of record, co-location is encouraged; 
4.  An antenna facility, exclusive of the height of any antenna or mast, shall not exceed 65 feet in height. Provided, however, that an antenna facility shall be permitted additional height at the ratio of one added foot in height for each additional foot of setback beyond the minimum setback required of an accessory building in the zoning district regulations contained in section 6-3, accessory building regulations. Regardless of the above, the maximum height for a tower permitted in any residential district shall be 80 feet unless a special exception is approved by the board of adjustment; 
5.  The height of an antenna, including the height of any antenna facility to which they may be fastened or attached shall not exceed 80 feet in height unless a special exception is approved by the board of adjustment; 
6.  An antenna not fastened to an antenna facility shall not exceed 80 feet without a special exception approved by the board of adjustment, except for an antenna which does not extend more than eight feet above a building on which it is mounted; 
7.  An antenna facility shall be limited to having the number and size of antennas attached to it that are allowed by the antenna facility manufacturer's designs and specifications for maximum wind load requirements; 
8.  Setbacks: 
(a)  Antennas and antenna facilities shall not be permitted in front or side yards. Guy wires are not permitted in front yards; 
(b)  Guy wires are permitted in required side and rear yards; 
(c)  Setback for antenna facilities shall be the same as those required for accessory buildings in residential districts; 
9.  Separation: There shall be no minimum or maximum separation requirements for antenna facilities from other structures on the same lot of record; 
10.  Prohibited in easements: Antenna facilities shall not be permitted in any easement; 
11.  Lights: No auxiliary or outdoor lighting shall be allowed on antenna facilities located on residentially zoned property except such lights or lighting as may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission; or lights for security purposes. 
12.  Construction standards: A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction and/or installation of an antenna facility. Antenna facilities must be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas. Regardless of the above, all such antenna facilities must meet the Electronic Industries Association Standard EIA-222-D, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures and the Building Code; with the exception of non-permanent antenna facilities. 
13.  Maintenance: Antennas and/or antenna facilities obviously not in use or obviously in need of maintenance as determined by the building official, shall be removed or brought into compliance within a reasonable time determined by the building official. This shall not preclude immediate action by the city manager to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare; 
14.  No extension beyond property lines: No part of an antenna facility or any attachment thereto may extend beyond the property lines of the owner of such antenna or antenna facility. 
15.  Any antenna, the radiating portion of which is accessible from ground level, shall have adequate fencing around it, or shall have signage providing constructive notice of radio frequency exposure/burn hazard. 
D.  Residentially zoned districts ((RE), (R-HA), (R-1), (R1.5), (R-2), (R-3), (MH))-Commercial radio equipment and commercial tv antennas. Only building attached antennas shall be allowed in residentially zoned districts under the following conditions: 
1.  Special exception: A special exception must be obtained from the board of adjustment. 
2.  Attachment or enclosure: The proposed antenna must be attached to or enclosed in an existing structure currently or last occupied by a nonresidential use as listed in section 3-1, permitted use table, or attached to a power or telephone pole, water storage tower, or other utility structure; 
3.  Height: The antenna must not exceed fifteen feet above the structure to which it is attached; 
4.  Attachment to exterior structure: If attached to the exterior of a structure or a power or telephone pole, water storage tower or other utility structure the antenna must be at least 75 feet above grade and painted to match the structure to which it is attached; 
5.  Enclosed antennas: The antenna may be placed lower than 75 feet above grade if completely enclosed within existing architectural elements of a building so as not to be visible; 
6.  Equipment storage buildings: Any associated equipment storage building shall be screened from public view by a decorative masonry wall, with landscaping for aesthetic purposes; 
7.  Driveways: All driveways accessing any antenna facility site or equipment storage site shall be constructed of an all weather hard surface as approved by the director of public works; 
8.  Lights: No auxiliary or outdoor lighting shall be allowed on antennas located on residentially zoned property except such lights or lighting as may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission or lights for security purposes; 
9.  Construction standards: A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction and/or installation of a tower, antenna or mast. Towers must be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas. Regardless of the above, all such towers, antennas or masts must meet the current Electronic Industries Association Standard, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures and the Building Code; 
10.  Maintenance: Antennas, not in use or in need of maintenance as determined by the administrative official, shall be removed or brought into compliance within a reasonable amount of time determined by the building official. This shall not preclude immediate action by the administrative official to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare; 
11.  No extension beyond property lines: No part of an antenna, or any attachment thereto may extend beyond the property lines of the owner of such antenna; 
12.  Property owner's permission required: No permit shall be issued for the installation of an antenna, on a structure or property unless a notarized statement of permission from the owner is presented to the administrative official. 
E.  Nonresidential districts ((B-1), (B-2), (B-3), (B-4), (B-5), (I). Radio, television, microwave broadcast relay, receiving towers, transmission and re-transmission facilities, satellite receiving only earth stations (home dish antenna), and any electronic emission equipment of a commercial nature shall be allowed in the nonresidential zoning districts if it complies with the following regulations: 
1.  Number of antennas per lot: One antenna facility may be located on a lot of record, co-location is encouraged; 
2.  Height: 
a)  With the exception of stealth facilities, an antenna facility, exclusive of the height of any attached antenna, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Provided, however, that an antenna facility shall be permitted additional height at the ratio of one added foot in height for each additional foot of setback beyond the minimum setback required of an accessory building in the zoning district where the antenna facility is located. Regardless of the above, with the exception of stealth facilities, the maximum height for an antenna facility permitted without a special exception in any nonresidential district shall be 80 feet; 
b)  With the exception of stealth facilities, the height of an antenna, including the height of any antenna facility to which they may be fastened or attached, shall not exceed 65 feet in height without a special exception; 
c)  With the exception of stealth facilities, an antenna shall not extend more than fifteen feet above a building on which it is attached; 
3.  Manufacturer's design and specifications: An antenna facility shall be limited to the number and size of antennas attached to it that are allowed by the antenna facility manufacturer's designs and specifications for maximum wind load requirements; 
4.  Setbacks: With the exception of stealth facilities, antennas and antenna facilities shall not be permitted in front or side yards; 
5.  Prohibited in easements: Antenna facilities shall not be permitted in any easement; 
6.  Lights: No auxiliary or outdoor lighting shall be allowed on antennas located on residentially zoned property except such lights or lighting as may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission; 
7.  Construction standards: A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction and/or installation of a tower, antenna, or mast. Antenna facilities must be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas. Regardless of the above, all such antenna facilities and antennas must meet the current Electronic Industries Association Standard, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures and the Building Code; 
8.  Maintenance: Antenna facilities and antennas obviously not in use or obviously in need of maintenance as determined by the administrative official, shall be removed or brought into compliance withina reasonable amount of time determined by the building official. This shall not preclude immediate action by the administrative official to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare; 
9.  No extension beyond property lines: No part of an antenna facility and antennas or any attachment thereto may extend beyond the property lines of the owner of such antenna or antenna facility; 
10.  Special exceptions for noncomplying facilities: A special exception must be obtained from the board of adjustment for any antenna or tower, which is in a nonresidential zoning district and does not comply with the regulations in this section. 
11.  Stealth facilities: Stealth facilities, as defined in section 6-10, wireless communication facilities definitions shall be exempt from the height and location requirements of this section. In addition, the administrative official shall be the final authority as to whether or not any facility meets the definition of a "stealth facility." 
12.  Distance from residential properties: No part of an antenna facility and antennas or any attachment thereto may be constructed within 500 feet of a residential property without a special exception obtained from the board of adjustment. 
F.  Satellite receive-only antennas: 
1.  Generally: Satellite receive-only antennas assist individuals in the receipt of satellite transmitted television signals. Satellite receive-only antennas which comply with the regulations in this section shall be permitted. Such regulations are hereby found to be reasonable and clearly defined 
2.  Small satellite receive-only antennas: A satellite receive only antenna shall be allowed if it complies with the following regulations: 
(a)  The satellite receive-only antenna is two meters or less in diameter and is located or proposed to be located in any area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted by this ordinance or; 
(b)  The satellite receive-only antenna is less than one meter in diameter and is located or proposed to be located in any residential zoning district. 
3.  Large satellite receive-only antennas. Satellite receive-only antennas that are greater than one meter in diameter in residential districts or greater than two meters in diameter in nonresidential districts shall be allowed in any zoning district if they comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  A special exception must be obtained from the board of adjustment for any satellite receive only antenna which does not comply with the regulations specified below. 
(b)  Only one satellite receive-only antenna per lot of record; 
(c)  A satellite receive-only antenna shall not exceed ten feet in height; 
(d)  Setbacks: 
(1)  Front and side: Satellite receive-only antennas shall not be permitted in front or side yards; 
(2)  Rear: Satellite receive-only antennas shall be permitted in rear yards provided they meet the minimum setback as is required for accessory buildings in residential districts and as for all buildings in nonresidential districts; 
(e)  Separation: There shall be no minimum or maximum separation requirements for satellite receive-only antennas from other structures on the same lot of record; 
(f)  Not permitted in easements: Satellite receive-only antennas shall not be permitted in easements; 
(g)  Lights: No auxiliary or outdoor lighting shall be allowed on satellite receive-only antennas except such lights or lighting as may be required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission; 
(h)  Construction standards: A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction and/or installation of a satellite receive-only antenna. Satellite receive-only antennas must be installed according to the manufacturers recommendations or under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas; 
(i)  Maintenance: Satellite receive-only antennas not in use or in need of maintenance as determined by the administrative official, shall be removed or brought into compliance within 30 days following notice given by the administrative official. This shall not preclude immediate action by the administrative official to safeguard life, limb, health, property, and public welfare; 
(j)  No extension beyond property lines: No part of a satellite receive-only antenna or any attachment thereto may extend beyond the property lines of the owner of such satellite receive-only antenna; 
(k)  Screening: All satellite receive-only antennas shall be screened from view from adjoining properties by fencing or evergreen plants. A satellite receive-only antenna located within a fence surrounding the yard in which the satellite receive-only antenna is located shall be considered to be screened. 
G.  Special exception relief from regulations. A special exception must be obtained from the board of adjustments for any antenna, tower, and/or satellite receive-only antenna which does not comply with the regulations specified in this section. In considering whether to grant a special exception from the regulations specified above, the board of adjustment shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The effect on the value of the surrounding property; 
2.  The potential for interference with the enjoyment of surrounding properties; 
3.  Aesthetics; 
4.  The necessity of the special exception for the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens or for governmental purposes; 
5.  The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the special exception is sought; 
6.  The provisions of 47 C.F.R. § 25.104 which preempt local zoning or other regulations that differentiate between satellite receive-only antennas and other types of antenna facilities unless such regulations: 
(a)  Have a clearly defined health, safety or aesthetic objective; and 
(b)  Further the stated health, safety, or aesthetic objectives without unnecessarily burdening the federal interest in ensuring access to satellite services and in promoting fair and effective competition among competing communications service providers; 
7.  To properly evaluate all applications to locate commercial antennas or towers which do not comply with the regulations specified above, the following information must be provided by the applicant: 
(a)  Describe the nature of the antenna site. Indicate whether the proposed structure is a monopole or mounted to a self-supporting structure. Indicate the proposed height; 
(b)  Provide photos or drawings of all equipment, structures and antenna; 
(c)  Describe why the antenna or tower is necessary; 
(d)  Address whether or not the applicant has made an effort to co-locate the facilities proposed for this antenna or tower on existing towers or facilities in the same general area and, if so, identify the location of these existing sites. If yes, describe in detail these efforts and explain in detail why these existing sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. Provide written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators, which confirm the statements provided. Indicate whether or not the existing sites allow or promote co-location and, if not, describe why not; 
(e)  If the requested location is in a residential district the applicant shall address whether or not the applicant has made an effort to locate the facility in a commercial or industrial district and identify the location of these commercial and or industrial district sites. Describe in detail these efforts and explain in detail why these commercial or industrial district sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the commercial or industrial sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. Provide written documentation from commercial or industrial district sites' owners and/or operators which confirm the statements provided; 
(f)  Indicate the proposed provider's current coverage area for the city. Attach maps showing the areas the proposed provider's existing antennas currently cover, the areas the applicant's existing sites and other existing sites would cover, and the areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would cover; 
(g)  Describe the applicant's master antenna and tower plan for the city. Attach maps and other related documentation. Provide information indicating each phase of the plan; 
(h)  Describe the applicant's plan to minimize the number of telecommunications antenna and towers needed to cover the city; 
H.  Written report upon denial of request. The administrative official and/or the board of adjustment shall document any denial of a request to place, construct, or modify an antenna facilities in writing. Such documentation shall be supported by substantial evidence within the written record. 
(Ord. 2018-O-03 , 1-2-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-O-27, 8-7-2018) 
Secs. 154.75-154.99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS 

Sec. 154.100. - Scope. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct, drill, erect, operate, explore, produce or install an oil and gas well and/or pipeline within 1,500 feet of a protected area listed in Section 154.12 of this subchapter. 
(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 154.101. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
    Abandonment. As defined by the Texas Railroad Commission, and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this subchapter. 
    Drilling. Digging or boring a new oil and gas well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas or for the purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
    Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
    Oil and gas well. Any single hole or bore to any horizon, formation or strata, for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. For each separate new hole a gas well permit is required. 
    Public building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation, education, entertainment, amusement or health care. "Public buildings" include, but shall not be limited to theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary, religious institutions, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, schools, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants and hospitals. 
    Religious institution. A building in which people regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 154.102. - Protected areas. 
    All distance shall be measured from the property line of the proposed well in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any structure or boundary line listed below: 
(A)  Abandoned oil and gas wells and pipelines; 
(B)  AG "Agricultural District" zoning; 
(C)  B-3 "Central Business District" zoning; 
(D)  Day care facility; 
(E)  Existing oil and gas wells or pipelines; 
(F)  Hospital; 
(G)  Municipal sanitary sewer main; 
(H)  Municipal water main; 
(I)  Public building; 
(J)  Public park; 
(K)  R-1 "Single Family Residential District" zoning; 
(L)  R-1.5 "Single Family Residential District" zoning; 
(M)  R-2 "One- and Two-Family Residential District" zoning; 
(N)  R-3 "Multiple Family Residential District" zoning; 
(O)  RE "Residential Estate District" zoning; 
(P)  R-HA "Single Family Residential District" zoning; 
(Q)  Religious institution; 
(R)  Residences; 
(S)  Schools; 
(T)  Water well. 
(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-5-2010) 
CHAPTER 155. - SUBDIVISIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 2018-O-06, adopted January 2, 2018, repealed the existing subdivision ordinance and enacted a new subdivision ordinance as set out herein. The former subdivision ordinance was derived from Ord. 1991-12, adopted June 4, 1991; Ord. 1998-3, adopted February 3, 1998; and Ord. 2008-14, adopted July 1, 2008. 

SECTION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 155.1.01. - Title. 
    This Ordinance and subsequent regulations of the City of Stephenville, Texas shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the "Subdivision Ordinance." 
Sec. 155.1.02. - Authority. 
    This Subdivision Ordinance and subdivision regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the U.S. Constitution, the Texas Constitution, and the laws of the State of Texas, specifically including Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code. All property subdivided into lots, blocks, or streets, or property to be re-subdivided, within the City Limits or within its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)) shall hereafter be laid out subject to the approval of the City as outlined within this Subdivision Ordinance. 
Sec. 155.1.03. - Purpose. 
    These regulations shall be administered so as to achieve the following specific purposes: 
A.  Specific Purposes of the Subdivision Ordinance. 
1.  Provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the City and its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) and provide for adequate public facilities; 
2.  Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community; 
3.  Establish orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the City; 
4.  Provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering design criteria for public infrastructure reduce inconveniences to residents of the area, and to reduce related unnecessary costs to the City for correction of inadequate facilities that are designed to serve the public; 
5.  Ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location that utilization will not impair the general welfare; 
6.  Protect against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces; 
7.  Provide proper utilities and services for adequate drainage, water supply, and disposal of sanitary and industrial waste; to furnish adequate sites, convenient to schools, parks, playgrounds, and other community services, respecting topography and existing vegetation so that the natural beauty of the land shall be preserved; 
8.  Coordinate new development realistically and harmoniously with existing development; 
9.  Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City; 
10.  Provide the most beneficial circulation of vehicle and pedestrian traffic throughout the City, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets; 
11.  Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for the development and redevelopment, provide for the orderly layout and use of land; 
12.  Ensure proper legal descriptions and documentation of subdivided land; 
13.  Ensure public facilities with sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision are available for every building site, and to provide public facilities for future development; 
14.  Ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community; 
15.  Preserve the topography of the City and ensure appropriate development with regard to natural features; 
16.  Ensure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the dedication and construction of Public Improvements and infrastructure that are necessitated by or attributable to the development or that provide value or benefit that makes the development feasible; and 
17.  Address other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy, attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural resources. 
Sec. 155.1.04. - Applicability. 
A.  General. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision and development of land, as subject to the control of the City, in order to carry out the purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the City. 
B.  Subdivision and Development of Land Policies. 
1.  Land shall not be subdivided or developed until proper provision has been made for drainage, water, wastewater, transportation and other facilities required by these regulations. 
2.  All public and private facilities and improvements shall be of at least the capacity necessary to adequately serve the development and shall conform to and be properly designed in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
3.  These regulations shall supplement, and facilitate the enforcement of, provisions and standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance and building codes adopted by the City. 
C.  Requirement to Plat. Platting is required for the following purposes: 
1.  To create a building site on a single lot or tract; 
2.  To construct or enlarge any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement on land without an existing Plat; 
3.  To subdivide land to divide a lot or tract into two or more parcels for development of the parcels; 
4.  To combine lots or tracts; 
5.  To amend a Plat; or 
6.  To correct errors on an approved and recorded Plat. 
D.  Plat Required. 
1.  Subdivision Plats Required per LGC 212 Subchapter A (i.e., All plats except Development Plats). 
a.  In accordance with Texas Local Government Code (LGC) Section 212.004, the owner of a tract of land located within the city limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) who divides the tract in two (2) or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to a municipality, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts must have a Plat of the subdivision prepared. 
b.  A division of a tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. 
c.  A division of land under this subsection does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres, where each part has access and no Public Improvement is being dedicated. 
2.  Development Plats Required per LGC 212 Subchapter B. 
a.  Any person who proposes the development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement) of a tract of land located within the limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City shall have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance with LGC 212 Subchapter B and this Subdivision Ordinance. (See Section 4.11 Development Plat of this Ordinance for requirements for Development Plats.) 
b.  Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land within the City or its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) into two (2) or more tracts, and claims exemption from LGC 212 Subchapter A for the purposes of development, that results in parcels or lots all greater than five (5) acres in size, a Development Plat shall be required. 
c.  In the event that development of any tract of land is intended, and where no Public Improvement is proposed to be dedicated, the Applicant shall first obtain approval of a Development Plat. 
d.  No Development Plat is required when the land has an approved Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat. 
E.  Exemptions to the Requirement to Plat. The following are exemptions to the platting requirements in 1.04.C: 
1.  Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations; 
2.  Dedication of an easement or Right-of-Way by a separate document recordable in the county records if approved by the City; and 
3.  Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 155.1.05. - Documents comprising subdivision regulations. 
    The requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance and the technical design and construction standards contained in the Engineering Standards Manual. 
Sec. 155.1.06. - Compliance required. 
    Compliance with all City ordinances pertaining to the subdivision and development of land, and the Comprehensive Plan (where applicable), shall be required prior to approval of any Application pursuant to this Subdivision Ordinance. All such ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan shall be construed to mean those documents as they exist or may be amended. It is the property owner's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, City ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, and the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
A.  Applicable City Codes, Ordinances, and Plans. Applicable City codes, ordinances, and plans with which all Applications must comply include, but are not limited to, the following. All of the documents shall be the latest version, as amended. 
1.  Comprehensive Plan (including all associated maps and plans); 
2.  Zoning Ordinance; 
3.  Parks or Trails Master Plans and dedication requirements; 
4.  Building Codes; 
5.  Drainage System Design Requirements; 
6.  International Fire Code; 
7.  Storm Water Quality and Land Disturbance Requirements; 
8.  Thoroughfare Plan; 
9.  Other applicable portions of the Code of Ordinances; and 
10.  Applicable State and Federal regulations 
Sec. 155.1.07. - Public improvements required. 
A.  Requirements. The subdivider shall furnish, install and/or construct the Public Improvements (e.g., water and wastewater systems and the street and drainage facilities, including any offsite Public Improvements or private improvements ) necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's Engineering Standards Manual, Section 1001.407 Construction of Certain Public Works of the Texas Occupation Code, and any other standards, specifications, and drawings as may be hereafter adopted, approved by the City Council and placed on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
B.  Facilities Sizing. Where considered necessary by the City Administrator, and/or as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission or shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by this Subdivision Ordinance or the Engineering Standards Manual to provide for future growth and expansion. 
1.  The City Council shall establish policies whereby the City may participate in the difference in cost of the facility as sized in the Comprehensive Plan and the cost of the facility as sized per the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance or the Engineering Standards Manual. 
2.  See Section 7 for rough proportionality and fair share requirements. 
C.  Development Agreement. 
1.  Cases that Require a Development Agreement. 
a.  The Subdivider shall be required to enter into a Development Agreement with the City that shall govern the Subdivision if there are any public improvements, pro rata payments, escrow deposits or other future considerations, or variances are granted to this Subdivision Ordinance, or if the City participates in the cost of any public improvements, or if there are nonstandard development regulations. 
b.  This Development Agreement shall be based upon the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, and shall provide the City with specific authority to complete the improvements required in the Development Agreement in the event of failure by the developer, and to recover the full costs of such measures. 
2.  The Development Agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the City and the Subdivider and shall specify the individual and joint responsibilities of both the City and the Subdivider. 
3.  The Development Agreement shall contain: 
a.  As appropriate, provisions for pro rata payments, City participation in community facilities, escrow deposits or other payments for future facilities, variances granted to this chapter, and other particular aspects of the proposed Subdivision; 
b.  Authority for the City to withhold building permits, put a hold on construction and inspections in the event of breach by the Subdivider; 
c.  Provisions for financial security (see 5.05.D Security for Completion of Improvements); 
i.  Insurance requirements in accordance with the City's requirements for public works projects; and 
ii.  An indemnification clause by which the Subdivider shall agree to hold the City harmless against any claim arising out of the proposed Subdivision or any actions taken therein. 
4.  The City may provide a standard-form Development Agreement that may be approved by the City Administrator. In the event that either party desires not to enter into the standard-form Development Agreement, then a Subdivision-specific Development Agreement will be negotiated and will be subject to City Council approval before execution. 
Sec. 155.1.08. - Special provisions for enforcement. 
A.  Provisions. 
1.  Plat Filing Requirement. 
a.  A Subdivision Plat shall not be filed or recorded until it has been approved by the City and all Public Improvements have been accepted by the City, and any such actual recording shall be void unless such approval shall be endorsed on the face of the Plat as hereinafter provided. 
b.  The above paragraph 1.08.A.1.a shall not apply to a Minor Plat or an Amending Plat. 
c.  No lot shall be sold or transferred until a Plat is approved or recorded. 
2.  Water and Wastewater (Sanitary Sewer) System Requirement. No building permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on any lot without connection to the City's existing or proposed wastewater facilities or without a City approved water source. See sections 6.12 and 6.14 for exemptions. 
3.  Final Plat or Development Plat Required for Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a Subdivision for which a Final Plat or Development Plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a Subdivision that the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
4.  Compliance with Standards Required. The City shall not authorize any other person to nor shall the City itself repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any Subdivision for which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
5.  Dedications. 
a.  Refusal or denial of a Plat by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. 
b.  Approval of a Plat shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually appropriated the same by final acceptance. 
c.  Any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation may be vacated by the Council in any manner provided by law. 
6.  Services Prohibited to Subdivision. The City shall not authorize any other person to, nor shall the City itself sell or supply any utility service such as water, gas, electricity, telephone, cable, communication or wastewater service within a Subdivision for which a Final Plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
7.  Action in a Court. On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
8.  Abutting Owner or Lessee Action. In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this Subdivision Ordinance may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises. 
9.  Non-Compliant Subdivision or Subdivision without a Final Plat. If any Subdivision exists for which a Final Plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been fully complied with, the City Council shall pass a resolution reciting the facts of such non-compliance and failure to secure Final Plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of this Section will apply to the Subdivision and the lots therein. 
a.  The City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the Deed of Records of the County. 
b.  If full compliance and Final Plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument, in the Deed of Records of the County stating that the provisions of this section no longer apply. 
Sec. 155.1.09. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
A.  Subdivision Regulations Extend into the ETJ. Subdivision Regulations as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are hereby extended to all of the area lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and the rules and regulations within said Subdivision Regulations governing Plats and Subdivision of land shall be applicable to such area within said extraterritorial jurisdiction from and after the date of final passage of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Subdividing. No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land into two or more parcels of land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City except in conformity with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
Sec. 155.1.10. - Violations and fines. 
A.  Subdivision Violations. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance shall be fined not more than five-hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 155.1.11. - Summary of general subdivision procedure. 
    Any owner or Developer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its extra-territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) who wishes to subdivide such land shall conform to the following procedure. 
A.  General Overview of the Platting Process. 
1.  Pre-Application Meeting between the Applicant and City Staff (Optional). 
2.  Preliminary Plat Submittal. 
3.  Construction Plans Approval. 
4.  Construction of Improvements. 
5.  City Inspection of Subdivision. 
6.  Final Document Submittal. 
7.  Final Plat Approval. 
8.  City Signs the Final Plat. 
9.  Final Plat Filed with County. 
10.  Final Plat Approval without Construction, See Section 5.05. 
11.  City Issuance of "Letter of Final Acceptance" for Improvements (if improvements fail to meet City standards, then the City will enforce the developer's guarantees). 
12.  Issuance of Building Permit. 
B.  Detailed Steps. The detailed steps within each phase of the Subdivision development procedure are covered in Section 3, Section 4, and Section 5. 
Figure 1: Summary of Subdivision Procedure 

SECTION 2. - DECISION-MAKER AUTHORITY 

Sec. 155.2.01. - City council. 
A.  Establishment. The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the City Council within the charter. 
B.  Responsibilities. Table 1 is a summary of the City Council's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 1: City Council Responsibilities 4.05.J.4.b Approving/Denying an Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 4.06.O.4.b Approving/Denying an Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Final Plat Extension 4.10.E Approving/Denying a Plat Vacation 7.01.C.1.b Approving/Denying an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 7.01.C.2 Approving/Denying a Major Subdivision Waiver 7.02 Approving/Denying a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 7.03.F.4 Approving/Denying a Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 7.03.F.5 Approving/Denying an Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition  
Sec. 155.2.02. - Planning and zoning commission. 
A.  Establishment. The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the Planning and Zoning Commission within charter. 
B.  Responsibilities. Table 2 is a summary of the Planning and Zoning Commission's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 2: Planning and Zoning Commission Responsibilities 4.05.F Approving/Denying a Preliminary Plat 4.05.J.4.a Approving/Denying an Appeal of the City Administrator's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 4.06.O.4.a Approving/Denying an Appeal of the City Administrator's Decision on a Final Plat Extension 4.06.H Approving/Denying a Final Plat 4.07.H.1. Approving/Denying a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision 4.08.G Approving/Denying a Replat 4.12 Approving/Denying a Conveyance Plat 4.08.G.2.b.i Approving/Denying a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision 4.09.G.1 Approving/Denying a Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision 7.01.C.1.b Approving/Denying an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 7.01.C.2 Approving/Denying a Major Subdivision Waiver 7.02 Approving/Denying a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 7.03.F.3 Approving/Denying a Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition  
Sec. 155.2.03. - City administrator/responsible official. 
A.  Establishment. City Administrator/Responsible Official shall consist of the City Administrator, City Secretary, City's Engineering Official, City's Planning Official, City Engineer or other City Staff as designated by the City Administrator. 
B.  Responsibilities. Table 3 is a summary of the City Administrator/Responsible Official's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 3: City Administrator Responsibilities 
4.05.F Reviewing a Preliminary Plat 4.06.G Reviewing a Final Plat 4.07.G Approving a Minor Plat 4.08.G Reviewing a Replat 4.08.G.2.b Approving a Minor Replat 4.09.F Approving an Amending Plat 4.10.D Recommending a Plat Vacation 4.11.I Reviewing a Development Plat 5.01 Approving Construction Plans 5.01 Approving an Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date 5.02 Attending a Pre-Construction Meeting 5.03 Approving a Construction Release 5.05.C Recommending Development Agreements and Security for Completion 5.06.A Scheduling and Approving Inspection of Public Improvements 7.01.C.1 Approving a Minor Subdivision Waiver (as applicable) 7.02 Reviewing a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 7.03.F.2 Approving a Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition  
SECTION 3. - APPLICATION SUBMITTAL, PROCESSING AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 155.3.01. - General application processing. 
A.  Initiation of Application. 
1.  Initiation by Owner or Owner's Agent. 
a.  Unless provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, any petition or Application may be initiated only by the property owner, owner of an interest in the land, or by the owner's designated agent. 
b.  If the Applicant is a designated agent, the Application shall include a written statement from the property owner authorizing the agent to file the Application on the owner's behalf. 
c.  The Responsible Official may require submission of documents, such as an affidavit from the owner, to provide evidence of ownership or agency. 
2.  Initiation by City Administrator. The City Administrator can initiate any Application authorized under this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Waiver of Application Information. The Responsible Official may initially waive the submission of any information in the Application and accompanying materials that are not necessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed activity. 
C.  Universal Application Contents. 
1.  Application Forms Generally. The City is hereby authorized to prepare Application Forms that include information requirements, checklists, architectural or engineering drawing sizes, Applicant contact information, and any other information necessary to show compliance with City codes. 
2.  Information for All Applications. All Applications shall contain the following information and shall be signed under oath stating that the Applicant believes the information contained therein is true to the best of his or her knowledge: 
a.  Identification of property owner and authorized agent; 
b.  Description of the property including state plane correlated data and the nature of the development that is the subject of the application; 
c.  Identification of all zoning classifications (inside the City only) for the property; 
d.  Identification of all pending legislative applications for the property; 
e.  Identification of decisions on all quasi-judicial or administrative Applications for the property that remain in effect; 
f.  Identification of all accompanying Applications; 
g.  Identification of all pending or accompanying requests for relief; 
h.  Demonstration of compliance with prior approved permits; and 
i.  Application signed by the owner of an interest in the land subject to the Application, or the owner's designated agent. 
3.  All Application Forms are available at City Offices or on City's official website. 
D.  Development Application Handbook. The City Administrator may create, manage, and update a Development Application Handbook, which shall be a collection of Application Forms that the City Administrator has created per 3.01.C.1. 
E.  Universal Application Fees. 
1.  Every Application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in the adopted Fee Schedule. 
2.  The prescribed fee shall not be refundable, except when the City Council waives the Application fee for resubmission of an approval that was denied. 
3.  The Fee Schedule may be amended from time to time per procedures established by the City Council. 
F.  Payment of all Indebtedness Attributable to the Subject Property. 
1.  No Application shall be accepted or reviewed for completeness from a person who owes delinquent taxes, assessments, any fees, or is otherwise indebted to the City until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. 
2.  It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, fees, etc. have been paid, or that other arrangements have been made for payment of said taxes, fees, etc. 
G.  Modification of Applications. The Applicant may modify any complete Application following its Official Vesting Date and prior to the expiration of the period, if any, during which the City is required to act on the Application. 
1.  Modifications Requested by the City. If the modification is for revisions requested by the City, and the modification is received at least five (5) business days prior to the time scheduled for decision on the Application, then the Application shall be decided within the period for decision prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Modifications not Requested by the City. 
a.  In all other instances (e.g., when the Applicant chooses to submit a revised Application of his/her own accord because of a change in development decisions), submittal of a modified Application shall extend the time for deciding the Application for a period equal to the time specified in this Subdivision Ordinance to decide the original Application. 
b.  The extension of the time for deciding the Application shall commence on the date the modified Application is submitted. 
i.  For Plat Applications, a modified Application shall be accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
H.  Action by Responsible Official. 
1.  Circulate and Compile Comments. After the determination of completeness has been established, the Responsible Official shall circulate the Application to all other administrative officials and departments whose review is required for a decision on the Application and shall compile the comments and recommendations of the officials. 
2.  Decision Rendered, If Applicable. The Responsible Official shall render a decision in the time prescribed for the applicable Application, if the official is the Decision-Maker for the Application. 
3.  Forward Application and Provide Notification. 
a.  In cases where the Responsible Official is not the Decision-Maker, the Responsible Official shall forward the Application for review to any advisory board/commission and the final Decision-Maker, and shall prepare a report to such board or commission, or to the City Council, including the compilation of any comments and recommendations by other administrative officials. 
b.  The Responsible Official also shall prepare required notices and schedule the Application for decision within the time and in the manner required by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
I.  Action by the Decision-Maker. 
1.  The Decision-Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the Application within the time prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Unless otherwise prescribed by law or City Charter, where the Decision-Maker is a board, commission or the City Council, the Application shall be decided by majority vote of a quorum of the members of the board, commission or the City Council. 
J.  Conditions. The initial or final Decision-Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
Sec. 155.3.02. - Official submission date and official vesting date. 
A.  Official Submission Date. 
1.  A calendar of official submission dates for subdivision related Applications requiring City review and approval pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212 (if applicable) shall be published by the City thirty (30) calendar days prior to the beginning of each calendar year or within six (6) months after the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  This calendar shall specify one "official submittal date" for each month. 
3.  All Applications delivered to the City on a date other than a scheduled date shall be dated received on the next Official Submission Date. 
B.  Official Vesting Date. 
1.  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, an Application or plan for development is considered filed on the date the Applicant delivers the Application or plan to the City or deposits the application or plan with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City. 
2.  A certified mail receipt obtained by the Applicant at the time of deposit is prima facie evidence of the date the Application or plan was deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
3.  Every Application or plan is subject to a determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for processing the Application. 
Sec. 155.3.03. - Application filing and determination of completeness. 
A.  Applicability. The following procedures shall apply to any subdivision related plan or Application that is required by the City and is submitted in accordance with this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Determination of Completeness for Subdivision Related Applications. Every required Application shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for processing the Application. 
1.  Acceptance Standards. The Application shall only be accepted by the Responsible Official for processing when it is accompanied by all documents required by, and prepared in accordance with, the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance and required items stated on the Application Form. A typographical error shall not, by itself, constitute an incomplete Application. 
2.  Acceptance Procedures. A determination of completeness of an Application shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  A determination of completeness shall be made by the Responsible Official not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day, unless otherwise specified, after the Official Vesting Date. 
b.  If the submitted Application is incomplete, then the Applicant shall be notified in writing not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day after the Official Vesting Date. 
i.  Such notice shall be served by depositing it in the U.S. Postal Service, or by electronic mail transmission, before the tenth (10th) business day following submission of the Application. 
ii.  The notification shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the Application, and shall state the date the Application will expire (see 3.03.E Expiration of a Subdivision Related Application-Before Approval Decision) if the documents or other information are not provided to the City. 
c.  An Application shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11 th ) business day after the Application has been received if notice is not served in accordance with 3.03.B.2.b. 
d.  If the Application is determined to be complete, the Application shall be processed as prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Acceptance shall not Constitute Compliance. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
4.  Acceptance shall not Guarantee Approval. There is no implied intent or guarantee that an accepted and completed Application will be approved, if after the Application is deemed complete, it is determined that the Application does not comply with this Subdivision Ordinance. 
C.  Re-Submittal after Notification of Incompleteness. 
1.  If the Application is re-submitted after a notification of incompleteness, the Application shall be processed upon receipt of the re-submittal. 
2.  The statutory 30-day time frame for Plat approvals shall begin on the date of the re-submittal. 
3.  To the extent that the information or documents submitted is not sufficient to enable the Decision-Maker to apply the criteria for approval, the Application may be denied on such grounds. 
D.  Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. The City Administrator shall be the Responsible Official to approve a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
1.  Request. An Applicant may submit in writing a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
2.  Received. 
a.  If the Applicant is requesting a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, the Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action must be received by the City Administrator on or before the seventh (7 th ) calendar day prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which action would have to be taken (based on the 30-day requirement in State law) on the Application. 
b.  Waiver requests that are not received by that day shall not be considered properly submitted, and action shall be taken on the Application at such meeting as scheduled. 
3.  Requirements Maintained. 
a.  Submission of a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, and acceptance of such waiver by the City as part of an Application, shall not be deemed in any way a waiver to any requirement within this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  A waiver from requirements herein is a separate and distinct process (see 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver). 
E.  Expiration of a Subdivision Related Application-Before Approval Decision. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, a subdivision related Application shall automatically expire (ending all vesting claims) at the close of business on the forty-fifth (45 th ) calendar day after the Application's Official Vesting Date, if: 
1.  The Applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the permit Application; 
2.  The City provides to the Applicant, not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day after the date the Application is filed, written notice that specifies the necessary documents or other information, and the date the Application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
3.  The Applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's requirements relating to the Application within the time provided in the notification. 
F.  Vesting Begins on the Official Vesting Date. An Application shall be vested into the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance in effect at the time of the Application's Official Vesting Date. 
G.  Right to 30-Day Action for Plats Applications Begins on the Official Submission Date. The statutory 30-day time frame for Plat approvals, established by TLGC 212, shall commence on the Official Submission Date. 
Sec. 155.3.04. - Processing, action, and notification of application decision. 
A.  Action by the Responsible Official. 
1.  The Responsible Official for an Application shall initiate internal (i.e., City Staff) review and assessment of the Application following the City's development review procedures. 
2.  The Responsible Official shall also, to the extent possible, work with the Applicant by advising on and communicating revisions that may be necessary to bring the Application into compliance with City regulations in preparation for consideration by the appropriate Decision-Maker. 
B.  Decision. The Decision-Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Application within the time period prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
C.  Conditions Attached. The Decision-Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, in which case the Application is considered denied until the conditions are satisfied. 
D.  Notification of Decision. The City shall send written notice within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of a decision on an Application. 
E.  Notification of Appeal. Whenever appeal is taken from a final decision on an Application following a public hearing, or whenever the City is to consider revocation of an Application that was obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the appeal or revocation proceeding shall be provided to the Applicant. 
Sec. 155.3.05. - Public hearings for replat and plat vacation applications. 
A.  Setting the Hearing. 
1.  When the Responsible Official determines that an Application is complete and that a public hearing is required by this Subdivision Ordinance (see 4.08.B [Replat] and 4.10.C [Plat Vacation]) or by State law, the official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance with State law. 
2.  The time set for the public hearing shall conform to the time periods required by Sections 4.08.B (Replat) and 4.10.C (Plat Vacation) in this Subdivision Ordinance and by State law. 
B.  Conduct of the Hearing. 
1.  The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with State law. 
2.  Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. 
3.  Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name and address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization or Applicant, state the name of the organization or Applicant for the record. 
C.  Record of Proceedings. The board/commission conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings using standard municipal record-keeping procedures. 
D.  Notice Requirements for Replats. 
1.  Published Notice for Replats. 
a.  Whenever published notice of a public hearing for a Replat approval before the Council and/or Commission is required under State law, or this Subdivision Ordinance, the Responsible Official shall cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15 th ) calendar day before the date set for the required hearing. 
b.  The notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing, and identification of the subject property, where the decision concerns an individual tract or parcel of land. 
2.  Personal Notice for Replats. 
a.  Notification by Mail. Whenever personal notice of a Replat public hearing before the Council and/or Commission, is required by State law or this Subdivision Ordinance, the City Administrator shall cause notice to be sent by regular mail before the tenth (10 th ) calendar day before the hearing date to the following: 
i.  Each owner of real property located within the original subdivision and within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the property in question, and 
ii.  The Applicant and/or property owner. 
b.  Notification Details. The notice shall set forth the name of the Applicant, the time, place and purpose of the hearing, identification of the subject property. 
i.  Notice shall be sent to each owner indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll for land inside the City limits, and, when required by State law, on the most recently approved County tax roll for land in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. For recently annexed land that is not included on the most recently approved City or County tax roll, notice may be given by publication. 
ii.  Notice shall be considered served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and first class postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
E.  Notice Requirements for Plat Vacations. 
1.  Published notice of the public hearing on the Plat Vacation Application shall be given in accordance with 3.05 Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications and State law. 
2.  The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council. 
Sec. 155.3.06. - Amendments and expiration to approved subdivision applications. 
A.  Amendments/Revisions to an Approved Subdivision Application. Unless another method is expressly provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, any request to amend or revise an approved Application shall be considered a new Application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original Application and the standards in effect at the time such new Application is filed with the City. 
B.  Expiration of an Approved Subdivision Application. 
1.  Subdivision Application Expiration-Two (2) Years. Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, an approved Application shall automatically expire two (2) years following the approval date of the Application (see 5.01.G Expiration Date for Construction Plans for expiration of Construction Plans), and shall become null and void, and all activities under the Application thereafter shall be deemed in violation of this Subdivision Ordinance, if: 
a.  The Applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by this Subdivision Ordinance or as part of the approval of the Application or that was made under the terms of any Development Agreement, within the time limits established for satisfaction of such condition or term; or 
b.  The Applicant fails to submit a subsequent complete Application required by this Subdivision Ordinance within the time so required; or 
c.  A Development Agreement (5.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion) is not approved for the development. 
2.  Applications with No Time Limit. If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the Application or in the regulations governing, the time shall be presumed to be two (2) years following the date the Application was approved. 
3.  Applications with Vested Right. Unless a different date is determined pursuant to and upon review of a vested rights petition, an Application approved prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance shall expire in accordance with the terms of the regulations in effect at the time the Application was filed. 
C.  Effect of Expiration. 
1.  Upon the expiration of an approved Application, all previously approved Applications for the same land shall also expire on the expiration date if the filing of an Application was required to avoid expiration for the previously approved Application(s). 
2.  Thereafter, a new Application must be submitted for consideration and approval subject to regulations in effect at the time the new Application is filed. 
SECTION 4. - PLATS AND PLATTING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 155.4.01. - Subdivision procedure summary. 
    Any owner or Developer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction who wishes to subdivide such land shall conform to the following general procedures. 
A.  General Procedures. 
1.  Pre-Application Conference (Optional). 
2.  Preliminary Plat. 
3.  Construction Plans. 
4.  Construction of improvements. 
5.  City acceptance of improvements. 
6.  Final Plat. 
Sec. 155.4.02. - General plat requirements. 
A.  Development Application. All submittals shall conform to the appropriate Application Form Requirements. 
B.  Application Fees. All Application fees shall be paid according to the Fee Schedule. 
C.  Phased Development. 
1.  All subdivisions shall be designed in accordance with Municipal Master Utility Plans. 
2.  The City may establish size limits and requirements for phased development. 
3.  A concept development plan for the entire site shall be prepared and shall accompany all submittals for a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat. 
4.  Phased Developments shall coordinate with the surrounding land use plan and existing developments. 
5.  Each phase shall submit a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat. 
D.  Drainage. If provisions are necessary for drainage facilities on the unplatted future phases of the development, then the Plat shall include separate instruments for (public or private easements) off-site drainage needs and shall include appropriate notes and descriptions providing the City the appropriate permissions and approvals needed for access and for maintaining and improving the public drainage system. 
Sec. 155.4.03. - General subdivision and platting procedures. 
A.  Plats Required for Land Subdivision. A Preliminary Plat or Minor Plat shall be approved prior to any land division that is subject to these regulations and prior to commencement of any new development. 
B.  Replats and Amending Plats. 
1.  Replat. A Replat, in accordance with State law, and the provisions of Section 4.08 shall be required any time a platted, recorded lot is further divided or expanded, thereby changing the boundary and dimensions of the property. 
2.  Amending Plat. In the case of minor revisions to recorded Plats or lots, an Amending Plat may also be utilized if in accordance with Section 4.09. 
C.  Zoning. 
1.  Conformance with Existing Zoning. All Applications shall be in conformance with the existing zoning on property inside the City Limits. 
2.  Request to Rezone First. If an Applicant seeks to amend the zoning for the property, the request to rezone the land shall be submitted and approved prior to acceptance of an Application for filing of a plat, unless as otherwise provided below. 
a.  The Applicant may request approval from the City Administrator to submit an application simultaneous with the zoning change request, in which case the Application for the zoning amendment shall be acted upon first, provided that the Application is accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (due to the more lengthy time frame necessary to advertise and process zoning Applications). 
b.  In the event that the requested zoning amendment is denied, the Plat Application shall also be rejected or denied. 
3.  Zoning Ordinance Site Plan Approval. Where Site Plan approval is required by the Zoning Ordinance prior to development, no Application for a Final Plat approval shall be accepted for filing until a Site Plan has been approved for the land subject to the proposed Plat. 
Sec. 155.4.04. - Pre-application conference (optional). 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The Pre-Application Conference is optional but intended to allow for the exchange of non-binding information between the Applicant and City Staff to ensure that the Applicant is informed of pertinent City development regulations and processes. 
2.  The Pre-Application Conference provides an opportunity for the Applicant and City Staff to discuss major development considerations such as utilities, roadways, drainage concerns, Comprehensive Plan elements, specific neighborhood characteristics, and historic information. 
3.  This exchange of information is intended to promote an efficient and orderly review process. 
B.  Pre-Application Conference before the Submission of Plans and Applications. 
1.  Prior to formal submittal of any required plan or Application, the Applicant is encouraged to consult with the City Staff in order for the Applicant to become familiar with the City's development regulations and the development process. 
2.  At the Pre-Application Conference, the Applicant may be represented by their land planner, engineer, surveyor, or other qualified professional. 
3.  Pre-application meetings do not vest a permit, application or other type of development approval, pursuant to Chapter 245, LGC. 
Sec. 155.4.05. - Preliminary plat. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a Preliminary Plat shall be to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development, and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Applicability. No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Preliminary Plat. 
C.  Exceptions. 
1.  A Preliminary Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to 4.07). 
2.  A Final Plat in accordance with Section 4.06 may be submitted in lieu of a Preliminary Plat if a Development Agreement and appropriate surety are submitted along with the Application. 
D.  Accompanying Applications. 
1.  Preliminary and Other Types of Plans. An Application for a Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Preliminary Drainage Plan; 
b.  Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan; 
c.  Preliminary Utility Plan; and 
d.  Other plans if deemed necessary for thorough review by the Responsible Official, such as a Planned Development Master Plan. 
Approval of each shall be separately included with this application. 
2.  Current Title Commitments. The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the Preliminary Plat. 
E.  Review by City Administrator/Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted. 
2.  Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review. 
3.  Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Preliminary Plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
F.  Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall: 
1.  Review the Preliminary Plat Application, the findings of the City Administrator and any other information available. 
a.  From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat conforms to this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Preliminary Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed approved by the Commission. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Preliminary Plat; 
b.  Approve the Preliminary Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Preliminary Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Preliminary Plat. 
G.  Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the Application for a Preliminary Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
1.  All Plats must be drawn to conform to the zoning regulations currently applicable to the property. If a zoning change for the property is proposed, then the zoning change must be completed before the approval of any Preliminary Plats/Final Plats; 
2.  No Plat or Replat may be approved that leaves a structure located on a remainder lot. 
3.  The Preliminary Plat is consistent with any approved Development Agreement; 
4.  The proposed provision and configuration of Public Improvements including, but not limited to, roads, water, wastewater, storm drainage, park facilities, open spaces, habitat restoration, easements and Right-of-Way are adequate to serve the development, meet applicable standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, and conform to the City's adopted master plans for those facilities; 
5.  The Preliminary Plat has been duly reviewed by applicable City staff; 
6.  The Preliminary Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual. 
7.  The Preliminary Plat is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, except where application of the Plan may conflict with State law; 
8.  The proposed development represented on the Preliminary Plat does not endanger public health, safety or welfare; and 
9.  The Preliminary Plat conforms to the City's subdivision Application checklists. 
H.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall allow the Applicant to proceed with the development and platting process by submitting Construction Plans and Final Plat. 
2.  Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed general approval of the subdivision's layout only, and shall not constitute approval or acceptance of Construction Plans or a Final Plat. 
I.  Expiration. 
1.  Two-Year Validity. 
a.  The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years following the date of approval, during which period the Applicant shall submit and receive approval for Construction Plans and a Final Plat for the land area shown on the Preliminary Plat. 
b.  If Construction Plans and a Final Plat Application have not been approved within the two (2) year period, the Preliminary Plat shall expire. 
2.  Relationship to Construction Plans. A Preliminary Plat shall remain valid for the period of time in which approved Construction Plans are valid (See Section 5.01.G). 
3.  Action on Final Plat. Should a Final Plat Application be submitted within the two (2) year period, but not be acted upon by the Commission within the two (2) year period, the Preliminary Plat shall expire unless an extension is granted. 
4.  Void If Not Extended. If the Preliminary Plat is not extended as provided in J below, it shall expire and shall become null and void. 
J.  Preliminary Plat Extension. A Preliminary Plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) year beyond the Preliminary Plat's initial expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to the City Administrator in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration of the Preliminary Plat, and shall include reasons why the Preliminary Plat should be extended. 
1.  Decision by the City Administrator. 
a.  The City Administrator will review the extension request and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Vesting Date of the request. 
b.  Should the City Administrator fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
2.  Considerations. In considering an extension, the City Administrator shall consider whether the following conditions exist: 
a.  A Final Plat has been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Preliminary Plat; 
b.  Construction Plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Preliminary Plat; 
c.  Construction is occurring on the subject property; 
d.  The Preliminary Plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and/or 
e.  If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the property. 
3.  Conditions. 
a.  In granting an extension, the City Administrator may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. 
b.  Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights. 
4.  Appeal of Denial for Extension. 
a.  Appeal of the City Administrator's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
i.  The denial of an extension by the City Administrator may be appealed to the Commission. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The Commission shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the City Administrator. 
b.  Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
i.  The denial of an extension by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The City Council shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the Planning and Development Department. 
iv.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
K.  Amendments to Preliminary Plats Following Approval. 
1.  Minor Amendments to Preliminary Plats. 
a.  Minor amendments to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat may be incorporated in an Application for approval of a Final Plat without the necessity of filing a new Application for re-approval of a Preliminary Plat. 
b.  Minor amendments may only include minor adjustments in street or alley alignments, lengths and paving details, and minor adjustments to lot lines that: 
i.  Do not result in creation of additional lots or any non-conforming lots (such as to zoning standards), and 
ii.  Are consistent with approved prior Applications. 
2.  Major Amendments to Preliminary Plats. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new Application for approval of a Preliminary Plat (including new fees, new reviews, new Official Vesting Date, new Official Submission Date, etc.) before approval of Construction Plats and/or a Final Plat. 
3.  Determination of Minor or Major Amendment. The City Administrator shall decide of whether proposed amendments are deemed to be minor or major, thereby requiring new submittal of a Preliminary Plat. 
Sec. 155.4.06. - Final plat. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a Final Plat is to ensure: 
1.  That the proposed Subdivision and development of the land is consistent with all standards of this Subdivision Ordinance pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, 
2.  That Public Improvements to serve the Subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City, or that provision for such installation has been made, and 
3.  That all other City requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the Final Plat to be recorded. 
B.  Applicability. No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Final Plat. 
C.  Exceptions. A Final Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (See Section 4.07). 
D.  Ownership. 
1.  The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the Final Plat. 
2.  The Final Plat shall be signed by each owner, or by the representative of the owners authorized to sign legal documents for the owners and lienholder, effectively denoting that they are consenting to the platting of the property and to the dedications and covenants that may be contained in the Final Plat. 
E.  Accompanying Applications. 
1.  An Application for a Final Plat may be accompanied by Construction Plans if also accompanied by a Development Agreement and appropriate surety in accordance with Section 5.05. 
2.  Approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with Section 5.05. 
F.  Prior Approved Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the approved Preliminary Plat, or as the Preliminary Plat may have been amended subsequently, incorporating all conditions imposed or required, if applicable. 
G.  Review by City Administrator. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted, 
2.  Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review, and 
3.  Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Final Plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Commission. 
H.  Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall: 
1.  Review the Final Plat Application, the findings of the City Administrator, and any other information available. 
a.  From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Final Plat conforms to the applicable regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  All Public Improvements have been installed (For exception, See Section 5.05) 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Final Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved by the Commission. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Final Plat; 
b.  Approve the Final Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Final Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled, and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Final Plat. 
4.  A motion to approve a Final Plat shall be subject to the following conditions, whether or not stated in the motion to approve: 
a.  All required fees shall be paid. 
b.  All conditions required by ordinances have been reviewed and approved by the City. 
c.  On-site easements and rights-of-way have been dedicated and filed of record and properly described and noted on the proposed plat. 
d.  All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that must be approved by the City Council and the abandonment ordinance numbers are shown on the plat. 
e.  Original tax certificates have been presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real property showing the current taxes are paid. 
I.  Final Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the Application for a Final Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
1.  With Prior Approved Preliminary Plat. 
a.  The Final Plat conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat except for minor amendments that are authorized under Section 4.05.K.1 and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved Preliminary Plat; 
b.  All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the Preliminary Plat, as applicable, have been satisfied; 
c.  The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5 and have been approved by the City Administrator. 
d.  Where Public Improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved Construction Plans and have been approved for acceptance by the City Administrator; 
e.  Where the City Administrator has authorized Public Improvements to be deferred, a Development Agreement has been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformity with Section 5.05; 
f.  The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this Subdivision Ordinance; 
g.  The Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Engineering Standards Manual; and 
h.  A plat prepared by a registered public surveyor conforms to the City Administrator's subdivision Application checklists and Subdivision Ordinance regulations. 
2.  Without Prior Approved Preliminary Plat. 
a.  The Final Plat conforms to all criteria for approval of a Preliminary Plat; 
b.  The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5 and have been approved by the City Administrator; 
c.  A Development Agreement with surety for installation of Public Improvements has been prepared and executed by the property owner in conformance with 5.05; 
d.  The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this Subdivision Ordinance; and 
e.  The Final Plat conforms to the City's subdivision Application checklist and Subdivision Ordinance regulations. 
J.  Procedures for Final Plat Recordation upon Approval. The Applicant shall supply to the City Administrator the required number of signed and executed copies of the Final Plat that will be needed to file the Plat, upon approval, with the County (in the County's required format) at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered for approval. 
1.  General. 
a.  Signatures. After approval of the Final Plat, the City Administrator shall procure the appropriate City signatures on the Final Plat. 
b.  Recording upon Performance. The Final Plat shall be recorded after: 
i.  The Final Plat is approved by the City; 
ii.  All required Public Improvements have been completed and accepted by the City or a Development Agreement has been executed and appropriate surety provided in accordance with Section 5.05; and 
iii.  All County filing requirements are met. 
2.  Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Installed. Where all required Public Improvements have been installed prior to recording of the Final Plat, the Applicant shall meet all requirements in accordance with Section 4.06.I. 
3.  Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Have Not Been Installed. Where some or all required Public Improvements are not yet completed in connection with an approved Final Plat, the Applicant shall submit the Final Plat as approved, revised to reflect any conditions imposed as part of approval. 
4.  Update of Proof of Ownership. If there has been any change in ownership since the time of the Proof of Ownership provided under 4.05.D, the Applicant shall submit a new consent agreement executed by each owner and lienholder consenting to the platting of the property and the dedications and covenants contained in the Plat. 
K.  Effect of Approval. The approval of a Final Plat: 
1.  Supersedes any prior approved Preliminary Plat for the same land. 
2.  If applicable, authorizes the Applicant to install any improvements in public Right-of-Way in conformance with approved Construction Plans and under a Development Agreement (refer to 5.05). 
3.  Authorizes the Applicant to seek Construction Release and/or issuance of a Building Permit. 
L.  Revisions Following Recording/Recordation. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or Amending Plat, as applicable. 
M.  Signature Blocks. Unless otherwise modified by the City Administrator, the following signature blocks shall be used in conjunction with the Final Plat. 
1.  Certificate of Surveyor. 
2.  Owner's Statement for Fire Lane Easement. 
3.  Owner's Acknowledgement and Dedication. 
4.  Lienholder's Ratification of Plat Dedication. 
5.  Certificate of Final Plat Approval. 
6.  Certificate of Completion and Authorization to File. 
7.  County Authorization (If Applicable). 
N.  Expiration of Approved but not Filed Plat. 
1.  Two-Year Validity. 
a.  The approval of a Final Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years following the date of approval, during which period the Applicant shall submit and receive approval for Construction Plans for the land area shown on the Final Plat. 
b.  If Construction Plans have not been approved within the two (2) year period, the Final Plat shall expire. 
2.  Relationship to Construction Plans. A Final Plat shall remain valid for the period of time in which approved Construction Plans are valid (5.01.G Expiration Date for Construction Plans). 
3.  Void If Not Extended. If the Final Plat is not extended as provided in 4.06.O Final Plat Extension for Approved but not Filed Plat, it shall expire and shall become null and void. 
4.  Approved Final Plat that have been Filed (Recorded with the County). Approved plats that have been filed with the County shall not expire. 
O.  Final Plat Extension for Approved but not Filed Plat. A Final Plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) year beyond the Final Plat's initial expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to the City Administrator in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration of the Final Plat, and shall include reasons why the Final Plat should be extended. 
1.  Decision by the City Administrator. 
a.  The City Administrator will review the extension request and shall approve or deny the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the request. 
b.  Should the City Administrator fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
2.  Considerations. In considering an extension, the City Administrator shall consider whether the following conditions exist: 
a.  Construction Plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Final Plat; 
b.  Construction, including the installation of public improvements, is occurring on the property; 
c.  The Final Plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and/or 
d.  If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the property. 
3.  Conditions. 
a.  In granting an extension, the City Administrator may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. 
b.  Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights. 
4.  Appeal of the Denial of a Final Plat Approval Extension. 
a.  Appeal of the City Administrator's Decision on a Final Plat Extension. 
i.  The denial of an extension by the City Administrator may be appealed to the Commission. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The Commission shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the City Administrator. 
b.  Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Final Plat Extension. 
i.  The denial of an extension by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The City Council shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the City Administrator. 
iv.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
Sec. 155.4.07. - Minor plat. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a Minor Plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances as outlined in Texas Local Government Code Section 212.0065. 
B.  Applicability. An Application for approval of a Minor Plat may be filed only in accordance with State law, when all of the following circumstances apply: 
1.  The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots; 
2.  All lots in the proposed Subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance; and 
3.  Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the Subdivision. 
C.  Application Requirements. The requirements for the submittal of a Minor Plat shall be determined by the City Administrator. 
D.  Additional Requirements. To be considered a Minor Plat it must also meet the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed Plat shall be for the Subdivision of one lot into four (4) or fewer lots. 
2.  The person, firm or corporation owning the property shall not have more than one Minor Plat approved during any twelve (12) month period. 
3.  The person, firm or corporation presenting the proposed Plat shall dedicate all easements and Right-of-Way as required elsewhere in these regulations. 
4.  Private wells and private wastewater treatment facilities that meet the current City health standards shall be considered adequate when existing public water and wastewater lines are not within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed Plat. 
E.  Minor Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the Application for a Minor Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
1.  The Minor Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property (if applicable), any approved Development Agreement (if applicable), and all other requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance that apply to the Plat; 
2.  All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by improved public street access and by all required City utilities and services and by alleys, if applicable; 
3.  The ownership, maintenance and allowed uses of all designated easements have been stated on the Minor Plat; and 
4.  Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
F.  Review by City Administrator/Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted; and 
2.  Distribute to appropriate City Departments for review. 
G.  Action by City Administrator/Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Determine whether the Minor Plat meets the regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the City Administrator, or if the City Administrator has not deferred the Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision, within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Minor Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Minor Plat; 
b.  Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Defer the Minor Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted. 
H.  Deferral of Decision of a Minor Plat Application. 
1.  Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision. If the City Administrator defers the Minor Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the City Administrator deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Minor Plat; 
b.  Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Minor Plat. 
I.  Procedures for Minor Plat Recordation Following Approval. The procedures for recordation of a Minor Plat shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a Final Plat, as outlined in Section 4.06.J. 
J.  Revisions Following Approval. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or Amending Plat, as applicable. 
Sec. 155.4.08. - Replat. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. 
1.  A Replat of all or a portion of a recorded Plat may be approved in accordance with State law without vacation of the recorded Plat, if the Replat: 
a.  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
b.  Is approved after a public hearing; and 
c.  Does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded Plat. 
2.  A Replat shall be subject to approval by the Commission. 
B.  General Notice and Public Hearing Requirements. 
1.  Published notice of the public hearings on the Replat Application shall be given in accordance with Section 3.05 if applicable. 
a.  See specific notice and hearing requirements for "Certain" Replats in Section 4.08.F. 
2.  A public hearing shall be conducted by the Commission on all Replat Applications. 
C.  Application. The Application for a Replat of a Subdivision shall meet all Application requirements of a Final Plat. The Applicant shall acknowledge that the Replat will not amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded Plat. 
D.  Partial Replat Application. If a Replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the Replat must reference the previous Subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the Replat the specific lots which are being changed along with a detailed "Purpose for Replat" statement. 
E.  Criteria for Approval. 
1.  The Replat of the Subdivision shall meet all review and approval criteria for a Final Plat. 
2.  The Replat document shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor. 
F.  Additional Requirements for "Certain" Replats. 
1.  Applicability of "Certain" Replats. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212.015, a Replat without vacation of the preceding Plat must conform to the requirements of this Section if: 
a.  During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or 
b.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot. 
2.  Notice and Public Hearing Requirements for "Certain" Replats. Notice of the required public hearing shall be given before the fifteenth (15 th ) calendar day before the date of the hearing by: 
a.  Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the applicable City or unincorporated area (as applicable) in which the proposed Replat property is located; and 
b.  Written notice, with a copy of Section 212.015(c) of the Texas Local Government Code (as amended) attached, forwarded by the City to the owners of lots that are in the original Subdivision and that are within two hundred feet (200') of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a Subdivision within the ETJ, the most recently approved applicable county tax roll of the property upon which the Replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City. 
3.  Protest. 
a.  If the Replat Application is accompanied by a waiver petition (per 7.01) and is protested in accordance with this Section, approval of the Replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the voting members of the Commission present at the meeting. 
b.  For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the Replat Application and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area, but within the original Subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior to the close of the public hearing. 
c.  The area of streets and alleys shall be included in the area computations. 
G.  Replat Review and Approval. 
1.  Replat. The review and approval processes for a Replat shall be the same as the review and approval processes for a Final Plat (except for the special public hearing and notice requirements described in Section 3.05. 
2.  Minor Replat. 
a.  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Replat involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities (i.e., a Minor Replat may be approved by the City Administrator in accordance with this Section 
b.  Prior to taking action on a proposed Minor Replat the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Otherwise, the review and approval process shall be the same as including: 
i.  Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision. 
H.  Effect. Upon approval of the Application, the Replat may be recorded and is controlling over the previously recorded Plat for the portion replatted. 
Sec. 155.4.09. - Amending plat. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of an Amending Plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making minor revisions to a recorded Plat consistent with provisions of State law. 
B.  Applicability. The procedures for an Amending Plat shall apply only if the sole purpose of the Amending Plat is to achieve one or more of the following Purposes: 
1.  Error Corrections or Administrative Adjustments. 
a.  Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding Plat. 
b.  Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding Plat. 
c.  Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding Plat. 
d.  Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments. 
e.  Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding Plat. 
f.  Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving Plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded Plats. 
g.  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
i.  Both lot owners join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  Neither lot is abolished; 
iii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
iv.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the Plat. 
2.  Relocate Lot Lines. 
a.  Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement. 
b.  Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
3.  Replatting. 
a.  Make necessary changes to the preceding Plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the Subdivision or a part of the Subdivision covered by the preceding Plat if: 
i.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
ii.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
iii.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area (per State law, TLGC 212.016). 
b.  Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
iv.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
C.  Certificates of Correction. Certificates of Correction are prohibited. 
D.  Notice Not Required. The approval and issuance of an Amending Plat shall not require notice, hearing or approval of other lot owners. 
E.  Review by City Administrator. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Review the plat and materials submitted. 
F.  Action by City Administrator. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Determine whether the Amending Plat meets the regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Amending Plat; 
b.  Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Defer the Amending Plat to the Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted. 
G.  Deferral of Decision on an Amending Plat Application. 
1.  Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision. If the City Administrator defers the Amending Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the City Administrator deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Amending Plat; 
b.  Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Amending Plat. 
Sec. 155.4.10. - Plat vacation. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a Plat Vacation is to provide an expeditious means of vacating a recorded Plat in its entirety, consistent with provisions of State law. 
B.  Initiation of a Plat Vacation. 
1.  By Property Owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a Plat may submit an Application to vacate the Plat at any time before any lot in the Plat is sold. 
2.  By All Lot Owners. If lots in the Plat have been sold, an Application to vacate the plat must be submitted by all the owners of lots in the Plat. 
3.  City Council. If the City Council, on its own motion, determines that the Plat should be vacated in the interest of and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare; and: 
a.  No lots within the approved Plat have been sold within five (5) years following the date that the Final Plat was approved by the City; or 
b.  The property owner has breached a Development Agreement, and the City is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of Public Improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successor; or 
c.  The Plat has been of record for more than five (5) years, and the City Council determines that the further sale of lots within the Subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors. 
C.  Notice. Published notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 3.05. 
D.  Review and Recommendation by the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the Plat Vacation Application and materials submitted; and 
2.  Recommend action on Plat Vacation to the City Council. 
E.  Action by the City Council. The City Administrator shall: 
1.  Review the Plat Vacation Application, the findings of the City Administrator, and any other information available. From all such information, the City Administrator shall make a finding as to whether the plat should be vacated. 
2.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Plat Vacation; 
b.  Approve the Plat Vacation with conditions, which shall mean that the Plat Vacation shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Plat Vacation. 
3.  The City Council's decision on a Plat Vacation shall be final. 
F.  Procedures for Recordation Following Approval. 
1.  If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the County Clerk's Office. 
2.  If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised Final Plat to be recorded along with the resolution which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. 
G.  Effect. 
1.  On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the previously filed plat shall have no effect. 
a.  Regardless of the City Council's action on the petition, the property owner(s) or Developer will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been agreed to by the City Council. 
2.  The Plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the Plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original Plat. 
3.  The City Council, at its discretion, shall have the right to retain all or specific portions of road Right-of-Way or easements shown on the Plat being considered for vacation. However, the City Council shall consider Plat Vacation upon satisfactory conveyance of easements and/or Right-of-Way in a separate legal document using forms provided by the City Attorney's office. 
Sec. 155.4.11. - Development plat. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a Development Plat is to ensure the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of such development with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Authority. This Section is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Sections 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. 
C.  Applicability. 
1.  To Whom Development Plat Regulations Apply. Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land located within the limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City must have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance with 1.04.D.2 of this Subdivision Ordinance, unless a Development Plat is not required in accordance with Section 1.04.D. 
2.  The Term "Development." For purposes of this Section, "development" means the new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement. 
3.  Cases Where Development Plat Regulations Apply. Development Plat regulations shall apply to any land lying within the City or within its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in the following circumstances: 
a.  The development of any tract of land that has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, unless expressly exempted herein; or 
b.  The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from the City's subdivision requirements, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in Section 1.04.E; or 
c.  The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street; or 
d.  The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five (5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated or constructed. 
D.  Exceptions. A Development Plat is not required: 
1.  When the land has an approved Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat; or 
2.  For bona fide agricultural activities; or 
3.  For construction of agricultural accessory structures and related development activities. 
E.  Prohibition on Development. No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued for any development or land division subject to this Section until a Development Plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and submitted to the City for filing at the County. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the City shall not require building permits or otherwise enforce the City's Building Code in the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in relation to any Development Plat required by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
F.  Required Information for all Development Plat Applicants. All Applications shall be submitted with the required information as stated on the Application Form. Information required shall be the same as required for a Final Plat. In addition to this information, a Development Plat shall: 
1.  Be prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor as a boundary survey; 
2.  Clearly show the boundary of the Development Plat; 
3.  Clearly show each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure, or improvement involving a change of the building, structure, or improvement; 
4.  Clearly show each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property; 
5.  Clearly show the dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part; and 
6.  Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the Development Plat, a completed Application Form, the required submission fee (per the City's current Fee Schedule), and a certificate or some other form of verification from the County appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property. 
G.  Accompanying Applications. An Application for a Development Plat may be accompanied by an application for rezoning approval. The rezoning Application shall be decided first. The applicant must execute a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action that is mandated by the State for general approval of Plats, including Development Plat approval. 
H.  Development Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a Development Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
1.  The proposed development conforms to all City plans, including but not limited to, the Comprehensive Plan, utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans; 
2.  The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (if located within the City's corporate limits) and this Subdivision Ordinance; 
3.  The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, in conformance with City regulations; 
4.  Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development have been tendered; and 
5.  The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in this Subdivision Ordinance, Engineering Standards Manual, and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land parcel. 
I.  Development Plat Review and Approval. The review and approval procedure for a Development Plat shall be the same as the review and approval processes for a Final Plat. 
J.  Effect. Upon approval, the Development Plat shall be filed at the County by the City in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat. 
Sec. 155.4.12. - Conveyance plat. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of a Conveyance Plat is to subdivide land and to provide for recordation of same, for the purpose of conveying (i.e., selling) the property without developing it. 
2.  A Conveyance Plat may be used to convey the property or interests therein; however, a Conveyance Plat does not constitute approval for any type of development on the property. 
B.  Applicability. A Conveyance Plat may be used in lieu of a Final Plat to record only the subdivision of property in the following instances: 
1.  Remainder Tract. 
a.  To record the remainder of a tract that is created by a Final Plat, provided that the remainder is not intended for immediate development; and 
b.  The remainder of a tract that was involved in a Final Plat must be larger than five (5) acres. 
2.  Inheritance or Holding Tract. To record the subdivision of property into parcels, five (5) acres or smaller in size, that are not intended for immediate development, provided all required Public Improvements exist to the City's current standards prior to approval and minimum frontage requirements are met. 
a.  All public Right-of-Way must be dedicated, contingent that alignments have been determined. 
b.  Installation of on-site improvements may be delayed if development of other tracts is not affected. All easements shall be dedicated to allow subdivided lot within the conveyance plat access to public infrastructure and/or drainage ways from the parent tract, if applicable. 
C.  Review and Consideration. Unless otherwise specified within this Section 4.12 Conveyance Plat for specific requirements for a Conveyance Plat, a Conveyance Plat shall be processed and approved using the same timing and procedures, including recordation, as specified for a Final Plat, refer to Section 4.06 Final Plat. 
D.  Concurrent or Prior Filing of a Final Plat. No Final Plat processed and approved in association with a Conveyance Plat shall be filed without the concurrent or prior filing of the associated approved Conveyance Plat for the remainder of the subject property. 
E.  Conveyance Plat Requirements. 
a.  No building or development permits shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided for land that has only received approval as a Conveyance Plat; a Final Plat must be filed for building and development permits and for utility service. 
b.  Notwithstanding the above, the Building Official may authorize temporary building permits, temporary occupancy permits, and temporary utility service. 
c.  A Conveyance Plat may be superseded by a revised Conveyance Plat or a Final Plat in total or in part through compliance with the procedures and requirements of these regulations. 
2.  Require a Preliminary Site Plan or Sketch Plan per the request of the City to ensure all Conveyance Plat tracts and remainder tracts have adequate access to public utilities and infrastructure. 
F.  Standards for Approval. 
1.  Access. 
a.  All lots created by a Conveyance Plat must have frontage and access to an existing or proposed public street, defined in the Comprehensive Plan, or an existing standard street meeting City construction standards and accessing the existing City street system. 
b.  All lots created by a Conveyance Plat must provide points of access as required by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Dedication of Right-of-Way. Dedication of Right-of-Way shall be required in accordance with the City requirements. 
G.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  Development on the Property Prohibited. The approval of a Conveyance Plat authorizes conveyance of the lot(s) created thereon, but does not authorize any type of development on the property. 
2.  Future Development Requires Compliance. The Applicant and future owner(s) of the property remain obligated to comply with all provisions in this Subdivision Ordinance upon future development of the property including, but not limited to, all requirements for platting, required Public Improvements, utility extensions, street improvements or assessments, Right-of-Way and easement dedications, and all other requirements in these regulations. 
SECTION 5. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 155.5.01. - Construction plans. 

Figure 2: Construction Plan Process 
A.  Purpose. To require that Public Improvements be installed to serve a development in accordance with all Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Submitting Plans. 
1.  Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the City Administrator's requirements, as required in the City's Application Form. Incomplete Construction Plans shall not be accepted and such plans shall be returned to the Applicant. All Construction Plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer registered with the State of Texas. 
2.  In addition to the requisite number of hard copies, Construction Plans shall also be prepared and submitted electronically oriented in Texas State Plane grid coordinates (U.S. Survey Foot), Grid North, NAD 83, at an elevation datum based on NAVD 88. Electronic copies shall be submitted in PDF, AutoCAD, GIS or other City approved formats. 
C.  Responsible Official and Decision Authority for Construction Plans. 
1.  Review and Approval Action. The City Administrator shall be the Responsible Official for review and approval of Construction Plans. 
2.  Outside Review. If an outside consultant is contracted to review Plats, Construction Plans or other submittals, then the Applicant shall reimburse the City for all review fees after the second review. 
3.  Decision-Maker Options. In this capacity, therefore, the City Administrator shall approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the Construction Plans. 
D.  Approval Required and Timing of Construction. Construction Plans must be approved in accordance with this Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures prior to the approval and/or recordation of the Final Plat, unless otherwise stated within this Subdivision Ordinance. 
E.  Criteria for Approval. The City Administrator shall approve Construction Plans if: 
1.  The Construction Plans are consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat, or the proposed Final Plat; and 
2.  The Construction Plans conform to the subject property's zoning (if the property is within the City Limits) and any planned development (PD) standards, and to the technical Engineering Standards Manual (ESM) for adequate public facilities, contained in this Subdivision Ordinance and all other applicable City codes and plans. 
F.  Effect. Approval of Construction Plans authorizes the Applicant to: 
1.  Schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting (5.02); and 
2.  Apply for Construction Release (5.03). 
G.  Expiration Date for Construction Plans. The approval of Construction Plans shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated, unless the Construction Plans are extended in accordance with Section 5.01.H Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date. 
H.  Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date. 
1.  General. 
a.  Construction Plans may be extended for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the expiration date. 
b.  A request must be made in writing to the City Administrator for such extension prior to expiration of the plans, and shall include reasons why the plans should be extended. 
2.  Decision by the City Administrator. 
a.  The City Administrator will review the extension request, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the extension request. 
b.  Should the City Administrator fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
3.  Consideration. The City Administrator shall extend Construction Plans approval for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the expiration date if: 
a.  A Final Plat has been submitted, approved or filed of record for any portion of the property shown on the Construction Plans; 
b.  The Construction Plans comply with new ordinances (i.e., ordinances that have been adopted after approval of the original Construction Plans) that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the City; 
c.  Demonstrable forward progress has been made to proceed with construction or required improvements; and 
d.  A Development Agreement (Section 5.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion), if applicable, is still valid and in full effect. 
4.  Conditions. In granting an extension, the City Administrator may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights. 
5.  Total Extension. A second six (6) month extension may be requested using the same process outlined above. 
Sec. 155.5.02. - Pre-construction meeting. 
A.  Requirement. 
1.  The Applicant(s) shall attend a Pre-Construction Meeting with the City Administrator following the approval of Construction Plans and prior to commencement of any construction on the property. 
2.  The City Administrator shall require three (3) business days to schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting. 
B.  Purpose. 
1.  Discussion of Procedures. The purpose of the Pre-Construction Meeting is to discuss administrative, communication, and operating procedures for project construction prior to Construction Release or issuance of a Building Permit. 
2.  Review of Criteria. A list of typical inspection items, procedures, and acceptance criteria for items in public Right-of-Way and easements will also be furnished to the Applicant. 
C.  Notice. The Applicant shall receive written notice from the City Administrator that Construction Plans have been approved and that the project is eligible for a Pre-Construction Meeting. 
D.  Effect. 
1.  Following the Pre-Construction Meeting and upon approval of the Construction Plans and full compliance with all pre-construction requirements, the City Administrator shall authorize Construction Release, allowing the Applicant to commence with construction of the project. 
2.  The Applicant may also be issued a Building Permit, if appropriate, provided that a Building Permit Application has been submitted and approved and all other Building Permit requirements have also been met. 
Sec. 155.5.03. - Construction release. 
1.  Requirements for a Construction Release. 
a.  Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat and/or the Construction Plans, receipt of all documentation (e.g., insurance information, bonds, etc.) and fees, and after the Pre-Construction Meeting with City staff and a franchise utility representative, the City Administrator shall release the plans for construction if all City requirements pertaining to construction have been met. All construction of public works, including but not limited to water works, sewers, drainage, highways, and streets shall be supervised by a licensed professional engineer. 
b.  The Construction Release shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated. 
2.  Construction Release Expiration and Extension. Expiration, and possible extension, of the Construction Release shall be the same as for the Construction Plans (see Sections 5.01.G and 5.01.H). 
Sec. 155.5.04. - Timing of public improvements. 
A.  Completion Prior to Final Plat Approval and Recordation. 
1.  Completion of all required Public Improvements, in accordance with the approved Preliminary Plat and the approved Construction Plans, shall occur prior to Final Plat approval and recordation. 
2.  A Final Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be considered for approval, prior to completion of such improvements except as provided in Section 5.04.B. 
B.  Completion after Final Plat Approval and Recordation. 
1.  The City Administrator, upon written request by the Applicant, may allow construction of Public Improvements after Final Plat approval and recordation. 
2.  Postponement of Public Improvements shall be conditioned on execution of a Development Agreement and provision of security, in accordance with Section 5.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion. 
3.  It shall be at the City Administrator's discretion to determine whether postponing construction of Public Improvements until after Final Plat approval and recordation is appropriate, and therefore, whether financial guarantee is acceptable through a Development Agreement. 
4.  All construction of the required Public Improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of construction release; an extension may be granted by the city council for up to one (1) year. 
C.  Deferral of Obligation. The City Administrator may defer the Developer's obligation to construct Public Improvements to serve a new development upon execution of a Development Agreement and upon provision of adequate security (see Section 5.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion). 
D.  Phased Development. If the development is being platted and constructed in phases, improvements shall be completed as platted areas are approved and phases are constructed. 
E.  Easements for Utility Providers. 
1.  The Applicant is responsible for contacting all utility providers prior to beginning construction, and for securing all necessary easements for same prior to Final Plat approval and recordation. 
2.  The Applicant's engineer shall provide the City Administrator with written certification that all necessary easements are secured for the various utility providers, and such easements shall be shown on the Final Plat with the recording information for each. 
F.  Off-Site Easements. 
1.  All necessary public and/or private off-site easements required for installation of required off-site improvements to serve the development shall be acquired by the Applicant prior to the Pre-Construction Meeting (see Section 5.02 Pre-Construction Meeting), or prior to approval and recordation of the Final Plat, whichever occurs first. Any off-site private improvements shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. 
2.  Off-site easements shall be conveyed and recorded at the County by an instrument approved by the City. 
3.  If the property on which the off-site easement is required has been platted, a separate instrument shall be required to dedicate the easement. 
4.  The Applicant shall be responsible for the acquisition of all required off-site easements. If the Applicant is unable to acquire the necessary off-site easements, the Applicant may request assistance from the City. The Applicant shall provide the City with easement or Right-of-Way survey documents and exhibits, documentation, including evidence of a reasonable offer made to the affected property owner. Upon receiving a written request for assistance, the City may secure the services of a Right-of-Way agent, at the developer's cost. The City may secure easements through eminent domain proceedings, should the City deem it appropriate. 
5.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for the costs of acquiring the necessary easements including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs. 
Sec. 155.5.05. - Development agreements and security for completion. 
A.  Development Agreements. When any of the required Public Improvements (i.e., water, wastewater, streets, drainage, park improvements etc.) will be postponed and constructed after Final Plat approval and recordation, the Final Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be approved, unless and until the Applicant enters into a Development Agreement of standardized format approved by the City by which the 
1.  Applicant: 
a.  Will complete the improvements; 
b.  Warrants the improvements for a period of two (2) years following final and formal acceptance by the City; 
c.  Provides a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the costs of the improvements for such period to ensure the repair and replacement of all defects due to faulty materials and workmanship that appear within the two (2) year period following date of acceptance; 
d.  Provides provisions (e.g., performance and payment bonds) for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent with Section 5.05.D Security for Completion of Improvements; and 
e.  Outlines other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the Applicant and the City, or as may be required by this Subdivision Ordinance, including insurance requirements and covenants to comply with other ordinances of the City. 
2.  Exception: 
a.  If escrow is provided in agreement with Section 5.05.E (Escrow Policies and Procedures), then the requirement for a Development Agreement may be waived by the City Administrator. 
B.  Development Agreements to Run with the Land. 
1.  The Development Agreement shall provide that the covenants and other items of agreement contained therein shall run with the land and shall bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the Applicant. 
2.  All existing owners shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants and other items contained in the agreement. 
C.  Development Agreement Decision by the City Council. 
1.  The City Administrator shall review all Development Agreements. 
2.  The City Administrator shall recommend an action to the City Council for all Development Agreements. 
3.  The Development Agreement shall require the approval of the City Council. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Development Agreement. 
a.  The City Council may authorize the City Administrator to approve specific Development Agreements on behalf of the City Council. In the event of a disagreement between the City staff and the Subdivider concerning stipulations of the Development Agreement, the Subdivider may request City Council approval of alternative provisions. 
D.  Security for Completion of Improvements. 
1.  Type of Security. 
a.  When any of the required Public Improvements will be constructed after approval and recordation of the Final Plat, the Applicant shall guarantee proper construction of such postponed improvements and payment of all claimants supplying labor and materials for the construction of the improvements, in accordance with the City's standards and with this Subdivision Ordinance, by a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City, on the form provided by the City. 
b.  The performance and payment bonds shall be approved as to form by the City Administrator. 
c.  In lieu of security, the City may accept a developer agreement drafted in a form suitable to the City Attorney. 
2.  Estimated Cost and Security Approval. 
a.  Security shall be issued in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost to construct and complete all required Public Improvements to the City's standards as estimated by the Applicant's professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, and as approved by the City Administrator. 
b.  Security shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Administrator. 
c.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat). 
E.  Escrow Policies and Procedures. 
1.  Request for Escrow. 
a.  The City may require or the Developer may petition the City to defer required improvements in exchange for a deposit of escrow up to an amount not to exceed $15,000 for a period of two (2) years from acceptance of the project. An example may include a timing issue due to pending street improvements by another agency such as TxDOT. 
b.  The City Administrator may require studies and other information to support the Developer's request to escrow. 
2.  Escrow Deposit with the City. 
a.  When the City Administrator requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits, the Developer shall deposit in escrow with the City, at a financial institution to be approved by the City, an amount equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the total "turnkey" costs including, but not limited to, the design, permitting, acceptance and inflation costs related to the improvement(s). The full amount of escrow shall remain deposited with the City until completion of the project. 
b.  The City Administrator shall review and approve the amount, which shall be approved and paid prior to recordation of the Final Plat. 
3.  City Usage of Escrowed Funds. The City may also use the escrowed funds in participation with another entity (such as TxDOT or the County, etc.) to jointly construct the Public Improvement(s). 
4.  Termination of Escrow. 
a.  Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which remain unused after a period of ten (10) years following the date of such payment shall, upon written request, be returned to the Developer. 
b.  Such return of escrowed funds does not remove any obligations of the Developer for construction of the required improvement(s). 
5.  Refund. If all or a portion of a street or other type of Public Improvement for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the City, the remaining unused escrowed funds, upon written request shall be refunded to the Developer after completion and City acceptance of the street or Public Improvement. The City shall require thirty (30) days from the request to process the refund. 
6.  Interest on Escrowed Funds. When escrowed funds are returned or refunded to the escrowing Developer, the City shall retain all of the interest accrued by the funds. 
7.  Escrow Fee Agreement. The City Administrator, at his/her discretion, may require an escrow fee agreement be executed. 
F.  Pro-rata Policy for Infrastructure Reimbursement. 
1.  The subdivider shall be fully responsible for the construction of utilities necessary for the subdivision and the surrounding area, unless other provisions are approved by the City Council. Provisions for reimbursement of costs required by the City but exceeding those necessary to serve the subdivision, and any other provisions, shall be made a part of a facilities agreement. For any subsequent subdivision utilizing such facilities, any costs due prior subdividers shall be prorated by the use the new subdivision bears to the amount due. Such prorated amounts will be made a part of any subsequent facilities agreement, collected by the City, and repaid to the original developer making such improvements. 
2.  All such reimbursements or prorations shall be based on the actual cost of the improvements at the time of their construction, subject to comparison with other current unit and/or project costs. The original subdivider shall therefore provide the City with acceptable documentation of actual construction costs from which calculation of reimbursable amounts will be made for inclusion in a facilities agreement. 
3.  (a)  As concerns all non-residential property: In cases that a Subdivision utilizes utilities or infrastructure already constructed through use of city funds, the subdivider shall pay to the City for the use of such facilities an amount equal to that which would be required to serve the subdivision under the requirements of this ordinance, based upon policies developed and approved by the City Council. 
(b)  As concerns residential property: All provisions that subjected residential property to a reimbursement policy are void and of no affect. 
4.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the adjacent owner shall pay 100 percent of the costs incurred by the subdividers to acquire an easement from the adjacent owner. The pro-rata share paid by the adjacent owner to the City will be forwarded to the subdivider within 60 days of receipt by the City. All pro rata payments levied are a personal liability and charge against the real and true owners of the premises described, notwithstanding such owners may not be named, or may be incorrectly named. 
G.  City Infrastructure Participation. 
1.  The City may participate with the subdivider on major items of construction such as lift stations, bridges or streets adjacent to the subdivision, which benefit existing or future development in addition to that being subdivided. The City shall participate in the street construction within and adjacent to new subdivisions on the following basis: 
a.  All streets not exceeding forty-five (45) feet from curb back to curb back shall be paid for and constructed by the subdivider. 
b.  If the subdivider's property abuts only one side of a street right-of-way, the subdivider shall provide not less than twenty-four (24) feet of paved width. 
c.  Streets in excess of forty-five (45) feet in width shall be provided by the subdivider in accordance with the City's transportation plan, or on request of the City Council, but the City shall pay the cost of developing the width of the street in excess of forty-five (45) feet, excluding the cost of curbs or turning lanes. 
2.  The construction of certain facilities required by the provisions of this ordinance may not be possible or practical at the time the subdivider prepares their plans for public improvements. Such deletion or delay of improvements may be specified in a facilities agreement, together with provisions for escrow deposits or future payments by the city and/or subdivider. The City shall not be responsible for payment until the street is extended into or through property other than that being subdivided, and/or until funds are available, unless otherwise provided in the facilities agreement for the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-24 , passed July 3, 2018) 
Sec. 155.5.06. - Inspection, maintenance, and acceptance of public improvements. 
A.  Inspection of Public Improvements. 
1.  Timing and Contact. 
a.  The City Administrator shall inspect the construction of improvements while in progress, as well as upon completion. 
b.  The Applicant, or Applicant's contractor, shall maintain contact with the City Administrator during construction of improvements. 
2.  Conformance with Construction Plans. 
a.  Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. 
b.  Any significant change in design required during construction shall be made and documented by the Applicant's engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the City Administrator. 
3.  Corrections to Improvements. If the City Administrator finds, upon inspection, that any of the required Public Improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with the approved Construction Plans, the Applicant shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the Public Improvements to bring such into compliance. 
4.  No building permit shall be issued until completion of all improvements within the subdivision and acceptance by the city. The authorized city representative shall have the authority, after reviewing the improvements, to release parts of the subdivision for building permits. The engineer responsible for the design of the proposed improvements shall submit testing reports performed by the engineer of an independent testing laboratory with a verification statement to the authorized city representative that the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the City Council and in accordance with any other provisions of any other ordinance of the city applicable thereto. 
B.  Public Works Inspection Fees. 
1.  A public works inspection fee of two percent (2%) of the actual contract costs of city-maintained improvements shall be established. The fee shall be based on a percentage of the estimated cost of public improvements including, but not limited to water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage structures, bridges, culverts, paving, screening walls, etc. The fee shall be due and payable at the time of the preconstruction meeting for residential developments and at the time of the building permit issuance for industrial and commercial developments. 
2.  Fee Standards. 
a.  The subdivider is required to retain a professional engineer to supervise the construction of all public improvements as required in Title 6 of the Texas Occupation Code, §1001.407. The supervision of the construction shall include, but not be limited to construction inspection and verifying the compliance with the construction plans and specifications. 
b.  If the subdivider does not retain a professional engineer to supervise the construction, then 5.06.B.1 shall apply. 
c.  Inspections shall be conducted during normal business hours, 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday. 
3.  Exceptions. 
a.  Where excavations are made by a public utility company operating under a franchise agreement issued by City or under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works, a permit may be granted without making the advance permit payment, or waived if the franchise agreement permits waiver and approved by the Director of Public Works. 
4.  Cost for Construction. 
a.  The Developer shall submit to the City a cost for construction of the public infrastructure to be dedicated to the City and upon which the maintenance bond and inspection fees will be based. 
b.  The cost of construction shall be reviewed and approved by the City Administrator. 
5.  Inspection During Non-Business Hours. 
a.  Public works inspections may be conducted at times other than normal working hours with prior approval. 
b.  A minimum forty-eight (48) hour notice must be given to the City by the Developer for any work that, in the City's sole opinion, requires inspection and occurs during non-business hours, and the Developer shall reimburse the City a minimum of four (4) hours at the current overtime rate per hour upon receipt of an invoice. 
C.  Maintenance during Construction. The Applicant shall maintain all required Public Improvements during construction of the development. 
D.  Engineer's Certification and Submission of Record Drawings. 
1.  Upon completion of the construction of all improvements, a certificate shall be provided, signed by the subdivision's professional engineer, that any and all improvements constructed in the subdivision have been completed in accordance with the approved construction plans 
2.  The City shall not accept dedication of required Public Improvements until the Applicant's engineer has certified to the City Administrator, through submission of detailed Record Drawings, which have been approved by the City, of the project and filed copies of any off-site easements that the Public Improvements have been built in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. 
3.  Each record drawing sheet shall show all changes made in the Construction Plans during construction, and on each sheet, there shall be a "record" stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date, which shall be maintained by the City Administrator. 
4.  Digital files of all the Record Drawings shall be submitted by the Applicant in a format acceptable by the City and received by the City. 
E.  Acceptance or Rejection of Improvements by the City Administrator. 
1.  Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall be responsible for inspecting all required Public Improvements shown in the Construction Plans, and for accepting completed subdivision improvements intended for dedication to the City. 
2.  Final Inspection. After completion of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading, and erosion control, the City Administrator and other designated representatives (as applicable) will perform a final inspection before recommending acceptance of the improvements via a Letter of Final Acceptance. 
3.  Letter of Final Acceptance. If all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with Subdivision Ordinance regulations and with the City's design standards and all inspection fees have been paid, then the City Administrator shall issue a Letter of Final Acceptance to the Applicant, thereby notifying the Applicant of the City's approval of improvements and acceptance or future acceptance subject to approval of a Final Plat. 
a.  In cases where a Final Plat has not been approved, the Letter of Final Acceptance will indicate that the City's acceptance of the Public Improvements will occur concurrently with the approval of a Final Plat. 
b.  In cases where a Final Plat has already been approved with a Development Agreement, then the Letter of Final Acceptance will indicate that the City's acceptance of the Public Improvements. 
4.  Meaning of Acceptance. Acceptance of the Improvements shall mean that the Applicant has transferred all rights to all the Public Improvements to the City for title, use, and maintenance. 
5.  Rejection. The City Administrator shall reject those Improvements that fail to comply with the City's standards and specifications. The City shall enforce the guarantee provided by agreement(s). 
F.  Disclaimer. 
1.  Approval of a Preliminary Plat or Final Plat by the Commission, or Construction Plans by the City Administrator, shall not constitute acceptance of any of the Public Improvements required to serve the Subdivision or development. 
2.  No Public Improvements shall be accepted for dedication by the City except in accordance with this Section. 
G.  Maintenance Bond. 
1.  Per requirements established and maintained by the City Administrator, the Developer shall furnish maintenance bonds to the City for Public Improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance by the City (see 5.06.E.3 Letter of Final Acceptance for acceptance dates). 
2.  The maintenance bond shall be a good and sufficient bond executed by a corporate surety approved by the City in an amount equal to the total cost of said improvements and guaranteeing their maintenance for two (2) years from the date of Final Plat approval. 
3.  The maintenance bond shall be for a full period of two years from the date of final approval of the contractual project and shall be in the amount of 20% of the contract price for the first year and in the amount of 10% of the contract price for the second year. 
4.  A licensed professional engineer shall write and seal an itemized letter verifying the accuracy of the maintenance of the items that were constructed. 
SECTION 6. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 155.6.01. - Minimum standards. 
A.  Basis for Standards. The standards established within this Subdivision Ordinance for dedication and construction of public facilities and infrastructure are based upon accepted engineering practices and historical usages and demands by different categories of development. 
B.  Minimum Level of Service Necessary. This Subdivision Ordinance identifies certain minimum standard requirements and sizes for utilities, roadways, parks, and other facilities that have been determined by the City Council to be necessary in order to provide the minimum level of service necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to ensure the quality of life currently enjoyed by the citizens. 
1.  It is the intent of this Subdivision Ordinance that no development occur until, and unless, these minimum standard levels of service are met. 
2.  Therefore, each Subdivision in the City and its ETJ shall be required to dedicate, construct or upgrade required facilities and infrastructure to a capacity that meets these minimum levels. 
3.  Additional requirements may be necessary for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. Where specific topographic or other conditions make special requirements, in addition to the minimum standards, necessary in order to achieve the best overall design, these standards may be modified by the Director of Public Works and/or City Engineer. 
Sec. 155.6.02. - Adequate public facilities. 
A.  Services Required. Land proposed for development in the City and in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, and drainage facilities designed by a professional engineer. 
B.  Approval Timing. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or off-site. 
C.  Rough Proportionality and Fair Share Statement. 
1.  The City desires that a new development project contribute its fair and proportional share of such costs. 
2.  There is a direct correlation between the increased demand on public facilities that is created by a new development, and the City's requirements to dedicate right-of-way and Easements and to construct a fair and proportional share of public improvements that are necessary to offset such impacts such that new development does not negatively affect the City as a whole. 
3.  A fair and proportional share shall be determined as the level or standard of service that is required to adequately serve a new development. 
4.  Standards relating to the dedication or construction requirements shall be roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system. 
5.  See 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal for proportionality approval procedures. 
Sec. 155.6.03. - Conformance to plans and codes. 
A.  Public Improvements Conform to Plan and Codes. 
1.  Design and construction of Public Improvements must conform to the standards, criteria, and requirements of the following, as they may from time to time be amended by those responsible for their promulgation. 
a.  The Thoroughfare Plan; 
b.  Engineering Standards Manual (ESM); 
c.  The Standard Construction Details; 
d.  The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
e.  Generally accepted Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Works; 
f.  American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials; Geometric Design of Highways and Streets; 
g.  Texas Health Code; 
h.  Texas Water Code; 
i.  The Drainage Design Manual; 
j.  Master Drainage Plans; 
k.  Floodplain Ordinance; 
l.  Erosion Control Ordinance; 
m.  Stormwater Management Plan; and 
n.  All other codes and ordinances of the City 
2.  If the construction of Public Improvements is not completed within one (1) year from the Preliminary Plat approval date, then the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most current criteria. 
Sec. 155.6.04. - Streets. 
A.  Adequate Streets. 
1.  The property owner shall ensure that the Subdivision is served by adequate streets and shall be responsible for the costs of Right-of-Way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards. 
2.  Additional Right-of-Way may be required at some street intersections to accommodate utilities, sidewalks, traffic control devices and/or sight distances. 
B.  Design and Construction. Design and construction shall conform to specifications included within these Subdivision Ordinance regulations as well as those included within the Engineering Standards Manual. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the general plan of the community, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Where such is not shown in the Thoroughfare Plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in a Subdivision shall: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of or conformance to an existing street impracticable; and 
c.  Be laid out so that they shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles. 
3.  Residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
4.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') shall be prohibited. 
5.  Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land-use, and the facilities in the area surrounding the land to be subdivided as stated in the Engineering Standards Manual. 
6.  Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
a.  Street markers and the erection thereof shall be at the expense of the Subdivider. 
7.  Residential lots less than one (1) acre shall not face Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets. 
8.  Driveways or alley pavement cuts shall not be permitted on Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets. 
9.  Streets shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the City's Engineering Standards Manual. 
C.  Street Right-of-Way Dedication. 
1.  Any Subdivider laying out and constructing new streets or whose Subdivision includes any portion of or is adjacent to an existing street shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  General Dedication Requirements. 
i.  All street Right-of-Way dedications shall in the aggregate provide the Right-of-Way widths required according to street classifications in City Ordinances and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plan. 
ii.  The required alignment of the Right-of-Way shall be determined with respect to property boundaries, safety, design, topography, and traffic management consideration. 
(a)  Concerns for safety, sound design principles and orderly development will prevail. 
(b)  Principles of efficient traffic management will be applied in accordance with the City's goals and objectives as expressed in the current Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plan. 
iii.  The appropriate alignment of any street Right-of-Way can only be determined by examining the property and topographical conditions along the entire length of the street. 
(a)  In order to provide adequate information to establish an appropriate Right-of-Way alignment the Developer shall provide property information and topographical information for a minimum distance of 200 feet in every direction that the street extends off of the property. 
(b)  Additional information may be required if, in the opinion of the City, the information provided indicates conditions that may require additional Right-of-Way consideration. 
b.  New Streets. New streets shall be provided where there is not an existing street, roadway or passage. 
i.  Internal Streets. Internal streets shall be designed and provided in accordance with the current City Ordinances and Engineering/Construction Criteria and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan or Thoroughfare Plans. Streets including curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the Engineering Standards Manual. 
ii.  Perimeter Streets: 
(a)  When a proposed residential or nonresidential Subdivision is developed abutting an existing or planned Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street or Collector Street, the Developer shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way within the Subdivision in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan. 
(b)  The Developer shall construct their proportional share of the abutting street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to the City's design standards for that type of street. 
(c)  The Developer's proportional share of the street construction shall be one-half (1/2) of the required street improvements for all pavement widths equal to or less than forty four (44) feet. For roadways greater than forty four (44) feet, the developer, subdivider shall construct or provide in escrow the cost of twenty two (22) feet of roadway. 
(d)  If the Developer disagrees with the City Administrator's determination of rough proportionality, then the Developer may file a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal. 
c.  Existing Streets. Streets may currently exist by reasons of Plat, metes and bounds description, general description or by prescription. If the existing geometrical configuration does not accommodate the current Comprehensive Plan/Thoroughfare Plan, the City may require the dedication of additional Right-of-Way to address safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. 
i.  Adjacent to a platted Subdivision: The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the distance from the platted Subdivision boundary. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. 
ii.  Along a Right-of-Way described by a metes and bounds or a general written description: The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the geometric centerline of the Right-of-Way as described. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. All existing Right-of-Way dedication within the Subdivision shall be converted from "separate instrument" to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the Final Plat. 
iii.  Along a prescriptive Right-of-Way: The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the apparent centerline of the existing pavement or of the travel way if unpaved. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. The Developer shall indicate on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat property lines and features which identify prescriptive Right-of-Way. These features may include fences, borrow ditches, utility lines, drainage improvements, limits of plowed or improved fields, etc. All existing prescriptive Right-of-Way dedications within the Subdivision shall be converted from prescriptive to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the Final Plat. 
D.  Street Classification Descriptions. 
1.  Local Street. 
a.  Distributes traffic to and from residences. 
b.  Short in length, non-continuous to discourage through traffic. 
c.  Low-density residential/single family. 
2.  Collector Street. 
a.  Carries traffic from local streets to Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets. 
b.  Uses served would include medium and high density residential, limited commercial facilities, some small offices and as direct access within industrial parks. 
3.  Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street. 
a.  Carries traffic from one urban area to another and serves the major activity centers of urbanized areas. 
b.  Used for longer urban trips and carries a high portion of the total traffic with a minimum of mileage. 
E.  General Requirements. 
1.  Streets must be designed in relation to the Comprehensive Plan/Thoroughfare Plan, existing and proposed streets, the terrain, streams, and other physical conditions. 
a.  The arrangement of streets must provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic and for utility efficiency. 
b.  The arrangement, character, extent, pavement width, Right-of-Way width, grade and location of each street shall be considered in its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan, to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and its relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such street. 
2.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts any part of any street so designated on the Comprehensive Plan, or where a street designated on the Comprehensive Plan crosses any part of the tract to be subdivided, such part of the proposed public street shall be platted, the Right-of-Way shall be dedicated, and the street shall be constructed by the Developer, consistent with the location as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan, and to a width consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the requirements contained within these regulations. 
3.  All streets shall be designed to coordinate with existing streets in adjoining Subdivisions. 
a.  Centerline offsets, where unavoidable, shall be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
b.  Greater centerline offsets as may be required by the City Administrator shall be planned where necessary for traffic safety. 
4.  Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets. 
5.  Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets. 
6.  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the Subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided area. 
7.  Streets should be platted to allow two tiers of lots between streets when possible. 
8.  The reservation in private ownership of strips of land at the end of proposed or existing streets and intended solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in the Subdivision shall be prohibited. 
9.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the Subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the City finds it will be reasonable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining land is subdivided. The other half of the street shall be platted within the adjacent tract at the time it is platted. 
10.  Median openings shall have a minimum offset of at least 125 feet from the centerline of an intersecting street or alley. 
11.  To ensure adequate access to each Subdivision, there should be at least two (2) planned points of ingress and egress, except that cul-de-sacs shall be permitted in conformity with Section 6.04.F Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets (below). 
a.  The City Council may require that more than two access points be constructed if the configuration, number of lots, or other consideration creates the need for additional access points. 
b.  Requirement 6.04.E.11.a will apply to subdivisions with more than 50 lots. 
F.  Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets. 
1.  Cul-de-sacs. 
a.  A cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. 
b.  A cul-de-sac street shall be platted and constructed with a concrete paved cul-de-sac at the closed end having a turnaround with a minimum outside paving diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet and a minimum street Right-of-Way diameter of at least one hundred-twenty (120) feet. (See 6.08.B.4 for supplemental information.) 
2.  Dead-End Streets. 
a.  Dead-end streets are prohibited unless the street design meets the requirements of paragraph (1) above or unless the street is intended to be extended in the future and the dead-end design is only temporary in nature. 
b.  If a temporary dead-end street is permitted, turnaround pavement meeting the dimensions listed for cul-de-sacs in Paragraph 6.04.F.1 Cul-de-sacs (above) and a temporary turnaround easement meeting the dimensions listed for the Right-of-Way in Paragraph 6.04.F.1 shall be provided on the Plat. 
i.  The portion of the temporary turnaround easement lying outside of the street Right-of-Way shall be shown as a dotted line on the Final Plat which shall denote a temporary easement. 
c.  In the event that the temporary dead-end street (as approved and shown on the Final Plat) is extended in the future, the portions of the temporary turnaround easement shall revert back to the lot(s) abutting the temporary turnaround easement. 
3.  Drainage Improvements. Provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage at the ends of dead-end streets. 
4.  Barricades. 
a.  Barricades and other traffic controls shall be installed by the Developer at dead-ends in accordance with Engineering Standards Manual. 
b.  Barricades and other traffic controls shall be maintained by the Developer or Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
G.  Street Class Requirements. 
1.  Street layout shall provide for continuation of Collector Streets in areas between Major Thoroughfares. 
2.  Local streets shall be extended through the tract to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands at intervals necessary to facilitate internal vehicular circulation with adjoining unplatted lands. 
3.  Where single family uses abut an existing or proposed Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets, the Plat or dedication instrument will provide: 
a.  Lots to side onto the arterial with a non-access restriction on the arterial side, or 
b.  Reverse frontage with screening and containing a non-access restriction along the rear property line, or 
c.  Lots with screened rear alleys, or 
d.  Other treatment as may be necessary or required for adequate protection of adjoining properties, after taking into consideration the proposed method of off-street parking and maneuvering which will prevent the necessity of backing into the Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets. 
H.  Street Design Criteria. All dedicated streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan/Thoroughfare Plan and the following Table 4: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
Table 4: Minimum Street Design Criteria 
Street Classification Minimum 
Right-of-Way Pavement Width Number of Lanes Parking Number of Parkways and Width Median Width Sidewalk/Shared Use Path Width 4-Lane Major Arterial 120' Two @ 28' 4 Prohibited Two @ 24' 16' 6'/10' 6-Lane Major Arterial 130' Two @ 38' 6 Prohibited Two @ 19' 16' 10'/10' Rural Arterial 100'-120' 48' 3 Prohibited 26' None 10'/10'' Minor Arterial 100' Two @ 27' 4 Prohibited Two @ 16' 14' 6'/10' Collector 70' 44' 2 Limited Two @ 13' None 6'/NA Local 50' 31' 2 Permitted Two @ 9.5' None 5' Notes: 
1. Depending upon the nature and impact of the proposed development, additional Right-of-Way will be required at most intersections and may be required at high-volume driveways to provide left and right turn lanes to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersections. Also, additional utility easements may be required beyond the Right-of-Way. 
2. If provided, the minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet (5'). 
3. Collector Streets: Existing rights-of-way (R.O.W.) fifty-five feet (55') in width or greater may be used for Collector Streets. New R.O.W dedicated for Collector Streets must be a minimum of seventy feet (70'). 
4. Sidewalk width requirements may be wider when adjacent to curbs, shrubs, fences, walls, or other structures.  

Figure 3: 4-Lane Major Arterial Section 

Figure 4: 6-Lane Major Arterial Section 

Figure 5: Rural Arterial Section, with adjacent trail easement 

Figure 6: Minor Arterial Section 

Figure 7: Collector Section 
I.  Street Intersection Design. No street or intersection shall vary from a 90 degree angle of intersection by more than five (5) degrees. 
J.  Construction Responsibilities. The Developer shall, at the Developer's own cost and expense, pay for constructing all roadways within the Developer's Subdivision. 
K.  Street and Alley Requirements. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  As a minimum, a street must be designated to safely provide two-way traffic for passenger, delivery, emergency, utility, and maintenance vehicles. 
i.  The minimum size street which can safely accommodate a development is a local street with two 15-foot lanes of traffic. 
ii.  In addition, a five foot (5') wide sidewalk is required on the developing side of the street to provide pedestrian safety and to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
b.  If the City determines that streets greater than the minimum standard are required, the City's engineer will conduct investigations, studies, and calculations to determine the infrastructure requirements. 
i.  If the Developer proposes to construct no greater than the minimum standard of infrastructure, it will be the responsibility of the Applicant to submit to the City engineering investigations, studies, and calculations in support of constructing the minimum standard. 
2.  Local Streets, Collector Streets, and Alleys. 
a.  Local street paving shall be in conformance with the City's Engineering Standards Manual. 
b.  Collector Street paving shall be in conformance with Table 4: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
c.  Alley paving shall be twelve feet (12') wide in residential areas and sixteen feet (16') wide in commercial and industrial areas. 
i.  Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley paving at that point. 
ii.  Paving radius where alleys intersect residential and Collector Streets shall be ten feet (10') and where alleys intersect Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets the radius shall be sixteen feet (16'). 
d.  For additional alley requirements, please see 6.06 Alleys. 
3.  Street Returns. 
a.  The minimum radius for all street returns shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
b.  Returns for driveways on local streets shall be five feet (5'). Commercial and industrial driveway returns shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') and a maximum of twenty feet (20') in special cases. 
L.  Street Signs. 
1.  Street signs shall be furnished and installed by the Developer for all intersections within or abutting the Subdivision. 
2.  Such signs shall be of a type approved by the City and include the block number. 
3.  Street signs shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
M.  Curb and Gutter Options. 
1.  A six (6) inch standard curb shall be constructed on both sides of all streets except as allowed in 2 and 3 below. 
2.  On residential local streets and any subdivision where all lots are one (1) acre or large, a "lay down" or "roll down" curb shall be permitted if designed in accordance with Engineering Standards Manual. 
3.  On subdivision where all lots are one acre or larger, a "ribbon curb" shall be permitted if designed in Engineering Standards Manual. 
Sec. 155.6.05. - Access management. 
A.  Intent of Access Management. It is the intent of this section to: 
1.  Prohibit the indiscriminate location and spacing of driveways while maintaining reasonable vehicular access to and from the public street system; 
2.  Reduce conflicting turning movements and congestion and thereby reducing vehicular accidents; and 
3.  Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new, high-quality developments in the City. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A person commits an offense if the person constructs, reconstructs, relocates or in any way alters the design or operation of any driveway without first obtaining a building permit issued by the Building Official. 
2.  No driveway shall be allowed or permitted if, in the determination of the City Administrator, it is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Street Section Classifications. Street section classifications shall be defined in accordance with the Transportation element of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Traffic Impact Analysis. 
1.  A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) may be required at the time of Preliminary Plat submittal for all site developments. For phased developments, the TIA shall include an analysis for each phase of the development and the threshold for the TIA shall be for the entire development. 
a.  Threshold for a Traffic Impact Analysis: 
i.  Residentially zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 1,000 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
ii.  Office zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
iii.  Nonresidential zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 2,500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
iv.  Industrial zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
b.  Calculation of the ADT for Subdivisions: 
i.  For calculating the ADT for residential zoned Subdivisions, a housing unit shall be considered to generate 10 vehicle trips a day. 
ii.  For calculating the ADT for office zoned Subdivisions, a 50,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 50,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
iii.  For calculating the ADT for retail zoned Subdivisions, a 60,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 2,500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 60,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
iv.  For calculating the ADT for industrial zoned Subdivisions, a 75,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 75,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
c.  The TIA impact study area shall include the site and area within one-half (1/2) mile from the boundary of the site. 
d.  A capacity analysis shall be conducted for all public street intersections and junctions of major driveways with public streets which are significantly impacted within the TIA impact study area. The capacity analysis will follow the principles established in the Transportation Research Board's (TRB) Highway Capacity Manual (HCM). 
2.  A Minor Subdivision Waiver may be granted by the City Administrator if the roadway is fully built. 
E.  Common Access. 
1.  Lots with sufficient frontage to safely meet the design requirements below may be permitted their own driveways. 
2.  A Common Access Easement may be required between adjacent lots fronting on any street section in order to minimize the total number of access points along those streets and to facilitate traffic flow between lots. 
3.  Common Access Easement. 

Figure 8: Example of Common Driveway (for illustrative purposes only) 
a.  The use of common driveways shall require the dedication of a joint-use private access easement on each affected property. 
b.  Said dedication shall be provided on the Final Plat of the subject properties, or be filed by separate instrument approved by the City Attorney with the County with a copy forwarded to the City. 
c.  The Plat shall state that the easement shall be maintained by the property owner. 
d.  The Common Access Easement shall encompass the entire width of the planned driveway plus an additional width of one foot on both sides of the drive. 
F.  Driveway Design for State Maintained Roadways Criteria. The following standards shall be followed in the design and construction of driveways. The values in the following tables represent minimum standards to be applied in designing and locating driveways on State maintained roadways. 
1.  Driveway Dimensions and Spacing. The following Table 5: Dimensions for Driveways along State Maintained Roadways indicates the minimum dimensional values required for driveways along State-maintained roadways. 
Table 5: Dimensions for Driveways along State Maintained Roadways Criteria Commercial & Multi-Family Driveway Service Driveway Driveway Throat Width 24-40 Feet 30-48 Feet Driveway Curb Radius 20-30 Feet 25-40 Feet Minimum Distance to Intersection Along Roadway 300 Feet 300 Feet Minimum Driveway Spacing Along Roadway 300 Feet 300 Feet Notes: 1. The requirements for Driveway Throat Width and Driveway Curb Radius are for standard undivided two-way operation and may be varied by the City Administrator if traffic volumes, truck usage, common driveways, and other factors warrant such. 
2. Distance measured from the proposed driveway face of curb to the face of the nearest curb of the nearest driveway. Minimum spacing does not implicitly determine the number of driveways allowed. See 6.05.F.2 (below) for additional restrictions on driveway locations along State-maintained roadways. 
3. Distance measured from the intersection street nearest face of curb to the face of the curb of the proposed driveway. See 6.05.F.2 (below) for additional restrictions on driveway locations along State-maintained roadways. 
4. Service driveway spacing may be reduced to 150 feet if the ingress/egress volume is less than 50 vehicles per day and if the service driveway is a secondary driveway ancillary to a commercial driveway within the same development. See 6.05.F.2 (below) below for additional restrictions on driveway locations along State-maintained roadways. 
5. Driveway spacing may be reduced to 250 feet if the driveway is right-in/right-out only. Appropriate signage, pavement markings, and traffic control devices must be provided to limit turning movements to right-in/right-out.  
2.  Additional Design Requirements. 
a.  Plans for all work within State Right-of-Way shall be submitted to the City Administrator. 
b.  A driveway permit from TXDOT shall be acquired prior to Preliminary Plat approval. Driveways shall be in accordance with TXDOT standards. 
c.  Deceleration Lane. 
i.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 60 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on highways with a posted speed of 40 mph or less. 
ii.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on highways with a posted speed of 45 mph or greater. 
G.  Driveway Design for City Maintained Roadways. The following standards shall be followed in the design and construction of driveways. The values in the following tables represent minimum standards to be applied in designing and locating driveways on City streets. 
1.  Driveway Dimensions and Spacing (City Maintained Roadways). The following Table 6: Dimensions for Driveways along City Maintained Roadways indicates the minimum dimensional values required for driveways along City maintained roadways (local streets, collectors, Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets). 
Table 6: Dimensions for Driveways along City Maintained Roadways Criteria Street Classification Commercial & Multi-Family Driveway Service Driveway Driveway Throat Width Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street 24-60 Feet 30-48 Feet Collectors 24-40 Feet 30-48 Feet Minor/Local Streets 24-40 Feet 24-36 Feet Driveway Curb Radius Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street 30-35 Feet 25-30 Feet Collectors 25 Feet 10-20 Feet Minor/Local Streets 25 Feet 10-20 Feet Minimum Distance to Intersection Along Roadway Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street 150 Feet 200 Feet Collectors 120 Feet 150 Feet Minor/Local Streets 100 Feet 100 Feet Minimum Centerline Driveway Spacing Along Roadway Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street 230 Feet 250 Feet Collectors 120 Feet 150 Feet Minor/Local Streets 70 Feet 100 Feet Notes: 
1. The requirements for Driveway Throat Width and Driveway Curb Radius are for standard undivided two-way operation and may be varied by the City Administrator if traffic volumes, truck usage, common driveways, and other factors warrant such. 
2. Minimum centerline spacing does not implicitly determine the number of driveways allowed. Driveways served by deceleration lanes may be spaced at closer intervals if approved by the City Administrator. 
3. Distance measured from the intersection Right-of-Way line to the centerline of the proposed driveway. 
4. Refer to 6.05.G.2 (below). Commercial, multi-family and service driveways may not be permitted on local streets.  
2.  Additional Design Requirements (City Maintained Roadways). 
a.  Driveways Prohibited. 
i.  Nonresidential, multi-family and service driveways shall not be permitted on local streets unless the tract or lot has no other public access. 
ii.  In the event there is no other access to a public street, commercial, multi-family and service driveways shall be permitted on local streets provided that they meet the design standards in Table 5: Dimensions for Driveways along State Maintained Roadways. 
b.  Deceleration Lanes for Driveways on Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets Required 
c.  The driveway dimensions and spacing for residential driveways are provided in the Engineering Standards Manual. 
i.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 60 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets with a posted speed of 40 mph to 45 mph. 
ii.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets with a posted speed greater than 45 mph. 
H.  Required Internal Storage (Minimum throat Length/Stacking). 
1.  Minimum Throat Length. The driveway for any multi-family or nonresidential property that connects to a highway, Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street, or collector or local street shall extend onto private property a minimum distance of 15 feet, but not less than the required front landscape edge width, from the Right-of-Way line before intersecting any internal circulation drive. 
2.  Internal Storage (Stacking). Internal storage (stacking) shall be provided on multi-family, commercial or industrial properties for corresponding driveways in accordance with Table 7: Required Internal Storage for driveways that provide ingress/egress to parking areas of 20 or greater spaces. 
Table 7: Required Internal Storage Average Number of Parking Spaces per Driveway* Total Number of Parking Spaces** Minimum Storage length 20-49 20-49 Landscape edge width +20' 50-199 50' 200+ 75' 50-199 50-199 75' 200+ 100' 200+ 200+ 100' Notes: 
1. The average number of parking spaces per driveway is calculated by dividing the total number of parking spaces by the number of commercial and multi-family driveways. (Service driveways are not included in the calculation.)  
I.  Adequate Sight Distance. 
1.  Driveways shall be prohibited where adequate sight distance is not available for the established speed limit. 
2.  Sight distances shall be calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the AASHTO "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." 
3.  If a field inspection indicates that driveway sight distance may be insufficient, the Applicant will be required to submit vertical and horizontal information prepared by a registered professional engineer to the City Administrator that verifies adequate sight distance is available for the proposed driveway location. 
4.  For sight triangle requirements, (i.e., visibility triangles), please refer to 6.08.C. Triangular Sight Visibility Easements (see also Figure 9: Visibility Triangles). 
Sec. 155.6.06. - Alleys. 
A.  Applicability. If alleys are constructed, the requirements outlined in this section 6.06 shall apply. 
B.  Use of Alleys. During the Preliminary Plat approval process, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to permit the use of any proposed alley. Additionally, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve changes to the alignment or location of any proposed alley during the Final Plat approval process. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall base its decision on providing reasonable compatibility with surrounding development, providing safe and efficient traffic movement, and providing areas for infrastructure and city services, such as sanitation services. 
C.  Standards for Commercial and Industrial Alleys. Alleys in retail, commercial, and industrial districts shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width and be constructed in accordance with the Engineering Standards Manual (ESM). 
D.  Standards for Residential Alleys. 
1.  Dedicated public access alleys are not permitted in residential districts. 
2.  Shall be independent easements or lots with shared access easements to be privately owned and maintained by an HOA or similar governing body. 
3.  Shall have a minimum shared access easement width of 20 feet and a minimum pavement width of 15 feet, unless the easement will be utilized for emergency access, in which case the minimum pavement width shall be 20 feet. 
4.  Shall be designed to meet all Engineering Standards Manual (ESM) for pavement design. Alley paving shall be structural concrete. 
5.  In new subdivisions, alleys shall connect to and/or be aligned with alleys in adjacent subdivisions. 
E.  Alley Right-of-Way Width and Design. 
1.  The minimum Right-of-Way width of an alley serving industrial and commercial areas shall be 25 feet. 
2.  Alley turn-outs shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two (2) feet wider than the alley paving. 
3.  A uniform transition in alley pavement widths shall be made in a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
4.  Alleys may be required along the rear lot lines when adjacent to Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets for rear entrance. 
5.  See section 6.04.K Street and Alley Requirements for additional requirements. 
F.  Maximum Alley Length. 
1.  Maximum alley length between access points to a street shall be 600 feet. 
2.  A length of more than 600 feet without access to a public street or approved access easement may be approved by Minor Subdivision Waiver. 
G.  Alley/Street Intersection-Right Angles. Alleys shall intersect streets at right angles or radially to curved streets. 
H.  Alley/Street Intersection-Prohibition. Alleys shall not intersect streets that are designated in the Comprehensive Plan as Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets. 
I.  Alley/Street Intersection-Separation. The minimum distance between an alley/street intersection and a street/street intersection shall be the width of at least one (1) lot. 
J.  Alleys Intersections or Alley Sharp Angle. In cases where two alleys intersect or turn at a sharp angle, lot corners shall be platted so that a triangular area of 25' x 25' or greater, is dedicated as part of the alley for the purpose of providing a minimum radius of 30 feet to the inside edge of the alley paving. For sight visibility safety, no utilities taller than three (3) feet shall be placed in the triangular area. 
K.  Alleys-Utilities. 
1.  Water. Private alleys shall not contain water meters, which must be set in a publicly maintained and accessible location. 
2.  Overhead Utility Lines. May be considered when a distribution line is necessary to serve the development and only when approved by the City Administrator. 
L.  Radii of the Turn-Outs. The radii of the turn-outs for alleys intersecting Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets shall be a minimum of 16 feet and shall be a minimum 10 feet at intersections with all other streets. 
M.  Alley Fences. Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial, or industrial areas, fences may be constructed along the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five (5) feet of a point where the driveway would intersect the alley pavement at 90 degrees. Fences are optional. No fences shall be placed over water and/or sewer easements. Fences allowing the pass through of stormwater without the collection of debris may be considered. 
N.  Dead-End Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities. 
Sec. 155.6.07. - Blocks. 
A.  Block Length Measurement. The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the Block Face: 
1.  Of greatest dimension, or 
2.  On which the greatest number of lots face. 
B.  Block Width Measurements. The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face: 
1.  Of least dimension, or 
2.  On which the fewest number of lots face. 
C.  Block Measurement Factors. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; 
4.  Limitations of topography; and 
5.  Compatibility with efficient development of public facilities as established by surrounding developments. 
D.  Block Design. 
1.  Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals as to serve traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. 
2.  Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet. 
3.  Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks should not be less than 500 feet in length. However, in cases where physical barriers, property ownership, or individual usage creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied then, upon approval by the City Administrator, the length may be increased or decreased to meet existing conditions, having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
E.  Exceptions. 
1.  These limits shall be exceeded only upon approval of a Subdivision Waiver. 
2.  Blocks longer than 600 feet shall be avoided in commercial and industrial districts. 
Sec. 155.6.08. - Easements and dedications. 
    Easements and fee simple dedication of all property needed for the construction of streets, Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street, alleys, private common access easements, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, floodways, water mains, wastewater mains and other utilities, retaining walls and any other property necessary to serve the Plat and to implement the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance and Engineering Standards Manual shall be provided on Subdivision Plats and maintained by the property owner. 
A.  Utility Easements. 
1.  Where not adjacent to a public Right-of-Way, easements at least sixteen (16) feet wide shall be provided for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided where necessary. 
2.  Easements accommodating both water and wastewater (sewer) facilities and easements accommodating both public utilities and franchise utilities shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
a.  More easements or additional easement width may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission if deemed necessary by the City Administrator. 
3.  Easements at least sixteen (16) feet wide for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided for lots which have frontage along state highways. 
4.  Easements of at least eight (8) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and alongside lot lines, where necessary, for utilities to ensure a total easement width of sixteen (16) feet. 
5.  Easements having greater width dimensions may also be required along or across lots where engineering design or special conditions make it necessary for the installation of utilities and drainage facilities outside public Right-of-Way. 
6.  The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument: 
Easements : Any public utility, including the City, shall have the right to move and keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other growths on any of the easements or Right-of-Way shown on the Plat (or filed by separate instrument that is associated with said property); and any public utility, including the City, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Easements shall be maintained by property owners. The City can move trees or any other improvements and does not have the responsibility to replace them. 
B.  Fire Lane Easement. 
1.  Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations required by the City and be curbed. 
2.  These easements shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum height clearance of fourteen and a half feet (14'6''). Internal drives within parking lots are not required to be curbed. 
3.  All turns shall have a minimum inside radius of twenty-six (26) feet and a minimum outside radius of 50'. 
4.  Any emergency access and fire lane easement more than one hundred and fifty (150') feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated public street or private way or be provided with a cul-de-sac having one hundred and fifty (150') feet diameter of paving with an additional distance of ten (10) feet on all sides clear of permanent structures or other obstructions. 
5.  These easements shall be maintained by the owner or the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association and a statement shall appear on the face of the Plat indicating maintenance responsibility. 
C.  Triangular Sight Visibility Easements. 
1.  Triangular sight visibility easements shall be required as follows for properties whose zoning falls within one of the following categories: 
a.  Residential zoning districts (including all single family, multi-family, mobile/modular home zoning districts and planned development districts having a single family, multi-family or mobile/modular home use designation): 
i.  20' x 20' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of two streets. 
b.  Nonresidential zoning districts (including all commercial, industrial and utility districts and planned development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use designation): 
i.  45' x 45' sight visibility easement on corner lots at the intersection of two streets. 
c.  Multi-family and nonresidential zoning districts (including all multi-family, commercial, industrial and utility districts and planned development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use designation): 
i.  15' x 15' sight visibility easements at the main driveways. 
d.  All zoning districts (as noted above): 
i.  15' x 15' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of an alley and a street. 

Figure 9: Visibility Triangle 
2.  The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on the face of the Plat: 
Sight Visibility Restriction : No structure, object, or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of twenty-four (24) inches to a height of ten (10) feet above the top of the curb, including, but not limited to buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the sight visibility easement as shown on the Plat. These sight visibility easements will remain in effect until vacated by ordinance adopted by the City Council and the property replatted. 
3.  On commercially zoned lots, the preceding triangular sight visibility restrictions may be altered to permit the placement within the easement area of one single pole sign, not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in diameter, with every portion of said sign allowing minimum height clearance between it and the ground of ten (10) feet. 
D.  Drainage Easements. 
1.  Easements for storm drainage facilities shall be provided at locations containing proposed or existing drainage ways. 
2.  Storm drainage easements of sixteen (16) feet minimum width shall be provided for existing and proposed enclosed drainage systems. 
a.  Easements shall be centered over the systems. 
b.  Larger easements, where necessary, shall be provided as directed by the City Administrator. 
3.  Where lot-to-lot drainage occurs, a drainage easement at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along the back and down one side of the downstream property. For information regarding applicable drainage standards see 6.15 Drainage and Storm Water, specifically 6.15.C.1. Lot to Lot Drainage Standards. 
4.  Storm drainage easements shall be provided for emergency overflow drainage ways of sufficient width to contain within the easement storm water resulting from a 100-year frequency storm less the amount of storm water carried in an enclosed system of a capacity required by the City. 
5.  Where a Subdivision is bounded by a water-course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage Right-of-Way conforming substantially to the lines of such water course, and of such width to provide for increased drainage from anticipated future upstream developments, plus a minimum of ten (10) feet on each side. 
6.  As required by the City, drainage easements shall be dedicated up to the full width of easement necessary to construct the ultimate drainage facility (culvert, storm water, channel, etc.) to be constructed within the easement, including provisions for access ingress and egress for maintenance purposes. 
E.  Floodplain Easements. 
1.  Floodplain easements shall be provided along natural drainage ways, lakes or reservoirs. 
2.  Floodplain easements shall be provided in accordance with the recommendation of the City Administrator to accommodate the 100 year storm drainage flows or the flow of the flood of record, whichever is greater. 
3.  Floodplain easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water surface elevation of the Base Flood, plus such additional width as may be required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for the protection of adjacent property, as determined by the City Administrator. 
4.  The following full statement shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the Plat: 
Floodplain Easement Restriction : Construction within the floodplain may only occur with the written approval of the City. A request for construction within the floodplain easement must be accompanied with detailed engineering plans and studies indicating that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result; and subject to all owners or the property affected by such construction becoming a party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation as determined by analyzing the ultimate build-out conditions of the entire drainage basin. 
a.  Existing creeks, lakes, reservoirs, or drainage channels traversing along or across portions of this addition, will remain as an open channel at all times and will be maintained by the individual owners of the lot or lots that are traversed by the drainage courses along or across said lots. The City will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of said drainage ways or for the control of erosion. Each property owner shall keep the natural drainage channels traversing his/her property clean and free of debris, silt, or any substance, which would result in unsanitary conditions. The City shall have the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance work by the property owner to alleviate any undesirable conditions, which may occur. 
b.  The natural drainage channel, as in the case of all natural drainage channels, are subject to storm water overflow and natural bank erosion. The City shall not be liable for damages of any nature resulting from the occurrence of these natural phenomena, nor resulting from a failure of any structure(s) within the natural drainage channels. The natural drainage channel crossing each lot is shown by the Floodway easement line as shown on the plat. If a Subdivision alters the horizontal or vertical floodplain, a FEMA Floodway map revision may be required. 
F.  Retaining Wall Easements. 
1.  If in the opinion of the City Administrator, the grading plans submitted with the Application for approval of a Final Plat indicate a need for the construction of one or more retaining walls over 6' in height, a private retaining wall easement showing the location of the retaining wall(s) and the no-build zone shall be dedicated and shown on the Preliminary Plat and the Final Plat. 
2.  The width of the retaining wall easement shall be 10 feet or the width of the retaining wall, whichever is greater, plus the width of the no-building zone, as established by the Applicant's structural engineer and approved by the City Administrator. 
3.  The retaining wall easement shall include a no-building zone extending from the retaining wall on both sides, within which any additional load from future construction would exceed the design capacity of the retaining wall. 
a.  No structure (other than the retaining wall), swimming pool, landscaping, or any other feature which adds load to the retaining wall, shall be constructed within the no-building zone. 
4.  A retaining wall easement shall be located entirely on one lot and shall not straddle property lines unless the wall is constructed within a retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association in accordance with 6.08.F.5 (below). 
5.  The Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association for the subdivision, as applicable, shall be responsible for maintenance of the retaining wall, and a note shall be included to this effect on the Final Plat. 
G.  Needs/Benefits Determination. 
1.  No dedication otherwise required by this ordinance may be imposed upon a property owner unless the City determines that the dedication is related to the impact of the proposed development; is roughly proportional to the needs created by the proposed development; and provides a benefit to the development. 
2.  An Applicant may appeal a staff recommendation that a dedication be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 Relief from Subdivision Design Standards. 
H.  Maintenance of Easement. 
1.  An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems. 
2.  The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone. 
3.  The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the easement. 
Sec. 155.6.09. - Homeowners' or property owners' associations. 
A.  Applicability. When a Subdivision contains common areas, common property, private parks or other improvements not intended to be dedicated to the City for public use, a Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be created, and the duties and responsibilities shall be established in a declaration consistent with State laws. 
B.  Dedication. The common areas shall be shown on the Final Plat or record Plat along with an adequate form for dedication thereof. This dedication form shall: 
1.  Save the title to common area properties for the benefit of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; and 
2.  Express a definite undertaking by the subdivider to convey the common properties to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
C.  Membership. A Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land declarations through which: 
1.  Each lot owner in a described land area is automatically a member; and 
2.  Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association's activities, such as maintenance of common areas, common open spaces or the provision and upkeep of common recreational facilities. 
D.  Legal Requirements. To ensure the establishment of a permanent Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, including its financing and the rights and responsibilities of the homeowners in relation to the use, management and ownership of common areas or common property, the Subdivision plat, dedication documents, covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must: 
1.  Legally create an automatic membership, nonprofit Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; 
2.  Place title to the common property in the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association or give definite assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time; 
3.  Appropriately limit the uses of the common property; 
4.  Give each lot owner the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property; 
5.  Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in with the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; 
6.  Provide for or place an association charge or assessment on each lot in a manner which will ensure sufficient association funds to maintain the common property or improvements; 
7.  Give each lot owner voting rights in the association; and 
8.  Identify the land area within the association's jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The property to be transferred to public agencies; 
b.  The individual residential lots; 
c.  The common properties to be transferred by the Developer to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; and 
d.  Other parcels. 
E.  Protective Covenants. Protective covenants shall be developed which, including, but not limited to, shall make the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association responsible for the maintenance and operation of all common property, and include provisions for assessments, to be enforced by lien. 
F.  Procedure. Prior to filing the Plat, the Subdivider shall: 
1.  Draft the articles of incorporation of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, its bylaws, and the restrictive covenants; 
2.  Submit draft articles, bylaws, and covenants to the City Administrator for approval; 
3.  After approval (see above), create an incorporated nonprofit corporation; 
4.  Record approved covenants, at the County Clerk's office, which automatically make every lot owner a member of the association, give him/her the right to use the common property, and establish his/her voting rights and his/her obligations to pay assessments; 
5.  Provide evidence of the recorded articles, bylaws, and the restrictive covenants prior to Final Plat approval; and 
6.  Pay attorney fees for document review. 
G.  Maintenance, Repair or Capital Improvement. Any maintenance, repair or capital improvement effort made to Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association property or facilities by the City as a result of non-performance or negligence on the part of the Association shall be assessed between the various Association members in proportion to the taxable value of their properties. 
Sec. 155.6.10. - Lots. 
A.  Lot Design. Lot design shall provide adequate width, depth, and shape to provide open area, to eliminate overcrowding, and to be appropriate for the location of the Subdivision for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Regulations of the City. 
B.  Lot Frontage Requirement. Every lot shall have at least forty (40') feet frontage, and access to, a public street or other approved public access easement. 
C.  Lot Frontage Prohibition for SF Lots on Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street. Lots zoned for single family use shall not front upon an Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street as designated on the Comprehensive Plan/Thoroughfare Plan. 
D.  Right Angles for Side Lot Lines. All side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines except where a variation to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. The City Administrator may grant a Minor Subdivision Waiver, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with this requirement. 
E.  Lot Width. The width of every lot at the building line shall be equal to or greater than that required by the Zoning Regulations. 
F.  Scenarios where Additional Lot Depth is Required. Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad Right-of-Way, drainage easement, a high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, electric transmission lines (69kv or higher), water or wastewater transmission lines, an Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street, an Industrial, Commercial, or other land use that has a significant change in use from the residential use of the property, and where no street or alley is provided at the rear of such lot, additional lot depth will be required per the Zoning Regulations. 
G.  Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots. 
1.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
2.  Where lots have double frontage, front building setbacks shall be established in accordance with the Zoning Regulations. 
H.  Lots with Septic Tanks. In a Subdivision where buildings are to be served by septic tanks or other on-site sewer facilities, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the State of Texas, the County or any other governmental unit having appropriate jurisdiction. 
I.  Land Subject to a 100-Year Flood. 
1.  Any land which, in its natural state, is subject to a 100-year flood or which cannot be properly drained shall not be subdivided, re-subdivided or developed until receipt of evidence that the construction of specific improvements proposed by the Developer can be expected to yield a usable building site, i.e. Flood Study and FEMA CLOMR (Conditional Letter of Map Revision). 
2.  Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of the Plat; however, building construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specific drainage improvements have been planned, public infrastructure construction completed, and a LOMR (Letter of Map Revision) has been received from FEMA. 
Sec. 155.6.11. - Sidewalks. 
A.  Sidewalks and Pedestrian ways are required as a part of Subdivision Plat approval to help the City achieve the following: 
1.  Promote the mobility, health, safety, and welfare of residents, property owners, and visitors to the City and to implement objectives and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan, 
2.  Improve the safety of walking by providing separation from motorized transportation and improving travel surfaces for pedestrians, 
3.  Improve public welfare by providing an alternate means of access to transportation and social interaction, especially for children, other citizens without personal vehicles, or those with disabilities, and 
4.  Facilitate walking as a means of physical activity recognized as an important provider of health benefits. 
B.  Sidewalk Location and Design. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed for both sides of all streets within the Subdivision. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be constructed along all lots adjoining dedicated streets, along Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets where lots do not adjoin the street, across power line easements and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. 
3.  Routing to clear poles, trees or other obstacles shall be subject to City Administrator approval. 
4.  The Plat or Construction Plans shall show the location of all proposed sidewalks and shall state at what stage of the project they will be constructed. 
5.  All sidewalks shall conform to Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements and barrier-free ramps should be provided for access to the street. 
C.  Sidewalk General Construction. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed by Class "A" concrete and shall have a width of not less than five (5) feet and a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
2.  Sidewalks along Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets shall be no less than six feet (6') in width. 
3.  Sidewalks adjacent to screening and retaining walls shall be five (5') feet in width and shall abut the wall, eliminating the landscape area found along the wall, thereby reducing maintenance. 
4.  Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot (1') from the property line within the street or Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street Right-of-Way and shall extend along the full street frontage including both sides of corner lots and block ends. 
5.  Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curbs will be considered where driveway entrances are constructed from the rear of lots on each side of the street for the full length of the block or where mountable curbs are installed. In these instances, the sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet (6') wide. 
6.  Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of lots, but in locations not adjacent to lots and across bridges and culverts, the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to the Subdivision. 
D.  Sidewalks in Nonresidential Areas. Sidewalks in nonresidential areas shall be a minimum width of five feet (6') or extend from the back of the curb to the building line as required by the City. 
Sec. 155.6.12. - Utility policy. 
A.  Adequate Utility Systems Required. 
1.  Subdivisions within the City shall be provided with an approved water supply and distribution system and with an approved sewage collection and disposal system. An adequate water supply and distribution system and sanitary sewer system shall conform to the Engineering Standards Manual. All systems must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan Master Plan for Water Distribution and Basin Sanitary Sewer Evaluation Studies. 
2.  Water and sewer lines must be laid across property lines in every instance. Beginning point and ending point of main line shall be determined by the city and shall simply be at the nearest existing adequate source in the case of water. 
3.  On a corner lot, utility lines shall be laid to conform to the Comprehensive Plan and the city shall never bear the expense of these extensions except for oversized pipe. The developer will be responsible for the cost of the extension. Where a corner lot can be adequately served from the side, the utility lines must still be laid in front at the expense of the Developer if the Comprehensive Plan so indicates. 
4.  The city shall be responsible for maintenance, oversize participation, replacement of old inadequate line and the laying of line along frontage owned by the city 
5.  In case of development along or either side of water or sewer lines, any builder or developer shall be held responsible to pay back to the original developer fifty percent (50%) of the original cost on or either side of the utility line before taps are issued. 
6.  Water and sewer lines extended to other areas, and having no development immediately adjacent to the line, have no pro rata claim to any reimbursement. Any extension from the end of a water or sewer line will also not require any reimbursement. 
7.  Wastewater collection systems requiring lift stations shall be avoided. Lift stations shall be privately owned and maintained. 
Sec. 155.6.13. - Water utility. 
A.  General. 
1.  All Subdivisions shall provide an approved water distribution system connected to the existing City water system in conformance with all applicable City master plans and Engineering Standards Manual. 
2.  In the absence of specific standards, all water supply, distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be designed in accordance with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association and the most current criteria included in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290. 
3.  The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system. 
4.  Water Main Construction. All water mains shall be constructed within the street Right-of-Way or easements dedicated to the City. 
5.  Water Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders. 
a.  All water lines installed within a Subdivision must extend to the borders of the Subdivision as required for future extensions of the distribution system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for service within the Subdivision. 
b.  If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision, the City Administrator may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat. 
6.  Fire Hydrants (Locations and Hose-Lay). 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place all of every lot within a radius of five hundred feet (500') in residential areas, but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay for more than five hundred feet (500') be made from the fire hydrant to cover all of every lot within the Subdivision or tract under development. 
b.  Fire hydrants shall be located in commercial and industrial areas so that all of every lot shall be within a radius of three hundred feet (300'), but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than three hundred feet (300') be made in order to adequately afford fire protection to the building or buildings. 
c.  A fire hydrant shall be placed at the entrance of all cul-de-sacs. 
7.  All subdividers shall connect to the City's water system if they are within 500' of a municipal water line. The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system. 
8.  If the development is not within 500' of the water system, the City may grant a waiver. If a water well is used, the city shall require testing of the well in accordance with the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
B.  Preliminary Utility Plan. 
1.  General. A Preliminary Utility Plan is regulated as part of Preliminary Plat approval and shall detail both Section 6.13 Water Utility and 6.14 Wastewater Utility requirements. 
2.  Illustrate the Location and Size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility Mains. 
a.  Concurrent with the submission of a Plat, the Developer shall submit a map or plan showing the location and size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility mains, which will be required to provide adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified in the proposed plat. 
b.  Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the City Administrator for review prior to construction in accordance with Engineering Standards Manual. 
3.  Plan Document. The plan shall be prepared as noted in the City's application requirements. 
4.  Coordination with other Utility Providers. 
a.  Preliminary Plat. When the subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the Developer must provide a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality. 
b.  Replat. 
i.  When a Subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the Developer must provide a letter from the utility provider stating that facilities exist in the area to provide adequate domestic service and fire protection. 
ii.  If the City has reason to believe that there may be water supply or pressure concerns the City may require, a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality. 
c.  Final Plat. The Final Plat will not be approved until a letter has been provided from the utility provider stating that they have accepted the plans for construction. 
Sec. 155.6.14. - Wastewater utility. 
A.  General. 
1.  Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment Required. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment in accordance with Engineering Standards Manual. 
2.  Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment. The City Administrator shall be responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment in accordance with City master plans and the Engineering Standards Manual. 
3.  Possible Phasing of Development Required. 
a.  The City Administrator may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. 
b.  Subdivisions either in the ETJ or that have recently been annexed and are not served by the City shall meet the same requirements but be subject to approval by the City Administrator. 
4.  Wastewater Collection System Required. 
a.  All Subdivisions shall provide an approved wastewater collection system conforming to the current criteria and all applicable City master plans and regulations and the requirements of Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 217, Design Criteria for Domestic Wastewater Systems. 
b.  All subdividers shall connect to the City's wastewater system if they within 500' of the wastewater line. The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system. 
c.  If no sanitary sewer service is available beyond the drainage divide line, the City may grant a waiver and allow an on-site sewage disposal system. Such systems shall follow all standards as required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
5.  Wastewater Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders. 
a.  All laterals and sewer mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as required for future extensions of the collection system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for service within the subdivision. 
b.  If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision, the City Administrator may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat. 
B.  Preliminary Utility Plan. When required by the Subdivision Ordinance, a Preliminary Utility Plan for Wastewater Utility requirements shall be prepared in accordance with 6.13.B Preliminary Utility Plan. 
Sec. 155.6.15. - Drainage and storm water. 
A.  General. 
1.  Components of the Drainage System. Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets, conduits, structures, basins, or outlets used to drain storm water, must be designed and constructed to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the property owner and the public. 
2.  Management of Storm Water Runoff. Adequate provision must be made for the acceptance, collection, conveyance, detention, and discharge of storm water runoff drainage onto, through and originating within the Subdivision. 
3.  Maintenance Responsibility. 
a.  Detention and retention pond maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner or the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
b.  It is a violation of this Subdivision Ordinance for the pond not to be maintained according to the City's requirements. 
c.  It is a violation of the City's Storm Water Management Plan's Best Management Practices for a detention/retention pond or a structural control to be unable to operate for its intended purpose due to lack of maintenance. 
4.  Discharge of Storm Water Runoff. Storm water must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a controlled rate so as not to endanger human life or public or private property. 
5.  Drainage Facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the Developer in accordance with the requirements within this 6.15 Drainage and Storm Water and the City's Engineering Standards Manual. 
B.  Planning and Construction. 
1.  Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for storm water improvements to be constructed and shall show the locations, sizes, grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed pipe, inlets, channels, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances. 
a.  Each sheet of the plans and profiles shall bear the seal and signature of the Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas who prepared them. 
2.  The Developer shall incur the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development of the Subdivision and acceptance of current upstream flows necessary to safely and adequately drain the Subdivision, including any necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required easements. 
a.  The 100-year storm must be contained within the street Right-of-Way and/or the drainage easement boundaries. 
b.  Any necessary off-site channel or storm sewers which are required to be within easements must have a separate instrument easement filed in the County Real Property Records and a filed copy shall be submitted to the City before Construction Plans will be approved. 
C.  Residential Grading and Drainage. 
1.  Lot to Lot Drainage Standards. 
a.  Surface runoff from residential lots shall cross no more than one additional lot before being directed toward the street or a dedicated drainage system. 
b.  When the flow reaches the second lot, side lot swales shall be in place to direct the flows to the street or to a dedicated City drainage system within a privately-maintained easement. Easements shall be acquired and/or provided by the Developer. 
c.  Furthermore, no more than one lot may drain to a second lot before the flow is directed to the street or to a dedicated City drainage system. 
d.  Where lot to lot drainage occurs, the lot lines shall be aligned and a minimum of a ten (10') feet wide drainage easement shall be provided. 
2.  Detailed Standards. See the Engineering Standards Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies. 
D.  Nonresidential Grading and Drainage. 
1.  Lot to Lot Grading and Drainage Standards. 
a.  Grading and drainage plans shall strive to ensure that surface runoff from nonresidential individual lots cross no more than one (1) additional lot before being directed toward a private on site system or a dedicated City drainage system. 
b.  When the flow reaches the third lot, side lot swales may be utilized to direct the flows to private enclosed systems or to a dedicated City drainage system within a dedicated easement or street Right-of-Way. 
c.  No runoff may drain to a fourth lot. 
i.  The flow must be directed to the street system or to a dedicated City drainage system with a dedicated easement. 
d.  Concentrations of stormwater shall not be discharged to City Streets through driveways or flumes in a manner that may inundate paved streets with water or ice but shall be collected into an enclosed system, either private or public, prior to reaching the curb line of the roadway. 
e.  Specific deviations from these guidelines may be addressed on an individual basis. 
2.  Detailed Standards. See the Engineering Standards Manual for detailed standards and policies. 
E.  Design Criteria. 
1.  The design of the swales and enclosed systems located within a dedicated drainage easement shall utilize the City's adopted drainage design criteria for channel and pipe systems. 
2.  Side yard swales shall have a minimum slope of one (1) percent to ensure adequacy of flow during and after a rain event. 
3.  See the Engineering Standards Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies. 
F.  Maintenance. 
1.  All grassed swales should be designed and constructed with 3:1 side slopes that will be gentle enough to allow easy mowing. 
2.  Mowing and maintenance responsibility shall be the responsibility of the property owner or Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
3.  Periodic cleaning of enclosed systems located within public, dedicated drainage easements shall be the responsibility of the City. 
G.  Preliminary Drainage Plan. 
1.  Applicability and Purpose. 
a.  A Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be prepared for all developments in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City's application forms. 
b.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall show the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development. 
i.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan must comply with the standards outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, Engineering Standards Manual, and the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan is a guide for later detailed drainage design. 
d.  The review of the Preliminary Drainage Plan does not constitute final drainage plan approval or authorize a waiver to the Subdivision Regulations. 
i.  The design engineer may also submit a sealed letter of No Adverse Impact with supporting documentation and calculations if the Preliminary Drainage Plan indicates there will be no adverse impact to downstream properties. 
2.  Plan Required, Previous Plans, and Waivers. 
a.  For any property involved in the development process, a Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be provided, at the Developer's expense, for the area proposed for development. 
b.  For property with a previously accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan, the accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan may be submitted and enforced unless a revised Preliminary Drainage Plan is required by the City due to lot reconfiguration or other conditions created by a new Plat. 
c.  The City Administrator may waive the requirement for a Preliminary Drainage Plan if the submitted plat is not anticipated to cause any significant change in runoff characteristics from a previously accepted drainage study or for single residential properties where no drainage problems are anticipated. 
d.  If the applicant requests a waiver in writing, a copy of any previous drainage plan prepared for the property shall be provided. 
3.  Submittal. 
a.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be labeled as "Preliminary" or attached to the Preliminary Plat. 
b.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be stamped by and dated by the professional engineer. 
Sec. 155.6.16. - Retaining wall construction. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply for retaining walls under private ownership. 
B.  Location. 
1.  Retaining walls shall be located and constructed on private property only. 
2.  Retaining walls shall be located within a private retaining wall easement. 
3.  If a retaining wall is designed to traverse three or more lots within a Subdivision, the wall shall be located within a private retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision. 
a.  The easement shall be shown on the Final Plat and shall be dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision to maintain the wall in a safe and orderly condition. 
C.  Maintenance. Retaining walls shall be maintained under private ownership. 
D.  Design. Any retaining wall four (4) feet tall or higher shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas and plans submitted to the City for review must be signed and sealed by the design engineer. 
E.  Building Permit Required. 
1.  Any earth terracing method that supports a structure or vehicle load, or that is over four feet (4') in height (as measured from the bottom of footing to top of wall), shall require a building permit and shall meet the requirements of this section. 
2.  A retaining wall shall not be constructed in excess of four (4') feet in height. 
a.  If the wall is to be more than four feet high, the retaining wall system shall be terraced, so as to provide a minimum of four (4) feet of flat ground between the faces of the retaining walls for each four foot section of retaining wall. 
b.  The flat terrace shall be sloped to a maximum of two (2) percent to allow drainage. 
3.  No building permit, other than for a retaining wall, shall be issued for any lot within a Subdivision until all retaining walls are constructed in accordance with a grading plan for the Subdivision. 
4.  A retaining wall shall be constructed in accordance with the grading plan and shall comply with the requirements of the applicable building code and this ordinance. 
5.  Any change from the approved grading plan or design for a retaining wall within a Subdivision shall not be permitted unless the Applicant has submitted sealed plans for the entire Subdivision showing the proposed changing in grading and the City Administrator has approved the proposed change(s). 
Sec. 155.6.17. - Private streets and gated subdivisions. 
A.  Private Streets and Gated Subdivisions. 
1.  General Requirements. Subdivisions with private streets and gated communities shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The general provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance and other City Codes as they relate to development, streets, and utilities will apply. 
b.  A vehicular turn around shall be provided at entry gates to allow vehicles that have been denied entry the ability to exit without having to backup. 
c.  All plans concerning private subdivisions are subject to review and approval by the local fire department. 
d.  The definition of a "subdivision" and "street," as contained in the Subdivision Ordinance, will apply to all subdivisions or streets, whether public or private. 
2.  Authority Maintained by City. All streets, gates, and other fire protection features, signage, and equipment are subject to periodic inspection by the City and must be repaired immediately if found to be in a condition of disrepair or inadequate for public access. The City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and disable, open, or remove any gate, device, or other feature that impedes or controls vehicle access at the sole expense of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
3.  Owners Responsibility. The person or corporation in control of the property is responsible for, and liable for, any violations of this private road requirement. This includes, but is not limited to, the developer, property owner, the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association and its officers, if applicable, or others who may own or exercise control over the property. 
4.  Private Street Lot. Each private street and alley must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
a.  Each lot must conform to the City's standards for design of a public street and alley right-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the City providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of the same. This right shall extend to all utility providers including telephone and cable companies, operating within the City. 
b.  The easement shall also provide the City with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
5.  Payment. The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
6.  Plans and Inspections. An applicant for a proposed subdivision with private streets must submit to the City the same construction plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to Final Plat approval shall apply. Fees charged for these services shall also apply. The City may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access. 
7.  Waiver of Services. The Final Plat, property deeds and Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association documents shall note that certain City services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services that will not be provided are the following: 
a.  Routine police patrols. 
b.  Enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports. 
c.  Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be provided. 
8.  Signs. The entrances to all private streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
9.  Indemnification. The Final Plat shall contain the following language: 
a.  Whereby the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any governmental entity and public utility: 
i.  For damages to the private street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the City, governmental entity of public utility; 
ii.  For damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of said private street; 
iii.  For damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, governmental entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and 
iv.  For damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision by the City, governmental entity or public utility. 
v.  Further, such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the City, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. 
b.  The indemnifications contained in this above language apply regardless of whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the City, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents. 
B.  Gates. 
1.  Each gate installation in a gated community must conform to the following provisions: 
a.  Fire Department Approval Required. Each gate installation must be approved by the fire department who will serve the proposed subdivision prior to installation. The installation must be completed and tested prior to the City's acceptance of the subdivision. 
b.  Gate Openings and Clearances. Gate design may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum gate width of twenty four feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate widths may be reduced if approved by the fire marshal, but in no case shall any gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than eighteen feet. 
c.  If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, the obstruction must be a minimum of fourteen feet (14') above the finished road surface. 
2.  Setback Required. Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. 
3.  Gates to Be Per Fire Department Guidelines. An automatic gate installation must conform to the design and performance guidelines established by the fire department. 
4.  Good Working Order Required. All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved operating condition, with all components serviced and maintained on a regular basis as needed to ensure proper gate operation. A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times. 
5.  Failure to Meet Requirements. Each security gate is subject to a performance test on a regular basis as determined by the fire department. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the fire department. 
C.  Property Owners Associations Required. 
1.  Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association Required. Subdivisions developed with private streets and alleys must have a mandatory Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association which includes all property to be served by private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. 
2.  The association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City's attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable City ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the Final Plat. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private streets and alleys and assessment therefore may be amended without the written consent of the City. 
D.  Construction and Utilities. Water, sewer, drainage facilities, street lights and signs placed within the private street and alley lot shall be installed to City standards prior to approval of the Final Plat. All City regulations relating to infrastructure financing and developer cost participation shall apply to subdivisions with private streets. 
E.  Converting Private Streets to Public Streets. The property association documents shall allow the association to request the City to accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members. The request will be accepted for consideration if it contains the notarized signatures of the owners of at least 75% of the affected lots on the street. However, in no event shall the City be obligated to accept said streets and alleys as public. 
1.  City's Acceptance of Streets and Alleys. Should the City elect to accept the streets and alleys as public, the City may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the City's acceptance of the streets and alleys. The City will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed and to the extent they are needed, including any associated drainage and street light repairs. 
2.  Initiation. The property owners' association or abutting property owners with responsibility to maintain the private streets shall submit a formal request to the City Administrator to convert street ownership and an offer of dedication. 
3.  Offer of Dedication. The formal request shall consist of a written evaluation sealed by a professional engineer registered in Texas, qualified in the area of soil mechanics and pavement design, of the pavement construction compared to the City's current public street standards, including an evaluation of the anticipated service life and maintenance costs of the subject street(s). The above shall be based on a sealed report of core samples of the subject street(s) performed by a geotechnical engineering firm. At a minimum, the geotechnical report shall include pavement thickness and type, the presence, size and spacing of reinforcing steel, and the type and density of subgrade material. The geotechnical engineering firm shall submit a plan showing the proposed core locations for City review prior to beginning work. 
4.  Approval Procedures. 
a.  Once a completed offer of dedication is submitted and reviewed, the request may be submitted to the City Council for consideration. The City Council may consider the request at a regular meeting or conduct a public hearing. 
b.  The City Council may, at its discretion, approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Conditions of approval may include obligations relating to items noted above or any other matter within the City Council's legislative discretion. 
c.  Upon conditional approval, the applicant must: 
i.  Hire a city-approved contractor to make all repairs and maintenance noted in the evaluation. The applicant, contractor, and City shall enter into a three-way contract to cover all work to be performed. All work will be inspected by the City. The applicant may be required to cover the cost of the inspection(s). A two year maintenance bond will also be required for the repair work. 
ii.  Hire a contractor or pay the City the cost for any streetlight work needed, as well as the cost for any street markers and/or sign replacement. 
iii.  Hire a contractor and obtain necessary building permits for demolition of any gates, guard houses, or any other improvements that must be removed. 
iv.  Submit a metes and bounds description of the right-of-way to be dedicated to the City or submit a replat of the affected properties. 
v.  Submit an Easement Use Agreement for any privately maintained improvements that are allowed to remain in the dedicated right-of-way. 
vi.  Address any other matter required by the City Council. 
5.  Recording. Upon final approval of the request, the right(s)-of-way shall be dedicated to the public through replatting of the affected properties with the right-of-way shown as public and filed for record with the County Clerk. 
F.  Access Restrictions. 
1.  General Requirements. The entrances to all private streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street. Either a guard house or an access control device such as a gate or cross arm shall be constructed at each entrance. All restricted access entrances shall be manned 24 hours every day, or an alternative means shall be provided of ensuring access to the subdivision by the City and other utility service providers with appropriate identification. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide City services, the City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. 
2.  Restricted Access. Private streets that have access controlled by a gate, cross arm, or other access control device shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The street must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 24 feet at the location of the access control device. 
b.  If an overhead barrier is used, it shall have minimum height above the road surface as required by the local fire department for fire lanes. 
c.  The design of all gates, cross arms and access control devices, including automatic opening systems and manual backup systems, shall be approved by the local fire department before installation. 
d.  The gates, cross arms, and access control devices shall be tested and accepted by the fire department before being put into operation. 
e.  Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum width of 24 feet. 
f.  If the entrance incorporates a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate and street pavement widths may be reduced if approved by the fire department. This approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision with private streets having a second approved means of access, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than 15 feet. 
3.  Visitor Entrance Design Standards. At least one entrance to a subdivision with private streets shall be equipped for visitor access. In addition to meeting the above design standards, the visitor entrance shall be equipped with a call or code box located at least 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for visitors calling in an automobile queuing. A turn-around space with a minimum outside radius of 30 feet shall be located between any call or code box and the access control device to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets in a "headout" position. A sign shall be erected next to the edge or such turn around space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space. A resident entrance used in combination with a visitor entrance shall comply with the requirements of this Subsection. 
4.  Resident Only Entrance Design Standards. In addition to meeting the above design standards, an access control device that requires residents to use a key, card, or code to gain access shall setback internally a minimum of 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for automobile queuing; except that resident entrances equipped with an electronic opener that allows residents to remotely open the access control device and enter the subdivision without having to stop are exempted from this requirement. A sign shall be erected next to any resident entrance that does not meet the 50 foot setback requirement of this paragraph and does not provide a turn-around space with a minimum outside radius of 30 feet to indicate that it is for resident use only and not for visitors. 
Sec. 155.6.18. - Survey monuments and lot markers. 
A.  Temporary Survey Reference Markers. 
1.  Before the Preliminary Plat is submitted to the City for consideration, a temporary marker and a guard stake with flagging shall be placed by the surveyor on all of the development's perimeter boundary corners which do not have a "found" monument. 
a.  Perimeter boundary corners includes points of intersection (PI), points of curvature (PC), points of compound curvature (PCC), points of tangency (PT) and any other point along the boundary which is necessary to establish the boundary of the development. 
b.  A guard stake with flagging shall be placed on all "found" monuments. 
c.  The temporary markers shall be within one foot (1') of the surveyed corner and the guard stake shall be within one foot (1') of the temporary marker or the "found" monument. 
2.  Submission of the Preliminary Plat prepared by the licensed surveyor shall be considered evidence that the temporary markers, guard stakes, and flagging have been set, regardless of whether or not the Final Plat has been sealed and signed. 
B.  Permanent Survey Reference Monuments. 
1.  Before the Final Plat is submitted to the City for consideration, a concrete monument six inches (6") in diameter and twenty-four inches (24") long, shall be placed by the surveyor on each of the development's perimeter boundary corners which do not have a "found" monument. 
a.  An eighteen inch (18") long steel rod, 5/8 inch in diameter and embedded at least twelve inches (12") into the monument, shall be placed at the boundary intersection point on each monument. 
b.  These monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction. 
c.  The tops of the monuments shall be at least twelve inches (12") below the finished grade. 
2.  In addition to the requisite number of hard copies, Final Plats shall also be prepared and submitted electronically oriented in Texas State Plane grid coordinates (U.S. Survey Foot), North Central Zone (4202), NAD 83, at an elevation datum based on NAVD 88. 
3.  Submission of the Final Plat prepared by the licensed surveyor shall be considered evidence that the monuments and benchmarks have been set, regardless of whether or not the Final Plat has been sealed and signed. 
C.  Public Right-Of-Way Markers. 
1.  Public Rights-of-Way and easements for public streets or approved access easement shall be indicated by monuments placed along their centerlines. Monuments shall be placed at PI, PC, PCC, and PT. 
2.  Where concrete streets are constructed, the monuments shall be an "X" cut into the concrete pavement. 
3.  Each leg of the "X" shall be at least six inches (6") long and 1/4-inch deep. 
4.  Where asphalt streets are constructed and in unpaved areas, the monument shall be a 5/8-inch iron bar, eighteen inches (18") long. 
D.  Survey Benchmarks. 
1.  All survey monuments and lot markers shall adhere to the adopted survey benchmark documents. 
2.  Each Final Plat is required to have at least one permanent benchmark monument set within its boundary based upon NAVD 88. All portions of the perimeter boundary of the development shall be less than 1/2 mile from the benchmark, or additional benchmarks shall be set such that all portions of the perimeter boundary of the development are within 1/2 mile of a benchmark. 
3.  Benchmark monuments may be similar to permanent boundary corner monuments set flush with the ground, or may be set on top of visible concrete structures such as headwalls or curb inlets by chiseling a 1-1/2 inch square in the concrete 1/4 inch deep. The location and elevation of the Benchmark(s) (based on NAVD 88) shall be noted on the Final Plat. 
Sec. 155.6.19. - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Underground Utilities (Optional). 
1.  All distribution lines, cables, etc. for utilities shall be installed below ground within the Subdivision in a manner designed to eliminate the necessity for disturbing the street, curb and gutter, sidewalk and other services and structures when making connections. 
a.  Transmission lines or major cables to provide utilities such as electric, telephone, and cable television to the area as a whole may be located above ground on the perimeter of the Subdivision being served. 
b.  The installation of these utilities shall conform to commonly accepted construction standards and be subject to review by the City Administrator. 
2.  The Developer shall provide separate service lines for water and wastewater (sanitary sewerage) to each lot or point of metering. 
3.  The Developer shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of their respective utility lines and service to and within the subdivision and for any costs or refunds of such cost. 
4.  All Plats for residential and multi-family developments shall require all telephone lines, cable television lines, electric lines, and utility lateral and services lines and wires to be placed underground except as otherwise herein provided. 
a.  In special or unique circumstances or to avoid undue hardships a Major Subdivision Waiver may be approved to permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or services lines and of overhead telephone and cable TV lines and may approve any Plat or Site Plan with such approved exceptions or waivers. 
b.  All Final Plats for residential and multi-family Subdivisions submitted for approval by the City must display signature approval by utility companies prior to submittal. 
i.  All multi-family Plats or Site Plans must display signature approval by utility companies before any building permits are issued. 
ii.  No Final Plat shall be approved and no building permit will be issued without such approval. 
c.  Where electrical service is to be placed underground, street or site facilities shall also be placed underground. 
d.  All electrical, cable TV and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installations in Subdivisions shall be pad mounted or placed underground. 
e.  Nothing herein set forth shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities. 
i.  Each utility whose facilities are subject to the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance shall develop policies and cost reimbursement procedures with respect to the installation and extension of underground service. 
f.  Unless specifically stated otherwise, temporary construction service may be provided by overhead utility lines and facilities without obtaining a waiver. 
g.  "Electric Utility Service Lines" shall mean those electric lines which through a transformer connect a lateral line to a customer's service entrance. 
5.  All installations regulated by the provisions set forth herein shall be in conformance with the intent of this ordinance and shall conform to any regulations and/or specifications that the various public utility companies may have in force from time to time. 
6.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require any existing facilities to be placed underground when no development is proposed. 
B.  Company Notification to City. All utility companies will notify the City before digging, boring, drilling, etc. 
Sec. 155.6.20. - Park land design, dedication, and fees. 
A.  Purpose. This Section Sec. 155.6.20 (Park Land Design, Dedication, and Fees) is intended to ensure that adequate recreational areas in the form of neighborhood and community parks are provided to meet the additional needs created by new residential development. 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all new residential development within the City and all residential subdivisions within its extraterritorial jurisdiction after the effective date of this Ordinance for which a Final Plat or Preliminary Plat is required to be submitted to the City for approval 
C.  Exemptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Residential development for property to be located on a lot of record, Final Plat or replat that was approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
2.  Residential development constructed or to be constructed in accordance with a building permit issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
3.  Senior living facilities and senior care facilities, including assisted living facilities, senior congregate care facilities, memory care facilities and nursing homes. However, independent living and retirement communities or age-restricted housing developments shall be subject to the provisions of this Section 
D.  Park Design Requirements for Neighborhood and Community Parks. Parks must be easy to access and open to public view to benefit area development, enhance the visual character of the City, protect public safety and minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. The following standards be used in designing parks and adjacent development: 
1.  Where physically feasible, parks shall be bounded by streets, or by other public uses (e.g. school, library, recreation center). 
2.  Where residential lots directly abut a park, lots must be oriented to side and not back to the park. In this instance, cul-de-sac and looped streets must be used to access the lots and park. 

3.  Residential lots may back to a park only when the site's physical character (e.g. shape, topography, drainage) does not reasonably permit an alternative design or the layout of the subdivision complements the use of the park (e.g., lots backing to a golf course). Lots backing to a park or open space shall only be allowed upon approval from the City Administrator and the Parks Department. 
4.  A proposed subdivision adjacent to a park may not be designed to restrict reasonable access to the park from other area subdivisions. Street connections to existing or future adjoining subdivisions may be required to provide reasonable access to parks. 
5.  Where a nonresidential use must directly abut a park, the use shall be oriented such that it sides, and does not back, onto the park if at all possible. The use must also be separated by a screening wall or fence and landscaping approved by the City. Access points to the park may be required by the City if a public benefit is established. 
6.  Alleys may abut a park provided that the alley does not exceed the residential lot depth by the width of the alley. Alleys should not be designed to encourage their use as a means of vehicular, bike or pedestrian travel to the park. 
7.  Streets abutting a park shall be built in accordance with the thoroughfare plan, the standards of this Ordinance and all other applicable construction standards and/or ordinances, as they exist or may be amended; however, the City may require any residential street built adjacent to a park to be constructed to collector street width to ensure access and prevent traffic congestion. 
a.  When park land is acquired, the City shall reserve sufficient land to provide the additional right-of-way required for an abutting collector size street, sixty (60) feet of right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the City. 
b.  The proposed street alignment fronting on City parks is subject to City approval. Land owners shall also provide street access to all Major Creeks and/or Access Dedications. 
8.  If the City adopts a Recreation or Open Space Master Plan, all park land dedication shall meet the requirements stated therein. 
E.  Trail and Park Connections. 
1.  Public access to a park shall not be less than fifty (50) feet and shall not be part of a residential lot. The Property Owner shall install a ten (10) foot wide concrete trail from the street to the hike and bike trail/park prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. This trail must be blocked from motor vehicle traffic. However, the Property Owner may request to escrow funds for the contracted amount prior to final acceptance of the subdivision with City approval. The escrow amount will remain in place until the trail has been completed and accepted by the City. The requirements of this section 6.20.E.1 shall only apply if a Hike and Bike Plan is adopted by the City. 
2.  A twenty-five (25) foot level surface shall be provided for a twelve (12) foot wide public hike and bike trail when required. The twenty-five (25) foot wide level surface can be provided within and/or outside of the Base Flood Plain and/or Access Dedication. The parkway for the public street may count towards the twenty-five (25) foot wide level surface. The proposed hike and bike trail shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat. The Parks Department shall make the final determination of the placement of the public hike and bike trail at the time of the Final Plat. Low water crossings for the hike and bike trail may be permitted with approval from the City Administrator. The hike and bike trail shall be designed so as to minimize visibility blind spots from public streets for public safety purposes. No development shall interrupt future trail routes or otherwise hinder efficient public access to or from an existing or future planned trail. Gated and other limited access developments shall be designed such that they facilitate, and do not impede, through public access, emergency ingress and egress, usage and enjoyment of public trails 
3.  If the City adopts a Recreation or Open Space Master Plan, all park land dedication shall meet the requirements stated therein. 
F.  Dedication Requirements (Land, Payment, or Combination). 
1.  Land Conveyance or Payment in Lieu of Land. The owner of any property to be developed for residential purposes shall convey for park purposes land or make a payment of money in lieu of land, or a combination of both, to the City at the time of rezoning or subdivision to provide for the recreational needs created by such development, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Proposed Number of Dwelling Units. All plats, lots of record, replats, site plans or proposed improvements of land for new residential development shall indicate the number of proposed dwelling units to be constructed or placed within the development on such plat, lot of record, replat or site plan. 
3.  Determination Authority. In reviewing any lot of record, plat, site plan or proposed improvements of land for a new residential development, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a determination of whether a conveyance of land, payment of money in lieu of land or a combination of both shall be made to meet the requirements of this Section. 
4.  Factors Considered. In making a determination of which type of dedication, or combination thereof, shall be made, the Director of Community Services shall recommend what would be in the best interest of the City, based upon relevant factors which may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Whether the proposed land to be conveyed for park purposes would be suitable as a neighborhood, linear, community, or City park. 
b.  The parks master plan for the area in which the development is located. 
c.  The recommendation of the Director of Community Services or the Department of Parks and Recreation. 
d.  Whether the proposed land to be conveyed for park purposes is adjacent to an existing or proposed school site. 
e.  Whether there is sufficient existing public or private park land in the area of the proposed development. 
f.  Whether the park needs of the area where the proposed development is located would be best served by expanding or upgrading existing parks. 
g.  Land located adjacent to a greenbelt park. 
G.  Dedications: Conveyance of Land Requirements. Where the Director of Community Services recommends and the Planning and Zoning Commission determine that a conveyance of land shall be required, in whole or in part, to meet the requirements of this Section, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Amount. The required conveyance of land shall be one (1) acre of land per thirty-five (35) residential units, or an amount proportionally equal to five percent (5%) of the total tract acreage, whichever is greater. 
2.  Manner and Method. Plats required to be submitted to the City for approval shall show thereon a fee simple conveyance to the City of the land required by this Section for park purposes as a condition to approval of such plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the City may further require the conveyance of the park property by general warranty deed. As a condition to acceptance of the plat or deed by the City, the Subdivider shall provide the City with an owner's title policy of insurance in an amount equal to the value of the land conveyed, which amount shall be determined by the City. 
3.  Credit for Prior Dedications. Where a dedication of land was made prior to the effective date of this Section 6.20 by the owner of land required to convey land under the provisions of this Section 6.20, the former dedication of land shall be credited on a per-acre basis toward the required conveyance provided by this Section 6.20 when the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that: 
a.  The dedication was made within five (5) years of the effective date of this Ordinance from which this Section derives; 
b.  The land dedicated was within one-half (1/2) mile of the new development for which land is required to be conveyed; 
c.  The land dedicated is not being presently used for purposes incompatible with park purposes and is suitable for park purposes; and 
d.  A credit may be given for on-site improvements that are compatible with long-range development plans for the proposed park. 
The credit provided for herein shall not be transferable and shall only be given to the donor of the land who is the owner of the property being developed for which a conveyance of land is required by this Section, unless said prior conveyances were included as a part of an executed facilities and/or development agreement with the City and the Developer. 
4.  Credit for Private Recreation Facilities. Where private recreation facilities are built for the residents for the subdivision or development, a credit may be granted with a recommendation from the Director of Community Services and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The value of these private recreation facilities shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, but shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) credit of conveyance. 
5.  Suitability of Land for Neighborhood or Community Parks. A proposed conveyance of land shall not be considered suitable for neighborhood or community park purposes if it has one or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  Located within the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the latest flood insurance rate map or floodplain Ordinance adopted by the City on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
b.  The proposed park site dedication shall not be less than five (5) acres for a neighborhood park or twenty (20) acres for a community park, unless the proposed dedication is located in such a manner in which it could be combined with other dedications to create a park of adequate size. 
c.  It has unusual topography or slope that renders it unsuitable for organized recreational activities or passive park needs, depending on the City's intended use for the park. 
d.  It does not or would not front an improved public street or would not be readily accessible, in whole or in part, to the public. 
H.  Dedications: Payment in Lieu of Land Provisions. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that a payment of money in lieu of land shall be made, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Determining the Amount of Payment. 
a.  Any payment of money required to be paid shall be as follows: 
i.  Eight-hundred (800) dollars per single-family unit. 
ii.  Four-hundred (400) dollars per multi-family unit. 
2.  Time of Payment. Any payment of money required herein shall be paid as a condition to the approval of any Final Plat or replat. Payment shall be made prior to the signing of the plat unless otherwise stated in an agreement approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
3.  Park Development Fund. All cash payments paid to the City in accordance with this Section 6.20 shall be deposited in a separate park development fund. The City shall account for all such payment with reference to each development for which the payment is made. 
4.  Use of Funds. Any payments made to the park development fund must be used for the acquisition, development, expansion or upgrading of parks located within the same park district or general area where the proposed development for which payment was made is located. 
5.  Right to Refund. If all or part of the payments made for a development are not expended for the purposes authorized herein within three (3) years of the date that 95 percent of all certificates of occupancy have been issued for the completed development of the property for which the payments were made, the person or entity who made such payments may be entitled to a refund on all unexpended funds if a request for a refund in writing has been made within six (6) months of entitlement. If no such timely request is made, the right to a refund of the unexpended funds shall be considered waived. 
6.  Compliance. 
a.  Requirements to be Satisfied Prior to Development. It shall be unlawful for any person who is required to convey land, or make a payment in lieu of land, to begin, or allow any other person or contractor to begin, any construction or improvements on any land within any development until the required conveyance of land, or payment of money in lieu of land, is made to the City in accordance with this Section 6.20. 
b.  Permits and Services to be Withheld. No building permits shall be issued for, and no permanent utility services shall be provided to, any land within any development until the required conveyance of land, or payment of money in lieu of land, is made to the City in accordance with this Section 6.20. 
7.  Additional Voluntary Park Improvements. A developer may request permission to construct, at his or her own expense, additional park improvements. The City may accept or reject voluntary dedications of park land and/or additional park improvements. Such voluntary dedications and/or improvements shall be considered for approval by the Director of Community Services. All improvements in public parks and open spaces shall be consistent with the design criteria and objectives of the Parks, Recreation & Open Space Master Plan, and shall, upon installation, become the property of the City. Prior to constructing such additional park improvements, the developer shall enter into a Development Agreement with the City that defines, among other things, the work to be performed, construction schedules, improvement costs, performance surety, the amount to be reimbursed by the City (if any), and the timing of such reimbursement (if any). The Director of Community Services shall assess and decide the proposed Development Agreement for park improvements. 
8.  Appeals and Variances. 
a.  The Developer may appeal the following decisions of the City Administrator to the City Council: 
i.  The applicability of the park fee; 
ii.  The amount of the fee due; or 
iii.  The amount of refund due, if any. 
b.  The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee, the amount of the credit or reimbursement was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of fees or the guidelines established for determining such amounts. The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the City Council within thirty (30) days following the determination by the City Administrator. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the park fee due as calculated by the City Administrator, the development application shall be processed. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of the fee due, unless a bond or other sufficient surety has been filed. 
c.  The City Council may grant a variance from any requirements of this Section, upon written request by a Property Owner subject to this Section, following a public hearing, and only upon a finding that a strict application of such requirement would result in a substantial hardship that is not common to similarly situated Property Owners. 
9.  Park Fee as Additional and Supplemental Requirement. The park fee is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution of any other requirements imposed by the City on the residential development of the land. 
SECTION 7. - RELIEF FROM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 155.7.01. - Petition for subdivision waiver. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a petition for a Subdivision Waiver to a particular standard or requirement with these Subdivision Regulations, as such are applicable to Plats or Construction Plans, is to determine whether such particular standard or requirement should be applied to an Application. 
B.  Definitions. Subdivision Waivers shall be classified as a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver. 
C.  Decision-Maker. 
1.  Minor Subdivision Waiver. 
a.  Decision-Maker Authority. 
i.  The City Administrator shall act upon a Minor Subdivision Waiver listed in Table 8. 
b.  Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision. 
i.  Appeal Review and Recommendation. An appeal of the Minor Subdivision Waiver decision may be considered by the Commission. 
ii.  Appeal Decision. If further appeal is made, the City Council shall then act on such an appeal. (See 7.01.J Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal) 
Table 8: Minor Subdivision Waiver Section Standard City Administrator 3.01.B Waiver of Application Information Approve 6.06.N Dead-End Alleys Approve 6.10.D Right Angles for Side Lot Lines Approve 6.05.D Traffic Impact Analysis Approve 6.13.A.5 Water Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders Approve 6.14.A.5 Wastewater Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders Approve  
2.  Major Subdivision Waiver. 
a.  Decision Maker Authority. After review and recommendation from the Commission, the City Council shall decide a Major Subdivision Waiver. 
D.  Subdivision Waiver Applicability. 
1.  Waiver of Standard or Requirement. 
a.  An Applicant may request a Subdivision Waiver of a particular standard or requirement applicable to a Preliminary Plat, to Construction Plans, or where no Preliminary Plat Application has been submitted for approval, to a Final Plat or a Replat. 
b.  A Subdivision Waiver petition shall be specific in nature, and shall only involve relief consideration for one particular standard or requirement. 
c.  An Applicant may, if desired, submit more than one Subdivision Waiver petition if there are several standards or requirements at issue. 
d.  For processing a Subdivision Waiver in relationship with a Plat Application, an Applicant shall submit a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with 3.03.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
2.  Waiver Petition Acceptance. 
a.  A petition for a Subdivision Waiver shall not be accepted in lieu of: 
i.  A Subdivision Proportionality Appeal (7.02); or 
ii.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition (7.03). 
b.  If there is a question as to whether a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal or Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is required instead of a Subdivision Waiver petition, such determination shall be made by the City Administrator. 
E.  Subdivision Waiver Submission Procedures. 
1.  Written Waiver Request with Application. 
a.  A request for a Subdivision Waiver shall be submitted in writing by the Applicant with the filing of a Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, Final Plat or Replat, as applicable. 
b.  No Subdivision Waiver may be considered or granted unless the Applicant has made such written request. 
2.  Grounds for Waiver. 
a.  The Applicant's request shall state the grounds for the Subdivision Waiver request and all of the facts relied upon by the Applicant. 
b.  Failure to do so, will result in denial of the Application unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with 3.03.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
F.  Subdivision Waiver Criteria. 
1.  Undue Hardship Present. A Subdivision Waiver to regulations within this Subdivision Ordinance may be approved only when, in the Decision-Maker's opinion, undue hardship will result from strict compliance to the regulations. 
2.  Consideration Factors. The Decision-Maker shall take into account the following factors: 
a.  The nature of the proposed land use involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity; 
b.  The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development; and 
c.  The effect such Subdivision Waiver might have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
3.  Findings. No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless the Decision-Maker finds: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved or other constraints such that the strict application of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance would deprive the Applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; and 
b.  That the Subdivision Waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the Applicant, and that the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area; and 
c.  That the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
4.  Intent of Subdivision Regulations. 
a.  A Subdivision Waiver may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Subdivision Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
b.  Financial hardship to the Applicant shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
5.  Minimum Degree of Variation. No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless it represents the minimum degree of variation of requirements necessary to meet the needs of the Applicant. 
6.  Violations and Conflicts. The Decision-Maker shall not authorize a Subdivision Waiver that would constitute a violation of, or conflict with, any other valid ordinance, code, regulation, master plan or Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
7.  Falsification of Information. 
a.  Any falsification of information by the Applicant shall be cause for the Subdivision Waiver request to be denied. 
b.  If the Subdivision Waiver request is approved based upon false information, whether intentional or not, discovery of such false information shall nullify prior approval of the Subdivision Waiver, and shall be grounds for reconsideration of the Subdivision Waiver request. 
G.  Burden of Proof. The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the requirement for which a Subdivision Waiver is requested, if uniformly applied, imposes an undue hardship or disproportionate burden on the Applicant. The Applicant shall submit the burden of proof with the original submittal. 
H.  Subdivision Waiver Decision. 
1.  The Decision-Maker shall consider the Subdivision Waiver petition and, based upon the criteria set forth in 7.01.F Subdivision Waiver Criteria, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in this Subdivision Ordinance; or 
b.  Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part the standard or requirement as it is stated in this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Decision Process for a Minor Subdivision Waiver. The Decision-Maker shall deny of grant a request for a Minor Subdivision Waiver concurrently with the decision of a Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, Final Plat or Replat, as applicable. 
3.  Decision Process for a Major Subdivision Waiver. 
a.  Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
i.  The Commission shall consider the Major Subdivision Waiver request at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of Major Subdivision Waiver is submitted to the City Administrator. 
ii.  The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to approve or deny a request for a Major Subdivision Waiver by majority vote. 
b.  Decision by City Council. 
i.  After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the Major Subdivision Waiver request at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Commission's recommendation was made. 
ii.  The City Council may or shall approve or deny a request for a Major Subdivision Waiver by a vote of all members. 
iii.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
I.  Notification of Decision on Petition-14 Days. The Applicant shall be notified of the decision on the Subdivision Waiver by the applicable Decision-Maker (e.g., the City Administrator, Commission or City Council, as applicable), within fourteen (14) calendar days following the decision. 
J.  Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal. 
1.  Initiation of an Appeal. 
a.  The Applicant may appeal a Minor Subdivision Waiver decision of the City Administrator, as allowed within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The written request to appeal shall be submitted to the City Administrator within thirty (30) calendar days following the denial decision. 
2.  Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  The Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the City Administrator. 
b.  At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if available, that might alter the previous decision to deny the Minor Subdivision Waiver. 
c.  The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to affirm, modify or reverse the previous decision by simple majority vote. 
3.  Appeal to City Council. 
a.  The Applicant may appeal the Commission's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the City Administrator within thirty (30) calendar days following the Commission's decision. 
b.  After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Commission's recommendation was made. 
c.  The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision by simple majority vote. 
d.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
K.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  Submission and Processing. Following the granting of a Subdivision Waiver, the Applicant may submit or continue the processing of a Plat or Construction Plans, as applicable. 
2.  Expirations. The Subdivision Waiver granted shall remain in effect for the period the Plat or Construction Plans are in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of either or both of those Applications. 
3.  Extensions. Extension of those Applications shall also result in extension of the Subdivision Waiver. 
Sec. 155.7.02.   Subdivision proportionality appeal.
A.  Purpose and Applicability. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication, construction requirement, or a requirement to pay a fee, other than an impact fee authorized by Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code is to ensure that the imposition of uniform dedication, construction, and fee standards to a proposed development does not result in a disproportionate burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the City's roadways and public facilities systems. 
2.  Applicability. 
a.  An Applicant may file a petition for relief under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal to contest any requirement to dedicate land or to construct Public Improvements as required by this Subdivision Ordinance, other ordinance, or attached as a condition to approval of the Application. 
b.  A petition under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal shall not be used to waive standards on grounds applicable to any Subdivision Waiver Application, as outlined in 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver. 
B.  Petition Requirements. 
1.  Form of Petition. The petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall allege that Application of the standard relating to the requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
2.  Study Required. The Applicant shall provide a study in support of the petition for relief that includes the following information: 
a.  Capacity Utilized. 
i.  Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. 
ii.  If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Capacity Supplied. 
i.  Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of Public Improvements. 
ii.  If the Application is part of a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of Public Improvements. 
c.  Capacity Comparison. 
i.  Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of Public Improvements, or payment of a fee. 
ii.  In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  Oversizing. The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the Public Improvement to be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements. 
e.  Other Information. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City. 
3.  Time for Filing Petition and Study. 
a.  A petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall be filed with the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision to conditionally approve or deny an Application. 
b.  The study in support of the petition shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial decision, unless the Applicant (petitioner for relief) seeks an extension in writing. 
c.  The City Administrator may extend the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) calendar days for good cause shown. 
4.  Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the ETJ of the City and are to be dedicated to the County, a petition for relief or study in support of the petition shall be accepted as complete for review by the City Administrator only when such petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to and accepted by the County, as applicable. 
C.  Processing of Subdivision Proportionality Appeal Petitions and Decision. 
1.  Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall be the Responsible Official for a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement. 
2.  Review and Recommendation. 
a.  The City Administrator shall review the petition and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to: 
i.  The Commission, and 
ii.  The City Council. 
b.  In response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement pursuant to 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal and to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public facilities, the City may participate in the costs of Public Improvements, credit or offset the obligations against payment of impact fees, or relieve the property owner any of the obligations. 
3.  Decision-Maker. The City Council shall decide the Subdivision Proportionality Appeal petition, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.  Public Hearing Held within 60 Days after Receipt of Study. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar days after the study supporting the petition (refer to Section 7.02.B) is filed with the City Administrator. 
5.  Burden of Proof. The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the Application of a dedication or construction requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a disproportionate burden on the Applicant. 
6.  Decision. The City Council shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The City Council shall determine whether the Application of the standard or condition is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system, and whether the Application of the standard or condition reasonably benefits the development. 
b.  In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the Applicant, the report and recommendation of the City Administrator and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any recommendations from the County, as applicable. 
7.  Action. Based on the criteria in 7.02.C.6, the City Council shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication or construction requirement as required by this Ordinance; or 
b.  Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
c.  Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the Public Improvement under standard participation policies. 
8.  Notification of Decision on Petition. The City Administrator shall notify the Applicant of the decision on the petition for relief within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision. 
D.  Expiration or Failure to File Application. Where an Application was denied based upon the imposition of the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a required Public Improvement and the City Council's decision is to grant some level of relief, the Applicant shall resubmit the Application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the petition for relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the City Council's decision on the petition. 
1.  If the Application is not resubmitted within the sixty (60) day period, the relief granted by the City Council on the petition shall expire. 
2.  If the re-submittal of the Application is modified in any other way, a new petition for relief may be required by the City Administrator. 
3.  If the Application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief may be required by the City Administrator. 
E.  Effect of Relief. 
1.  The City Administrator may require the Applicant to submit a modified Application or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted by the City Council on the petition. 
2.  The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the Application is in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the plat or related Application. 
Sec. 155.7.03.   Subdivision vested rights petition.
A.  Purpose. In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, the purpose of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is to determine whether an Application should be processed under the terms of a previous ordinance, to provide a process for determination of possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to expiration. 
B.  Applicability of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Any Application. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be submitted for any Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Prohibit Joint Submission. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition cannot be submitted by an Applicant along with submission of a request for a text amendment to this Subdivision Ordinance, a Zoning Map amendment, or any other request for a legislative decision by the City Council. 
C.  Petition Submission. 
1.  Filing. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be submitted to the City's Responsible Official and shall be in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute. 
2.  Automatic Waiver. Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall require a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (See Section 3.03.D). 
3.  Stay of Further Proceedings . Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall stay further proceedings on the related Application until a final decision is reached on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
D.  Time for Filing a Petition and Application. 
1.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be filed jointly with an Application for which a vested right is claimed. 
2.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be filed without a joint Application if the petition is filed pursuant to Section 7.03.K Dormant Projects. 
3.  Where more than one Application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this Subdivision Ordinance, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each Application. 
E.  Petition Requirements. The Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall allege in writing that the Applicant has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the Application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or successor statute or other applicable law, that requires the City to review and decide the Application under standards that were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly authorized agent). 
2.  Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right. 
3.  Identification of the project, as that term is defined in Local Government Code Section 245.001(3), and the permit application, permit, or plan for development giving rise to the project. 
4.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project; 
5.  A copy of each approved or pending Application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply current standards to the Application which is the subject of the petition; 
6.  The Official Vesting Date of the Application; 
7.  The date the subdivision for which the Application was submitted was commenced; 
8.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the Application from which relief is sought; 
9.  Identification of any current standards which Applicant agrees can be applied to the Application at issue; 
10.  A narrative description of how the Application of current standards affect proposed landscaping, Usable Open Space or park dedication, shown on the Application for which the petition is filed; 
11.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
12.  Whenever the Applicant alleges that an Application subject to expiration should not be terminated, a description of the events constituting Progress Towards Completion of the subdivision for which the application was approved. 
F.  Decision of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Reviewing a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  The Responsible Official for a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is the same as that for reviewing the Application with which the petition is associated. 
b.  Where multiple Applications are submitted, and there is more than one Responsible Official, the decision of each Responsible Official shall be coordinated with that of any other Responsible Official on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
c.  The City Attorney shall also be notified of the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition following its filing and acceptance for processing. 
d.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat. 
2.  Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  If the City Administrator or Responsible Official is the Decision-Maker on the original related Application, that official shall determine whether the relief requested in the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the Decision-Maker's reasoning and recommendation. 
b.  The Applicant shall be notified of the decision within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The City Administrator or Responsible Official may defer making a decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition and instead forward the petition to the Commission for a decision, in accordance with the process outlined in 7.03.F.3. 
3.  Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  If the original related Application is to be decided by the Commission, or if the City Administrator or Responsible Official defers making a decision on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition pursuant to 7.03.F.2.c, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the Commission. 
b.  The Commission shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City or deferred by the City Administrator or Responsible Official. 
c.  The Commission's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full Commission's voting members. 
4.  Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  Where the City Council is the final Decision-Maker on the related Application, or for any petition submitted pursuant to Paragraph K. Dormant Projects, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the City Council. 
b.  The City Council shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The City Council's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full City Council's voting members, and shall be final. 
5.  Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  For an Applicant-Initiated Appeal. The Applicant may appeal the City Administrator or Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  A letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by the Applicant. 
b.  For a City Council-Initiated Appeal. No less than four (4) voting members of the City Council may appeal the Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the entire City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  The Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that occurs after the date at which the decision was made. 
ii.  Written notice of the City Council's vote to appeal shall be submitted to the City Administrator within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council's vote to appeal the decision. 
c.  The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal by the City. 
d.  Approval of an appeal by the City Council shall only be upon a favorable vote of at least four (4) of the City Council's voting members, and shall be final. 
G.  Criteria for Subdivision Vested Rights Petition Approval. 
1.  Factors. The Decision-Maker shall decide the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior Applications filed for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved Applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with State law or local ordinances; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed Application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Subdivision Regulations from which the Applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved Applications relied upon by the Applicant have expired; and 
g.  Any other applicable provisions outlined in Chapter 245 or Section 43.002 of the Texas Local Government Code, or successor statutes. 
2.  Conditions for a Pending Application. If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending Application, subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Decision-Maker may condition any relief granted on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition on the approval of the pending Application. 
H.  Action and Record of Action on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Action. The Decision-Maker may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the Application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related Application be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the related Application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied. 
2.  Record. The Responsible Official's report and the decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be recorded in writing in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The related Application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, if applicable; 
d.  Prior standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards, if applicable; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; and 
f.  To the extent feasible, subsequent related Applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition. 
I.  Effect of the Final Petition Decision on Related Applications. 
1.  Petition Decision Required Before Proceeding with Application. A final decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition must be achieved prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of, or decision on, the related Application. 
2.  Revision Made (if necessary) to Related Application After Petition Decision. Following the City's final decision on a petition, the Applicant shall, if necessary, revise the related Application such that it conforms to the City's decision on the petition. 
3.  Related Applications with Revisions. After submission of a revised related Application, the Decision-Maker on the related Application shall review and consider the revised Application in accordance with the procedures for deciding that type of Application, as outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, and in conformity with any relief granted. 
4.  Related Applications without Revisions. If the relief granted on the petition is consistent with the related Application on file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related Application shall be deemed submitted at the time of the final decision on the petition. 
J.  Expiration and Extension of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Expiration. Relief granted on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
a.  The Applicant fails to submit a revised Application that is consistent with the relief granted, if any, within sixty (60) calendar days following the final decision on the petition; 
b.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition is denied; or 
c.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition expires. 
2.  Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the Application for which relief was granted on a petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on the petition for the same time period. 
K.  Dormant Projects. 
1.  Definitions. For purposes of this Section 7.03.K only: 
a.  Dormant Project. A dormant project shall meet the following criteria: 
i.  An Initial Permit does not have an expiration date; and 
ii.  No Progress Towards Completion has been made within the project over 5 years. 
b.  Initial Permit. Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under these Subdivision Regulations, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance: 
i.  Preliminary Plat, 
ii.  Construction Plans, 
iii.  Construction Release, 
iv.  Subdivision Waivers to any requirement in this Subdivision Ordinance (per 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver), or 
v.  Any other Application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for development. 
c.  Final Permit. Final permit means a Final Plat approved under this Subdivision Ordinance, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Expiration Date Established for an Initial Permit. Any Application for an Initial Permit that was approved or filed two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this Subdivision Ordinance, and was not subject to an expiration date shall expire on the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit. 
a.  The property owner of the land subject to an Initial Permit that expires under 7.03.K.2 (above) may petition the City Council to reinstate such Initial Permit by filing a written petition within one (1) year following the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation the following: 
i.  As of two (2) years prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, one of the following events had occurred: 
(a)  A Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit and was approved by the City, or was filed and was subsequently approved by the City; 
(b)  An Application for a Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the expired Initial Permit, but such Application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245.005(c)(2)); 
(c)  Costs for development of the land subject to the Initial Permit, including costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the land; 
(d)  Fiscal security was posted with the City to guarantee performance of obligations required under this Subdivision Ordinance, including the construction of required improvements associated with the proposed development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit; or 
(e)  Utility connection fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit were paid to the City. 
4.  City Council Action on Reinstatement of a Dormant Project's Expired Initial Permit. The City Council may take one of the following actions: 
a.  Reinstate the expired Initial Permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i. 
b.  Reinstate the Initial Permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i, subject to expiration dates or other conditions that ensure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending Final Permit Application will be developed in a timely fashion. 
i.  In granting relief under this provision, the City Council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the Initial Permit. 
c.  Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the Applicant has failed to meet any of the criteria in 7.03.K.3 Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit); or 
d.  Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending Final Permit Application, if it finds that the Applicant has met the criteria in Section 7.03.K.3.b.i and the pending Application subsequently was approved, and deny the reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired Initial Permit. 
Sec. 155.7.02. - Subdivision proportionality appeal. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication, construction requirement, or a requirement to pay a fee, other than an impact fee authorized by Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code is to ensure that the imposition of uniform dedication, construction, and fee standards to a proposed development does not result in a disproportionate burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the City's roadways and public facilities systems. 
2.  Applicability. 
a.  An Applicant may file a petition for relief under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal to contest any requirement to dedicate land or to construct Public Improvements as required by this Subdivision Ordinance, other ordinance, or attached as a condition to approval of the Application. 
b.  A petition under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal shall not be used to waive standards on grounds applicable to any Subdivision Waiver Application, as outlined in 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver. 
B.  Petition Requirements. 
1.  Form of Petition. The petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall allege that Application of the standard relating to the requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
2.  Study Required. The Applicant shall provide a study in support of the petition for relief that includes the following information: 
a.  Capacity Utilized. 
i.  Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. 
ii.  If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Capacity Supplied. 
i.  Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of Public Improvements. 
ii.  If the Application is part of a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of Public Improvements. 
c.  Capacity Comparison. 
i.  Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of Public Improvements, or payment of a fee. 
ii.  In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  Oversizing. The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the Public Improvement to be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements. 
e.  Other Information. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City. 
3.  Time for Filing Petition and Study. 
a.  A petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall be filed with the City Administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision to conditionally approve or deny an Application. 
b.  The study in support of the petition shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial decision, unless the Applicant (petitioner for relief) seeks an extension in writing. 
c.  The City Administrator may extend the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) calendar days for good cause shown. 
4.  Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the ETJ of the City and are to be dedicated to the County, a petition for relief or study in support of the petition shall be accepted as complete for review by the City Administrator only when such petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to and accepted by the County, as applicable. 
C.  Processing of Subdivision Proportionality Appeal Petitions and Decision. 
1.  Responsible Official. The City Administrator shall be the Responsible Official for a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement. 
2.  Review and Recommendation. 
a.  The City Administrator shall review the petition and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to: 
i.  The Commission, and 
ii.  The City Council. 
b.  In response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement pursuant to 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal and to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public facilities, the City may participate in the costs of Public Improvements, credit or offset the obligations against payment of impact fees, or relieve the property owner any of the obligations. 
3.  Decision-Maker. The City Council shall decide the Subdivision Proportionality Appeal petition, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
4.  Public Hearing Held within 60 Days after Receipt of Study. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar days after the study supporting the petition (refer to Section 7.02.B) is filed with the City Administrator. 
5.  Burden of Proof. The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the Application of a dedication or construction requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a disproportionate burden on the Applicant. 
6.  Decision. The City Council shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The City Council shall determine whether the Application of the standard or condition is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system, and whether the Application of the standard or condition reasonably benefits the development. 
b.  In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the Applicant, the report and recommendation of the City Administrator and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any recommendations from the County, as applicable. 
7.  Action. Based on the criteria in 7.02.C.6, the City Council shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication or construction requirement as required by this Ordinance; or 
b.  Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
c.  Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the Public Improvement under standard participation policies. 
8.  Notification of Decision on Petition. The City Administrator shall notify the Applicant of the decision on the petition for relief within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision. 
D.  Expiration or Failure to File Application. Where an Application was denied based upon the imposition of the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a required Public Improvement and the City Council's decision is to grant some level of relief, the Applicant shall resubmit the Application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the petition for relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the City Council's decision on the petition. 
1.  If the Application is not resubmitted within the sixty (60) day period, the relief granted by the City Council on the petition shall expire. 
2.  If the re-submittal of the Application is modified in any other way, a new petition for relief may be required by the City Administrator. 
3.  If the Application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief may be required by the City Administrator. 
E.  Effect of Relief. 
1.  The City Administrator may require the Applicant to submit a modified Application or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted by the City Council on the petition. 
2.  The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the Application is in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the plat or related Application. 
Sec. 155.7.03. - Subdivision vested rights petition. 
A.  Purpose. In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, the purpose of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is to determine whether an Application should be processed under the terms of a previous ordinance, to provide a process for determination of possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to expiration. 
B.  Applicability of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Any Application. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be submitted for any Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Prohibit Joint Submission. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition cannot be submitted by an Applicant along with submission of a request for a text amendment to this Subdivision Ordinance, a Zoning Map amendment, or any other request for a legislative decision by the City Council. 
C.  Petition Submission. 
1.  Filing. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be submitted to the City's Responsible Official and shall be in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute. 
2.  Automatic Waiver. Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall require a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (See Section 3.03.D). 
3.  Stay of Further Proceedings . Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall stay further proceedings on the related Application until a final decision is reached on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
D.  Time for Filing a Petition and Application. 
1.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be filed jointly with an Application for which a vested right is claimed. 
2.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be filed without a joint Application if the petition is filed pursuant to Section 7.03.K Dormant Projects. 
3.  Where more than one Application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this Subdivision Ordinance, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each Application. 
E.  Petition Requirements. The Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall allege in writing that the Applicant has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the Application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or successor statute or other applicable law, that requires the City to review and decide the Application under standards that were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly authorized agent). 
2.  Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right. 
3.  Identification of the project, as that term is defined in Local Government Code Section 245.001(3), and the permit application, permit, or plan for development giving rise to the project. 
4.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project; 
5.  A copy of each approved or pending Application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply current standards to the Application which is the subject of the petition; 
6.  The Official Vesting Date of the Application; 
7.  The date the subdivision for which the Application was submitted was commenced; 
8.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the Application from which relief is sought; 
9.  Identification of any current standards which Applicant agrees can be applied to the Application at issue; 
10.  A narrative description of how the Application of current standards affect proposed landscaping, Usable Open Space or park dedication, shown on the Application for which the petition is filed; 
11.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
12.  Whenever the Applicant alleges that an Application subject to expiration should not be terminated, a description of the events constituting Progress Towards Completion of the subdivision for which the application was approved. 
F.  Decision of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Reviewing a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  The Responsible Official for a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is the same as that for reviewing the Application with which the petition is associated. 
b.  Where multiple Applications are submitted, and there is more than one Responsible Official, the decision of each Responsible Official shall be coordinated with that of any other Responsible Official on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
c.  The City Attorney shall also be notified of the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition following its filing and acceptance for processing. 
d.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat. 
2.  Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  If the City Administrator or Responsible Official is the Decision-Maker on the original related Application, that official shall determine whether the relief requested in the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the Decision-Maker's reasoning and recommendation. 
b.  The Applicant shall be notified of the decision within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The City Administrator or Responsible Official may defer making a decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition and instead forward the petition to the Commission for a decision, in accordance with the process outlined in 7.03.F.3. 
3.  Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  If the original related Application is to be decided by the Commission, or if the City Administrator or Responsible Official defers making a decision on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition pursuant to 7.03.F.2.c, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the Commission. 
b.  The Commission shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City or deferred by the City Administrator or Responsible Official. 
c.  The Commission's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full Commission's voting members. 
4.  Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  Where the City Council is the final Decision-Maker on the related Application, or for any petition submitted pursuant to Paragraph K. Dormant Projects, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the City Council. 
b.  The City Council shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The City Council's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full City Council's voting members, and shall be final. 
5.  Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  For an Applicant-Initiated Appeal. The Applicant may appeal the City Administrator or Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  A letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by the Applicant. 
b.  For a City Council-Initiated Appeal. No less than four (4) voting members of the City Council may appeal the Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the entire City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  The Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that occurs after the date at which the decision was made. 
ii.  Written notice of the City Council's vote to appeal shall be submitted to the City Administrator within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council's vote to appeal the decision. 
c.  The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal by the City. 
d.  Approval of an appeal by the City Council shall only be upon a favorable vote of at least four (4) of the City Council's voting members, and shall be final. 
G.  Criteria for Subdivision Vested Rights Petition Approval. 
1.  Factors. The Decision-Maker shall decide the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior Applications filed for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved Applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with State law or local ordinances; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed Application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Subdivision Regulations from which the Applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved Applications relied upon by the Applicant have expired; and 
g.  Any other applicable provisions outlined in Chapter 245 or Section 43.002 of the Texas Local Government Code, or successor statutes. 
2.  Conditions for a Pending Application. If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending Application, subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Decision-Maker may condition any relief granted on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition on the approval of the pending Application. 
H.  Action and Record of Action on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Action. The Decision-Maker may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the Application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related Application be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the related Application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied. 
2.  Record. The Responsible Official's report and the decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be recorded in writing in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The related Application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, if applicable; 
d.  Prior standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards, if applicable; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; and 
f.  To the extent feasible, subsequent related Applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition. 
I.  Effect of the Final Petition Decision on Related Applications. 
1.  Petition Decision Required Before Proceeding with Application. A final decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition must be achieved prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of, or decision on, the related Application. 
2.  Revision Made (if necessary) to Related Application After Petition Decision. Following the City's final decision on a petition, the Applicant shall, if necessary, revise the related Application such that it conforms to the City's decision on the petition. 
3.  Related Applications with Revisions. After submission of a revised related Application, the Decision-Maker on the related Application shall review and consider the revised Application in accordance with the procedures for deciding that type of Application, as outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, and in conformity with any relief granted. 
4.  Related Applications without Revisions. If the relief granted on the petition is consistent with the related Application on file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related Application shall be deemed submitted at the time of the final decision on the petition. 
J.  Expiration and Extension of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
1.  Expiration. Relief granted on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
a.  The Applicant fails to submit a revised Application that is consistent with the relief granted, if any, within sixty (60) calendar days following the final decision on the petition; 
b.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition is denied; or 
c.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition expires. 
2.  Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the Application for which relief was granted on a petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on the petition for the same time period. 
K.  Dormant Projects. 
1.  Definitions. For purposes of this Section 7.03.K only: 
a.  Dormant Project. A dormant project shall meet the following criteria: 
i.  An Initial Permit does not have an expiration date; and 
ii.  No Progress Towards Completion has been made within the project over 5 years. 
b.  Initial Permit. Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under these Subdivision Regulations, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance: 
i.  Preliminary Plat, 
ii.  Construction Plans, 
iii.  Construction Release, 
iv.  Subdivision Waivers to any requirement in this Subdivision Ordinance (per 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver), or 
v.  Any other Application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for development. 
c.  Final Permit. Final permit means a Final Plat approved under this Subdivision Ordinance, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Expiration Date Established for an Initial Permit. Any Application for an Initial Permit that was approved or filed two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this Subdivision Ordinance, and was not subject to an expiration date shall expire on the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit. 
a.  The property owner of the land subject to an Initial Permit that expires under 7.03.K.2 (above) may petition the City Council to reinstate such Initial Permit by filing a written petition within one (1) year following the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation the following: 
i.  As of two (2) years prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, one of the following events had occurred: 
(a)  A Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit and was approved by the City, or was filed and was subsequently approved by the City; 
(b)  An Application for a Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the expired Initial Permit, but such Application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245.005(c)(2)); 
(c)  Costs for development of the land subject to the Initial Permit, including costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the land; 
(d)  Fiscal security was posted with the City to guarantee performance of obligations required under this Subdivision Ordinance, including the construction of required improvements associated with the proposed development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit; or 
(e)  Utility connection fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit were paid to the City. 
4.  City Council Action on Reinstatement of a Dormant Project's Expired Initial Permit. The City Council may take one of the following actions: 
a.  Reinstate the expired Initial Permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i. 
b.  Reinstate the Initial Permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i, subject to expiration dates or other conditions that ensure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending Final Permit Application will be developed in a timely fashion. 
i.  In granting relief under this provision, the City Council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the Initial Permit. 
c.  Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the Applicant has failed to meet any of the criteria in 7.03.K.3 Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit); or 
d.  Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending Final Permit Application, if it finds that the Applicant has met the criteria in Section 7.03.K.3.b.i and the pending Application subsequently was approved, and deny the reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired Initial Permit. 
SECTION 8. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 155.8.01. - Usage and interpretation. 
A.  Usage and Interpretation Rules. For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance certain terms or words herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; 
2.  The singular includes the plural; 
3.  The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual; 
4.  The term "shall" is always mandatory; 
5.  The term "may" is discretionary; 
6.  The male gender shall include the female and the neutral. 
B.  Words and Terms not Expressly Defined. Words and terms not expressly defined herein are to be construed according to the normally accepted meaning of such words or terms or, where no definition appears, then according to their customary usage in the practice of municipal planning and engineering. 
Sec. 155.8.02. - Words and terms defined. 
    For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance, certain terms and words are herewith defined and shall have the meaning here applied; any word not defined herein shall be determined by the City Council; to wit: 
1.  Abutting. Adjacent, adjoining and contiguous to. It may also mean having a lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space. 
2.  Access. A means of approaching or entering a property, or the ability to traverse a property (such as in the use of the phrase "pedestrian access easement"). 
3.  Alley. A public Right-of-Way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
4.  Amending Plat. An Amending Plat applies minor revisions to a recorded plat consistent with provisions of State law, see Section 4.09 Amending Plat. 
5.  Applicant. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an Application. The Applicant must be the actual owner of the property for which an Application is submitted, or shall be a duly authorized representative of the property owner. Also see Developer. 
6.  Application. The package of materials, including but not limited to an Application Form, Plat, completed checklist, tax certificate, Construction Plans, special drawings or studies, and other informational materials, that is required by the City to initiate City review and approval of a development project. 
7.  Application Form. The written form (as provided by and as may be amended by the City Administrator) that is filled out and executed by the Applicant and submitted to the City along with other required materials as a part of an Application. 
8.  Approval. 
a.  Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board, commission or City Council responsible for such determination that the Application is in compliance with the minimum provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  Such approval does not constitute approval of the engineering or surveying contained in the plans, as the design engineer or surveyor that sealed the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans. 
9.  Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street. 
a.  A street designated within the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  A principal traffic way more or less continuous across the City or areas adjacent thereto and shall act as a principal connecting street with highways as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
10.  Base Flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determined based upon FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) guidelines and as shown in the current effective Flood Insurance Study. 
11.  Block. A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad Right-of-Way, highway, stream, or corporate boundary lines. 
12.  Block Face. The portion of a Block that abuts a street. 
13.  Block Length. The length of the Block Face between two intersections. 
14.  Building. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, personal property, records or other movable property and when separated in a manner sufficient to prevent fire, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. 
15.  Building Official. The Building Official of the City or his or her designee. 
16.  Building Permit. A permit issued by the City before a building or structure is started, improved, enlarged or altered as proof that such action is in compliance with the City code. 
17.  Building Setback Line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent street Right-of-Way/property line. 
18.  Certificate of Occupancy. An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcement official which indicates conformance with the City's rules and regulations and which authorizes legal use of the premises. 
19.  City. The City of Stephenville, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies. 
20.  City Administrator. The officially appointed and authorized City Administrator of the City of Stephenville, Texas, and may include the City Administrator's duly authorized representative or designee, per the City Administrator's discretion. 
21.  City Attorney. The person(s) so designated by the City Council to provide oversight for and have legal responsibility for the City. This term shall also include any designee of the City Attorney. 
22.  City Council. The duly elected governing body of the City of Stephenville, Texas. 
23.  City Engineer. The Licensed Professional Engineer or firm of Licensed Professional Consulting Engineers that has been specifically designated or contracted as such by the City Administrator. 
24.  City Secretary. The person(s) so designated by the City Administrator to provide clerical and official services for the City Council. This term shall also include any designee of the City Secretary. 
25.  City's Engineering Official. The person(s) so designated by the City Administrator to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the City's Public Works Department. This term shall also include any designee of the City's Engineering Official or per the City Administrator the City Engineer (which may be a private consulting firm). 
26.  City's Planning Official. The person(s) so designated by the City Administrator to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the City's Planning and Development Department. This term shall also include any designee of the City's Planning Official. Also, this term shall be inclusive of any future variations of the term, as deemed appropriate by the City Administrator, such as "Director of Planning and Development" or "City Planner." 
27.  Collector Street. A street which is continuous through several residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts and Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Streets, highways or business districts. 
28.  Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
29.  Comprehensive Plan 
a.  The plan, including all revisions thereto, adopted by the City Council as the official policy regarding the guidance and coordination of the development of land in the City. 
b.  The plan indicates the general location recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, utilities, parks other public and private developments and improvements and population projections. 
c.  The plan may consist but is not limited to the following plan elements: Future Land Use Plan, Mobility, Housing, Livability, and Infrastructure. 
30.  Construction Details. A separate and stand-alone document not included within this Subdivision Ordinance that provides technical construction drawings of the City's required Improvements, such as a "Standard Storm Drain Curb Inlet." The Construction Details document is developed and maintained by the City Administrator. 
31.  Construction Plans. A set of drawings and/or specifications, including paving, water, wastewater, drainage, or other required plans, submitted to the City for review in conjunction with a subdivision or a development. 
32.  Conveyance Plat. An interim step in the subdivision and development of land, a Conveyance Plat is a plat designed to subdivide land and to provide for recordation for the purpose of conveying ( i.e. , selling) the property without developing it. A Conveyance Plat does not constitute approval for any type of development on the property. 
33.  Council. See City Council. 
34.  County. Erath County. 
35.  Crosswalk Way. A public Right-of-Way, four (4) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
36.  Cul-de-Sac. A short, residential street having but one vehicular access to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
37.  Curb Level. 
a.  The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. 
b.  Where no curb has been established, the City Administrator shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
38.  Date of Adoption. The date of adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be the date this ordinance becomes effective. 
39.  Dead-End Street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
40.  Decision-Maker. The City official or group, such as the City Administrator, City Council, or Planning and Zoning Commission, responsible for deciding action on an Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
41.  Developer. 
a.  A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly authorized representative thereof, who proposes to undertake or undertakes the division, developments, or improvement of land and other activities covered by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The word Developer is intended to include the terms Subdivider, property owner, and, when submitting platting documents, Applicant. 
42.  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings and/or other structures, paving, drainage, utilities, storage, and agricultural activities. 
43.  Development Agreement. Agreement between the City and a Subdivider, which includes provisions for construction of Public Improvements, City participation, pro rata agreements, escrow deposits, and other provisions for the development of land. (See 5.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion for details.) 
44.  Development Application. An Application, developed and updated by the City Administrator, for any type of plan, permit, plat or Construction Plans/drawings authorized or addressed by this Subdivision Ordinance. Also may be referred to as a permit within the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245. 
45.  Development Application Handbook. A collection of Application Forms created, updated, and managed by the City Administrator. (See 3.01.D.) 
46.  Development Plat. A Plat required prior to development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement), in accordance with Local Government Code 212, Subchapter B (212.045), in lieu of other Subdivision Plats (established in LGC 212, Subchapter A) required by this Subdivision Ordinance and in accordance with Section 4.11 Development Plat. 
47.  Director of Community Services. The person(s) so designated by the City Administrator to perform and manage tasks related to community services. This term shall also include any designee of the Director of Community Services. 
48.  Dwelling, Multi-Family. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent and separate housekeeping units. 
49.  Dwelling, Single Family (attached-duplex). A building designed for occupancy for two (2) families living independently of each other. A two family attached unit (also known as a duplex) has a lot line dividing the building and separating the building's two (2) dwellings units onto two (2) separate lots. 
50.  Dwelling, Single Family (attached-townhouse). A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall, and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. 
51.  Dwelling, Single Family (detached). A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one family. 
52.  Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for occupancy by a single family or group of persons living together as a family or by a single person. 
53.  Easement. 
a.  Authorization by a property owner for another to use any designated part of the owner's property for a specified purpose or use and evidenced by an instrument or plat filed with the County Clerk. Among other things, easements may be used to install and maintain utility lines, drainage ditches or channels, or for other City or public services. 
b.  An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems. 
c.  The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone. 
54.  Easement, Common Access. An easement to provide shared access to and from commercial, and industrial owned and maintained by the owners of the property upon which the easement is located or as otherwise provided by deed restrictions or the terms of the easement instrument. 
55.  Engineer. A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering and who is specifically qualified to design and prepare Construction Plans and specifications for public works improvements. 
56.  Engineering Plans. See Construction Plans. 
57.  Engineering Standards Manual. A separate and stand-alone document or complication of documents not included within this Subdivision Ordinance, the Engineering Standards Manual (ESM) details specific engineering requirements (e.g., drainage criteria) for the construction of Public Improvements. The ESM is developed and maintained by the City Administrator or designated responsible official. 
58.  ESM. ESM is an abbreviation of Engineering Standards Manual. 
59.  Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City outward for the distance as stipulated in Chapter 42 of the Texas Local Government Code, according to the population of the City, and in which area the City may regulate subdivisions and enjoin violation of provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
60.  Fee Schedule. A listing of fees for various City Applications, which is prepared by the City Administrator and approved by City Council and may be amended periodically. The Fee Schedule is approved separately from this Subdivision Ordinance. 
61.  Final Acceptance. The acceptance by the City of all infrastructure improvements constructed by the Developer in conjunction with the development of land. 
62.  Final Plat. 
a.  The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a Surveyor or Engineer with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner and all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. 
b.  The Final Plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be recorded in the Deed Records of Erath County, Texas. 
c.  A Final Plat may also be referenced as a Record Plat or Final Plat. 
63.  Flood Plain. The area subject to be inundated by water from the Base Flood. 
64.  Floodway. A natural drainage area which accommodates the design flood for existing creeks and open drainage ways. 
65.  Floor Area. The habitable area of a building that is served by a conditioned air system, but specifically excluding porches, patios, breeze-ways, automobile storage areas, garages, workshops, attic storage areas and basements. 
66.  Frontage. All the property abutting on one (1) side of the street, or between two (2) intersecting streets, measured along the street line. 
67.  Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. A formal nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: 
a.  Each lot and/or property owner in a specific area is automatically a member; and 
b.  Each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's activities, such as the maintenance of common property; and 
c.  The charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying member's property. 
68.  Improvement. Any man-made fixed item which becomes part of or placed upon real property, see also Public Improvement. 
69.  Infrastructure. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage, water, and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation, and other facilities as required by the City. 
70.  Land Planner. A person(s) other than Surveyors or Engineers who also possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, commercial, industrial and other related developments; such proficiency often having been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning and who is a member of the American Planning Association. 
71.  Letter of Final Acceptance. Notification to an Applicant from the City Administrator that all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with this Subdivision Ordinance and with the City's design/engineering standards and all improvements are accepted by the City or will be accepted contingent to the approval of a Final Plat. 
72.  Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under this Subdivision Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place. 
73.  Lot, Corner. 
a.  A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets. 
b.  A corner lot shall be deemed to front on the street on which it has its smallest dimensions, or as otherwise designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
74.  Lot, Depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
75.  Lot, Interior. A lot, the side line of which does not abut on any street. 
76.  Lot, Through. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. Such through lot shall provide a front yard on each street. 
77.  Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
78.  Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a map of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk. 
79.  Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at right angles to the depth. 
80.  Major Subdivision Waiver. See Waiver, Major Subdivision. 
81.  Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, or MUTCD defines the standards used by road managers nationwide to install and maintain traffic control devices on all public streets, highways, bikeways, and private roads open to public traffic. The MUTCD is published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) under 23 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 655, Subpart F. 
82.  Minor Plat. A plat dividing land into no more than four (4) lots that meets the submission and approval requirements of Section 4.07 Minor Plat. Such plat is also considered a Final Plat. 
83.  Minor Replat. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Minor Replat is a Replat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. See Section for 4.08.G.2 Minor Replat details. 
84.  Minor Subdivision Waiver. See Waiver, Minor Subdivision. 
85.  Official Submission Date. 
a.  A calendar of official submission dates for subdivision related Applications requiring City review and approval pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212. 
b.  See 3.02 Official Submission Date and Official Vesting Date for further details and standards. 
86.  Official Vesting Date. 
a.  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, an Application or plan for development is considered filed on the date the Applicant delivers the Application or plan to the City or deposits the application or plan with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City. 
b.  See 3.02 Official Submission Date and Official Vesting Date for further details and standards. 
87.  Parkway. Within the Right-of-Way, the area between the property line and the nearest curb or edge of the roadway (if no curb exists.) See Figure 10: Example of a Parkway for visual depiction of a parkway. 

Figure 10: Example of a Parkway 
88.  Park, Playground, or Community Center, Public. An open recreational facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the City or the school district, and available to the general public. 
89.  Parking Space. Open space or garage space reserved exclusively for the parking of a vehicle. 
90.  Paved Driveways. Paved driveways are constructed of brick pavers, concrete pavers, hot mix asphaltic concrete, or portland cement concrete. 
91.  Pavement Width. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the back of the curbs. 
92.  Perimeter Street. A street which abuts a parcel of land to be subdivided on one side. 
93.  Person. Person means an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation. 
94.  Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
95.  Plat. 
a.  A map or chart of the subdivision, lot or tract of land. 
b.  It shall include the term plan, plat or re-plat, in both singular or plural. 
96.  Preliminary Drainage Plan. This plan shows the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development. 
97.  Preliminary Plat. 
a.  The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract shown by superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land division on a topographic map and showing in plan view existing and proposed drainage features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development. 
b.  The Preliminary Plat shall serve as a means for the City to review and study the proposed division of land and/or improvements. 
98.  Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan. The purpose of the Preliminary SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature opportunities for Subdivision development. 
99.  Preliminary SWMP. Preliminary SWMP is an abbreviation for the graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract shown by superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land division on a topographic map and showing in plan view existing and proposed drainage features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development. 
100.  Preliminary Utility Plan. A plan detailing both Water Utility and Wastewater Utility requirements. 
101.  Premises referring to a sexually oriented business, premises means the building of the sexually oriented business. 
102.  Progress Towards Completion. Progress towards completion of the project shall include any one of the following: 
a.  An Application for a Final Plat or plan for development is submitted; 
b.  A good-faith attempt is made to file with the City or County an Application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
c.  Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
d.  Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation required by the regulatory agency; or 
e.  Utility connection fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory agency. 
103.  Pro-rata. Pro-rata means a charge made against an existing lot abutting a utility or other city infrastructure that is the average per foot cost of the improvement, multiplied by the front footage of the land, and that is imposed to reimburse the original subdivider their cost of installing or paying for the improvement. The pro-rata must be approved as part of a subdivider agreement. 
104.  Public Improvement. Any Improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, Right-of-Way or easement necessary to provide transportation, storm drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential public services and facilities, for which the City ultimately assumes the responsibility, upon a Letter of Final Acceptance being issued, for maintenance, operation and/or ownership. 
105.  Record Drawings. A group of drawings or plans that depicts the final configuration of the installed or constructed improvements of a development, improvements that have been verified by the contractor as their installation or construction occurs during development. The Record Drawings shall reflect the Construction Plans (or working drawings) used, corrected, and/or clarified in the field. 
106.  Record Plat. See Final Plat. 
107.  Replat. The re-subdivision of any or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract, that is beyond the definition of an Amending Plat and which does not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat. Such plat also conforms to Section 4.08 Replat of this Subdivision Ordinance. A Replat can function as a Final Plat for a property. 
108.  Residential District. Residential district means a single family, patio home, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
109.  Residential Street. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district and which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
110.  Residential Use. Residential use means use of a structure as a residence. 
111.  Responsible Official. The City staff person who has been designated by the City Administrator to accept a type of development Application for filing, to review and make recommendations concerning such Applications, and where authorized, to initially decide such Applications, to initiate enforcement actions, and to take all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of development Applications. Also includes any designee of the designated City staff person. 
112.  Retaining Wall. A non-building, structural wall supporting soil loads and live and dead surcharge loads to the soil, such as additional soil, structures and vehicles. 
113.  Right-of-Way: 
a.  A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or alley. 
b.  A Right-of-Way may be used for other facilities and utilities, such as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical communication, oil or gas, water or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for any other use. 
c.  The use of Right-of-Way shall also include parkways and medians outside of pavement. 
d.  For platting purposes, the term "Right-of-Way" shall mean that every Right-of-Way shown on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such Right-of-Way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
114.  Setback Line. A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, establishing the minimum required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot. 
115.  Site Plan. A Site Plan is a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface improvements, structures, and utilities proposed for development and is associated with the zoning ordinance. 
116.  Sketch Plat. A sketch or informal plan prepared prior to the preparation of the Preliminary Plat describing the proposed design of the subdivision to be reviewed during the pre-application review process. 
117.  Street. A public Right-of-Way that provides vehicular traffic access to adjacent lands. 
118.  Street Width. The shortest distance between the property or easement lines which delineate the Right-of-Way of a street. 
119.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to advertising signs, billboards and poster panels, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary of retaining walls, sidewalks and curbs. 
120.  Subdivider. 
a.  Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
b.  In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land to be subdivided. 
121.  Subdivision. 
a.  The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of an estate, and shall include re-subdivision. 
b.  Any other subdivision or re-subdivision of land contemplated by the provisions of Chapter 212, Local Government Code. 
122.  Subdivision Ordinance. The adopted Subdivision Ordinance of the City, as may be amended in the future, and may be referred as "this Ordinance." 
123.  Subdivision Plat. A Plat (e.g., Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat) established in LGC 212, Subchapter A involving the subdividing of land in two (2) or more parts or the amending of a recorded Plat. 
124.  Subdivision Regulations. Any regulations and standards contained within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
125.  Subdivision Waiver. Either a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver, see Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver. 
126.  Surveyor. A licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Public Surveyor, as authorized by the State to practice the profession of surveying. 
127.  Thoroughfare. See Major Arterial/Thoroughfare Street. 
128.  Thoroughfare Plan. The plan that guides the development of adequate circulation within the City, and connects the City street system to regional traffic carriers. Also, referred to as the Thoroughfare Plan. 
129.  Usable Open Space. An area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable Open Space may include recreational facilities, water features, required perimeter landscape areas, floodplain areas, and decorative objects such as art work or fountains. Usable Open Space shall not include the following: 
a.  Walks, 
b.  Rooftops, 
c.  Buildings, except those portions or any building designed specifically for recreation purposes, 
d.  Parking areas, 
e.  Landscaped parking requirements, 
f.  Driveways, 
g.  Turnarounds, or 
h.  Rights-of-Way or easements for streets and alleys. 
130.  Utility Easement. See Easement. 
131.  Vested Right. A right of an Applicant requiring the City to review and decide the Application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the standards of this Subdivision Ordinance and/or of any subsequent amendments. 
132.  Vested Rights Petition. 
a.  A request for relief from any standard or requirement of the Subdivision Regulations based on an assertion that the Applicant (petitioner for relief) has acquired a Vested Right. 
b.  Such petition is regulated under Section 7.03 Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
133.  Vision Clearance. A space left open and unobstructed by fences, structures, shrubs, trees or other plant life along streets at the corner in front of the building line of lots contiguous to intersecting streets. 
134.  Waiver, Major Subdivision. 
a.  A significant change to both the standards and intent of the Subdivision Regulations, which involves Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council approval. 
b.  See Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver for details. 
135.  Waiver, Minor Subdivision. 
a.  A minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of these Subdivision Regulations, which involves the City Administrator approval unless otherwise noted. 
b.  See Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver for details. 
136.  Water Treatment Facility. The facility or facilities within the water supply system which can alter the physical, chemical, or bacteriological quality of the water. 
137.  Yard. 
a.  An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
138.  Yard, Front. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front street line of the lot. 
139.  Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the main building, except that area included in the side yard as defined below. 
140.  Yard, Side. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear yard. 
141.  Zoning Ordinance. The adopted Zoning Ordinance of the City, as may be amended in the future. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Stephenville Zoning Code included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption Date Section Section 
this Code  3- 4-1972 153.15, 153.16  2- 4-1975 153.16  9- 4-1984 153.01, 153.02 153.17-153.29 153.40-153.56 153.70-153.77 1989-11  7-11-1989 151.01-151.08 151.20-151.23 151.35-151.40 151.50-151.58 151.70-151.73 151.80-151.91 151.998 1991-7  6- 4-1991 150.04 1991-8  6- 4-1991 150.01 1991-10  6- 4-1991 150.02 1991-11  6- 4-1991 150.03 1991-12  6- 4-1991 150.01 1995-1  2- 7-1995 150.02 1995-2  2- 7-1995 150.01 1995-3  2- 7-1995 150.02 1995-5  2- 7-1995 150.04 1998-3  2- 3-1998 150.01 1999-2  3- 2-1999 150.01-15.04 150.15-150.18 2003-20  8- 5-2003 150.01-150.07  3- 1-2006 150.01 2008-05  3- 4-2008 150.01-150.08 2008-14  7- 1-2008 155.01 2009-18 11- 3-2009 154.01 2010-17 10- 5-2010 154.10-154.12 2011-17  9- 6-2011 152.01-152.05 152.20-152.27 152.35-152.38 152.50-152.54 152.99 2014-29 12- 2-2014 150.01-150.07 2015-13  7- 7-2015 150.08 2018-O-03  1- 2-2018       Added 154.74 2018-O-05  1- 2-2018 154.12 2018-O-06  1- 2-2018       Added 155.1.01-155.8.02 2018-O-11  3- 6-2018 1       Rpld 151.01-151.09 151.20-151.23 151.35-151.40 151.50-151.58 151.70-151.73 151.80-151.91 151.99       Added 151.01-151.03 151.111-151.114 151.131-151.137 2018-O-12  3- 6-2018 154.12.37 2018-O-22  6-12-2018 1 154.05.4 2018-O-24  7- 3-2018 155.5.05F.3. 2018-O-25  8- 7-2018 1 154.06.1-154.06.3 154.06.6, 154.06.7 2 154.06.7.C(4) 3       Rpld 154.06.5 2018-O-26  8- 7-2018 154.12 2018-O-27  8- 7-2018 154.74.E 2018-O-28  8- 7-2018       Added 154.20.3 2018-O-29  8- 7-2018       Added 154.21.3 2018-O-32  8-28-2018 1 154.03 2 154.06.6.C(3) 2018-O-43 11- 6-2018 6 154.20.2.B 7 154.21.2.B 2018-O-44 11- 6-2018 6 154.20.2F(4) 7 154.21.2F(4)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
V.T.C.A. 
Water Code 
Section Section  
this Code 16.315 152.01  
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St.  Section 
this Code Art. 5221f 153.01 153.02 153.15-153.29 153.40-153.56 153.70-153.77  
