7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/720
City of Seagoville
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 12
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 19-2019 adopted 4/15/19.
CODE TITLE I:
GENERAL ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Seagoville, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Seagoville, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/720
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Seagoville, Texas.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of Seagoville, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Seagoville, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Dallas or the County of Kaufman, Texas,
as applicable.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/720
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/720
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed at least once per
calendar year, as directed by the city secretary. Additional supplementations may be prepared, as determined to
be necessary by the city secretary. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered
that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or
partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (Ordinance 04-2017
adopted 3/6/17)
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/720
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/720
Sec. 1.01.010 Liability of corporations, organizations and agents for violations
(a) Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation
or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in
every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization.
(b) Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association
or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment, as well as such corporation or unincorporated
association or organization, for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act
or omission or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person.
(1977 Code, sec. 1-9)
Sec. 1.01.011 Code enforcement officers authorized to issue citations
(a) Enforcement of the City of Seagoville Code of Ordinances and any and all applicable codes and
ordinances within the City of Seagoville and the State of Texas shall be the responsibility of the city manager,
supervisor of code enforcement, any designated code enforcement officer or licensed peace officer of the city.
(b) Any officer, as designated in this section, shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances and any and all other codes or ordinances of the city. If the person
being cited is not present, the person designated hereunder may send the citation to the alleged offender by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If a person who receives a citation by personal service or as provided
under this subsection fails to appear on the return date of the citation, the court may issue a warrant for the
person's arrest for the violation described in this citation.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any code enforcement officer in the performance of his
duties under this section and to enforce the ordinances of the City of Seagoville, Texas.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.012 Establishment of fees
All fees provided for in this code shall be established by resolution of the city council unless otherwise required
by ordinance or state law. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.02 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.02.001 Definitions
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), words and phrases in this article have the same meaning they have in
title 6, subtitle C, of the Local Government Code. Reference is further given to title 6, subtitle C, chapter 201,
section 201.003, with the definitions referenced therein being hereby incorporated as exhibit A to this article.
(b) In this article:
Department. A department, city council member's office, office, division, program, commission, bureau, board,
committee, task force, ad hoc committee, or similar entity of the city.
Department director. The officer who by charter, ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of a
department.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-90)
Sec. 1.02.002 City records declared public property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/720
All municipal records as defined in title 6, subtitle C, of the Local Government and section 1.02.001 of this
article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his
or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or
compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (1977
Code, sec. 2-91)
Sec. 1.02.003 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1977 Code, sec. 2-92)
Sec. 1.02.004 Records management program established
(a) This article reestablishes within the Code of Ordinances a records management program in compliance
with chapter 20, subchapter B, of the Local Government Code.
(b) The records management officer shall administer the records management program.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-93)
Sec. 1.02.005 Records management officer
(a) The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for
the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director
and librarian of the state library and archives commission within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of
taking up the office, as applicable.
(b) The records management officer shall:
(1) Develop, implement, and administer a citywide records management program, including a
records management plan;
(2) Coordinate records management operations among city offices and departments;
(3) Cooperate with department directors to identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to quickly and with a minimum of disruption and expense
reestablish operations in the event of a disaster;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of any historically valuable record of
the city;
(5) Prepare a records control schedule for each city office and department and define and identify
essential and permanent records;
(6) Review each records control schedule annually and make necessary updates or changes;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to city offices and departments through a
policies and procedures workbook and through consultation;
(8) Timely take action, including microfilming, electronic storage, destruction, and transfer, as
required by a records control schedule;
(9) Ensure compliance with state regulations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/720
(10) Maintain records on:
(A) The volume of records destroyed, microfilmed, stored electronically, or transferred to the
records center for storage; and
(B) The estimated cost savings of each department of the city resulting from the disposal or
disposition of records;
(11) Report annually to the city manager on the implementation of the records management plan in
each department of the city;
(12) Protect privacy and confidentiality, as permitted or required by law;
(13) Appoint a city records manager;
(14) Instruct records liaison officers and other employees in the policies and procedures of the
records management program and an employee's duties in relation to the records management plan;
and
(15) Report to the city manager noncompliance with the records management plan or state law by
a department director or city employee.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-94)
Sec. 1.02.006 Records management committee
(a) A records management committee consisting of the department directors is hereby established.
(b) The records management officer serves as the chairperson of the records management committee.
(c) The records management committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development, implementation, and management
of the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose necessary changes and
improvements;
(3) Review and approve each records control schedule submitted by the records management
officer;
(4) Review the effectiveness of this article, and, if the committee determines that modifications are
required, request that the city council amend this article; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program.
(d) A member of the committee may designate a representative to serve in the member's place by filing a
written designation with the records management officer. The city manager must approve a designee to the
committee.
(e) The committee shall meet at least quarterly. A majority of the committee members shall constitute a
quorum. An action of the committee requires a majority vote of the committee members present.
(f) The city records manager shall be the records management committee secretary and shall be a nonvoting
member of the committee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/720
(1977 Code, sec. 2-95)
Sec. 1.02.007 Records management plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city.
(b) The records management officer shall submit the records management plan to the city manager for
approval. Each office and department of the city shall comply with the records management plan approved by
the city manager.
(c) The records management plan must:
(1) Reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping;
(2) Enable the records management officer to effectively perform the duties prescribed by state law
and this article;
(3) Establish eligibility criteria for microfilming or electronic storage of records;
(4) Provide microfilming or electronic storage of records in compliance with state law and the
rules of the state library and archives commission;
(5) Provide adequate protection of the essential records of the city;
(6) Preserve city records that are of historical value; and
(7) Regulate the operations and use of the records center serving as the depository of inactive
records with continuing value to the city, except records that have been transferred to the Austin
History Center for preservation as historical records.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-96)
Sec. 1.02.008 Duties of department directors
(a) Each department director shall cooperate with the records management officer to implement this article.
(b) Each department director shall:
(1) Document the services, programs, and duties that are the responsibilities of the director's
department; and
(2) Maintain the department's records in accordance with the records management plan.
(c) Each department director shall appoint a senior level manager (if applicable) as the departmental records
administrator to oversee the implementation of the records management plan within the department. The
departmental records administrator shall have the authority to allocate resources to implement the plan within
the department. A department director may serve as the departmental records administrator.
(d) A department director may not refuse to comply with the requirements of this article based on a city
ordinance or policy relating to a duty, recordkeeping requirement, or other responsibility of the department
director.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-97)
Sec. 1.02.009 Duties of departmental records administrators
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/720
A departmental records administrator shall:
(1) Incorporate the responsibilities of the records liaison officer set out in section 1.02.010 into the
records liaison officer's annual performance plan;
(2) Ensure the maintenance of the department's records and carry out the preservation,
microfilming, electronic storage, destruction, and other disposition of the department's records
according to the records management plan, this article and state law;
(3) Ensure the records liaison officer has adequate time and resources available to fulfill the
records liaison officer's records management responsibilities;
(4) Develop a departmental records management plan or include records management
requirements in departmental policy or procedure;
(5) Submit a departmental records inventory to the records management officer in accordance with
criteria established under this article;
(6) Cooperate with the records management officer to identify essential records of the department
and establish a records disaster recover plan;
(7) Annually review the departmental records control schedule to determine if the schedule reflects
current departmental practices;
(8) Ensure that electronic records of continuing value to the city are migrated forward as
technology changes;
(9) Ensure that requests for funding for new systems or system enhancements include requirements
for backup, recopying, disaster recovery, security, public access, audit trails, and recordkeeping
requirements established under the records management plan, this article and state law;
(10) Ensure that records can be accessed in the form or medium in which the records are kept;
(11) Assist the records management officer in producing an annual report to the city manager on
the implementation of the records management program in each department; and
(12) Notify the records management officer within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of any
loss, theft, or damage to a department record.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-98)
Sec. 1.02.010 Duties of records liaison officers
(a) Each departmental records administrator shall designate in writing a staff member of the department to
serve as a records liaison officer to implement the records management plan within the department. In the event
of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the
departmental records administrator shall promptly designate another person to serve as the records liaison
officer.
(b) The records liaison officer shall be responsible for the daily implementation of the records management
plan within the department.
(c) A records liaison officer shall:
(1) Be familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/720
(2) Have access to all records maintained by the department;
(3) Cooperate with the records management officer to coordinate and implement the records
management plan in the department and coordinate and verify the accuracy, content, and
completeness of the records inventory;
(4) Disseminate information to a department staff about the records management program;
(5) Review the department's recordkeeping practices for compliance with the records management
plan and consult with the records management officer to identify practices that require improvement
to increase efficiency or implement corrective action for plan compliance;
(6) Report noncompliance with the records management plan to the departmental records
administrator in writing; and
(7) Correct any incomplete or inaccurate departmental records inventory and submit the corrected
inventory to the records management officer.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-99)
Sec. 1.02.011 Records control schedule
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department directors, shall prepare a records control
schedule for each department listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period
for each type of record.
(b) A retention period shall be as long as determined necessary by the records management committee, in
compliance with the records retention schedules issued by the state library and archives commission.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be:
(1) Approved by the affected department director and by the records management committee; and
(2) Submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state library and
archives commission as provided by state law.
(d) The records management officer shall submit the department's records control schedules to the director
and librarian of the state library and archives commission.
(e) If the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission does not accept a schedule for
filing, the records management officer shall amend the schedule to make it acceptable for filing.
(f) The departmental records administrator and the records liaison officer for each department shall implement
the records control schedule for the department.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-100)
Sec. 1.02.012 Destruction of records generally
(a) When the retention period for a departmental record has expired, the departmental records administrator
shall approve the destruction of the record unless:
(1) A request for the record under the Public Information Act is pending;
(2) The subject matter of the record is pertinent to pending litigation, an audit, or review by a
governmental regulatory agency;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/720
(3) The records management officer has approved a written request from a department director or
records liaison officer that the record be retained for an additional period; or
(4) The departmental records administrator and the records management officer agree that the
record has continuing historical value to the city.
(b) A request under subsection (a)(3) must clearly state the reason for the continued retention.
(c) The records liaison officer for each department shall retain a destruction log that includes the following
information about records that have been destroyed:
(1) The series title;
(2) The records series number;
(3) The inclusive dates of the records;
(4) The quantity of records destroyed;
(5) The date the records were destroyed;
(6) The name of the person who authorized the destruction; and
(7) The method of destruction.
(d) The records management officer may destroy a record that is obsolete or that is not identified on a records
control schedule if:
(1) The destruction of the record has been approved by the records management committee; and
(2) The director and librarian of the state library and archives commission has approved a request
for authorization to destroy the record(s).
(e) A record approved for destruction under this article and state law may be destroyed by:
(1) The departmental records administrator of the department that has custody of the record; or
(2) The records management officer.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-101)
Sec. 1.02.013 Records center
(a) The records management officer shall establish a records center.
(b) The records center shall provide:
(1) Cost-effective storage of records no longer required to be kept in active office space;
(2) An information retrieval service and microfilming or electronic storage program for the benefit
of city offices; and
(3) A method for destruction of a record in storage whose retention period has expired.
(c) If a department record is no longer required in the conduct of current business, the departmental records
administrator shall promptly transfer the record to the records center or destroy the record in accordance with a
records control schedule and under the requirements set forth in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/720
(1977 Code, sec. 2-102)
Sec. 1.02.014 Destruction of original records that have been microfilmed or stored electronically
(a) The records management committee may authorize the destruction of the original of a record that has been
microfilmed or stored electronically unless the destruction is otherwise prohibited by law.
(b) Before a record is destroyed under this section, the records management officer shall notify the director
and librarian of the state library and archives commission. The records management officer shall transfer the
record to the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission if requested to do so by the
director and librarian.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-103)
Sec. 1.02.015 Electronic storage of records
The creation, maintenance, preservation, electronic document imaging, and storage of the electronic records of
the city must comply with the records management plan, this article, state law, and the administrative rules of the
state library and archives commission. (1977 Code, sec. 2-104)
Sec. 1.02.016 Records with historical value
(a) A departmental records administrator and the records management officer may agree to transfer to the
Austin History Center the custody of a city record that has continuing historical value to the city. If a city record
is transferred to the custody of the Austin History Center, ownership of the record remains with the city.
(b) The Austin History Center shall have custody of all city records belonging to a defunct department that
does not have a named successor.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-105)
Sec. 1.02.017 Right to demand return of records
The city may demand and receive from a person a city record in the person's possession that was created or
received by the city, if the removal of the record was not authorized by law. (1977 Code, sec. 2-106)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Disaster Emergency Services
Sec. 1.03.031 Committee created; membership
There is hereby created the municipal disaster emergency services committee of the city, which shall consist of
the following:
(1) The mayor, who shall serve as chairman of the committee.
(2) The assistant municipal disaster coordinator, who shall serve as vice-chairman of the
committee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/720
(3) The directors of divisions and chiefs of services of such divisions as may be provided for by
resolution by the city council or by directive of the municipal disaster coordinator.
(4) Representatives, not to exceed five (5) in number, from civic, business, industry, labor,
veterans, professional or other groups, to be selected and appointed by the mayor.
(1977 Code, sec. 7-1)
Sec. 1.03.032 Powers and duties of committee; meetings
The powers and duties of the municipal disaster emergency services committee shall include the
recommendation, for adoption by the city council, of a disaster services plan for the city and the
recommendation, for adoption by the city council, of any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are
deemed essential for the implementation of such disaster services plan. The duties of such committee shall also
include the making of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which
could be used during an emergency, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements
in the disaster services plan adopted by the city council. The committee shall meet upon the call of either its
chairman or vice-chairman. (1977 Code, sec. 7-2)
Sec. 1.03.033 Office of disaster coordinator created
The office of municipal disaster coordinator is hereby created. The mayor shall serve as such coordinator. (1977
Code, sec. 7-3)
Sec. 1.03.034 Duties of disaster coordinator
The duties and responsibilities of the municipal disaster coordinator shall include the following:
(1) The control and direction of the actual operation or training of the disaster services
organization of the city.
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
disaster services organization of the city.
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, district, state, county, regional,
federal or other disaster services organizations.
(4) The marshaling, after declaration of an emergency as provided for in this division, of all
necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out
of the disaster services plan.
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of an emergency and the
immediate operational effectiveness of the disaster services plan.
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the
protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the
city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity, unless publicity will be of aid and comfort to
the enemy.
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within
the county, for the countywide coordination of efforts in disaster services.
(8) The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/720
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for the use of private
property for public shelter and other purposes.
(1977 Code, sec. 7-4)
Sec. 1.03.035 Assistant disaster coordinator
The office of assistant municipal disaster coordinator is hereby created. The assistant coordinator shall be
charged with the preparation of a disaster services plan for the city, together with such other duties as the
municipal disaster coordinator may prescribe. The assistant coordinator shall be appointed by and hold his
position at the pleasure of the municipal disaster coordinator. (1977 Code, sec. 7-5)
Sec. 1.03.036 Operational organization
The operational disaster services organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city
designated by the municipal disaster coordinator, as well as all volunteer municipal workers. The functions and
duties of this organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city council
shall prescribe by resolution or the municipal disaster coordinator shall provide by directive. Any such
resolution or directive shall set forth the form of organization, establish and designate divisions and services,
assign functions, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this
division. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. (1977 Code,
sec. 7-6)
Sec. 1.03.037 Expenditure of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any disaster services
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 7-7)
Sec. 1.03.038 Participation in countywide program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Dallas and the mayors of the
other cities in the county in the formation of a disaster emergency services council for the County of Dallas, and
shall have the authority to cooperate in the formation of a disaster services plan for the county and in the
appointment of a disaster director for the county, as well as all other powers necessary to participate in a
countywide program of disaster services, insofar as said program may affect this city. (1977 Code, sec. 7-8)
Sec. 1.03.039 Declaration of existence of emergency
The municipal disaster coordinator shall have the authority to request the declaration of the existence of an
emergency by the city council or by higher authority. In the event it is deemed necessary to declare the existence
of an emergency without delay, the coordinator may, if the city council is not in session, do so, but such action
shall be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. (1977 Code, sec. 7-9)
Sec. 1.03.040 Emergency orders, rules and regulations to supersede existing regulations
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith. (1977 Code, sec. 7-10)
Sec. 1.03.041 Obstructing enforcement; failure to obey emergency regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster services
organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, or to do any act
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/720
forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this division. (1977 Code, sec.
7-11)
Sec. 1.03.042 Simulation of warning signal
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1977 Code, sec. 7-12)
Sec. 1.03.043 Impersonating disaster services personnel
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the disaster services organization of the city, unless authority so to do has been
granted to such person by the proper officials. (1977 Code, sec. 7-13)
Sec. 1.03.044 Conflicts with state or federal statutes or military or naval regulations
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule or regulation. (1977 Code, sec. 7-14)
Sec. 1.03.045 Exemption from liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury
to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for
loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1977 Code, sec. 7-15)
ARTICLE 1.04 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.04.031 Policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures,
the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, color, sex, religion, disability,
familial status, or national origin.
(b) It is further declared that this policy is based upon a recognition of the right of every person to have access
to adequate housing of his own choice without regard to race, color, sex, religion or national origin, and further
that the denial of such right through considerations based on race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status,
or national origin is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an
unjust denial or deprivation of such rights which is within the power and proper responsibility of government to
prevent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/720
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-11; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.032 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the masculine gender include the feminine, words in the plural number include the singular, and
words in the singular number include the plural.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under sections 1.04.033 through 1.04.035.
Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed and intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual.
Person. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-12)
Sec. 1.04.033 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by section 1.04.036, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale
or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
sex, religion, disability, familial status, or national origin;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement, or
advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is
in fact so available;
(5) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of any person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial
status or national origin; and
(6) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, influence or attempt to influence, by any
words or acts, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance
of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/720
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-13; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.034 Discrimination in financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or
residential real estate loans to discriminate in denying a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or
other terms or conditions, because of:
(1) The race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin of such person or of
any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or
(2) The race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin of the present or
prospective owners, lessors, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or
other financial assistance is made or given.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-14; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.035 Discrimination in provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin. (1977 Code,
sec. 4 1/2-15; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.036 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of sections 1.04.033 through 1.04.035 hereof all transactions
involving:
(1) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains
and occupies one of such units as his residence.
(2) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than one family, if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains
and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four (4) such rooms
are offered.
(3) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided
that:
(A) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person;
(B) The sale is made without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement or
written notice in violation of section 1.04.033(3). This shall not prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, or other such professional assistance as necessary to
perfect or transfer of title;
(C) The owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at one time;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/720
(D) The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf,
under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at one time;
and
(E) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply
only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period.
(b) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or
society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, or national origin.
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an
incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(d) Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in
which a room or rooms are leased, subleased, or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing
accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen, or similar facilities available for the use of all persons
occupying such housing accommodation.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-16)
Sec. 1.04.037 Fair housing administrator
The mayor shall appoint and the city council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as
“administrator”), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this division. The administrator may
delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. (1977
Code, sec. 4 1/2-17)
Sec. 1.04.038 Complaints
(a) Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter
referred to as “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in
writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory
housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are
based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them to any person upon request.
(b) All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory
housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the
complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person or persons named therein who allegedly
committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an
answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint.
(c) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer
oaths.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-18)
Sec. 1.04.039 Investigation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/720
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a
prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
(b) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint, the
administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory
housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this division.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the
complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(c) Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to
secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a
discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that
such violation be prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. With such recommendation, the administrator
shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral,
make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city
attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute the same to conclusion within
thirty (30) days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-19)
Sec. 1.04.040 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any individual,
group, or business because he or they complied with the provisions of this division, because he or they have
exercised his or their rights under this division or enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because he or they
have made a charge, testified, or assisted in any manner in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder or
have made any report to the administrator. (1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-20)
Sec. 1.04.041 Education and public information
In order to further the objectives of this division, the administrator may conduct educational and public
information programs. (1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-21)
Sec. 1.04.042 Penalty; injunction
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this division may be enjoined by a suit filed by
the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.
(1977 Code, sec. 4 1/2-22)
ARTICLE 1.05 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Municipal Court of Record No. 1
Sec. 1.05.001 Created; jurisdiction
(a) There is hereby created a Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in and for the city to be designated as “The
Municipal Court of Record in the city.” The court shall have no term and may sit at any time for the transaction
of business of the court. Where the term municipal court is used in the city's charter or this code, it shall mean
the municipal court of record created herein. Any provision of the city charter, city ordinances, or state law that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/720
is applicable to a municipal court shall be applicable to the municipal court of record created herein unless the
provision is in conflict or inconsistent with chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, as amended, which
governs the municipal courts of record.
(b) The municipal court of record shall be a unified municipal court and shall have and exercise that
jurisdiction conferred by section 30.00005 of chapter 30 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. The
municipal court of record shall also have:
(1) Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter
A, chapter 214, Local Government Code, or subchapter E, chapter 683, Transportation Code;
(2) Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under subchapter B,
chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, as amended, within the city's territorial limits and
property owned by the city located in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of
enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; and
(3) Authority to issue:
(i) Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement
ordinance violation; and
(ii) Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending
property and removing the debris from the premises.
Sec. 1.05.002 Judge; powers and duties
(a) The municipal court of record is presided over by a municipal judge who shall be appointed by the city
council for a term of two (2) years and shall be entitled to compensation as set by the city council. The amount
of the judge's compensation may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. The compensation may not
be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees, or costs collected by the court.
(b) The municipal judge must be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the state, a licensed attorney in
good standing and have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in the state. In the event of a
vacancy in the office of the municipal judge, the city council may appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy
and to preside over the municipal court of record for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(c) A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is employed as an employee of the city. A
municipal judge who accepts employment with the city vacates the judicial office.
(d) The city council may appoint alternate judges, subject to the same qualifications as the municipal judge,
who shall have all the powers and shall discharge all the duties of the municipal judge while serving as
municipal judge. Each appointment shall be for a term of two (2) years. The municipal judges may exchange
benches and act for each other in any proceeding pending in the court. An act performed by any of the judges is
binding on all parties to the proceeding.
(e) The municipal judge and alternate judges shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and
corporate limits of the city and shall have all powers and authority as provided by section 30.00007 of the Texas
Government Code, as amended. The judges may grant writs of mandamus, attachment, and other writs necessary
to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the
offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court. A municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue
administrative search warrants.
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004; term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, sec. 29.005.
Sec. 1.05.003 Court clerk
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/720
(a) The city manager or his designee shall appoint the clerk of the municipal court of record who may hire,
direct, and remove the personnel authorized in the city's annual budget for the clerk's office. The clerk or the
clerk's deputies shall have all duties and authority as provided by section 30.00009 of the Texas Government
Code, as amended.
(b) The court clerk shall acquire and maintain a seal in conformance with state law for the municipal court of
record in the city.
(c) The court clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service in the municipal court of record.
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
Sec. 1.05.004 Record of proceedings; fees
Upon request of the judge or upon written request of one of the parties to a trial, proceedings of the municipal
court of record, limited to trial testimony and hearings on motions before the court, shall be recorded. For the
purpose of recording the proceedings and preserving a record in cases tried before the municipal court of record,
a good quality electronic recording device shall be used. When the recording device is used, a court reporter
need not be present at the trial to certify the reporter's record. The recording shall be kept and stored for a 20-day
period beginning the day after the last day of the proceeding, trial or denial of motion for a new trial, whichever
occurs last. If the case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed by an official court reporter.
Sec. 1.05.005 Appeal
(a) A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record. The
state has the right to an appeal as provided by article 44.01, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) The appellate court shall determine each appeal from the court on the basis of the errors that are set forth
in the appellant's motion and that are presented in the clerk's record and reporter's record, if any, prepared from
the proceedings leading to the appeal. An appeal from the court shall not be by trial de novo.
(c) To perfect an appeal, the defendant must file a motion for new trial not later than ten (10) days after the
date on which the judgment and sentence are rendered. The motion must be in writing and must be filed with the
clerk of the municipal court of record. The motion constitutes the assignment of error on appeal. A ground or an
error not set forth in the motion is waived. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of thirty
(30) days after it is filed with the clerk, the motion is overruled by operation of law.
(d) After an order overruling a motion for new trial, the defendant shall give written notice of appeal and pay a
fee for the preparation of the clerk's record of $25.00 not later than ten (10) days after the date on which the
motion is overruled. The court shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the court. If the case is reversed
on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the defendant.
(e) The appellant shall pay for any reporter's record containing a transcription of the proceedings unless the
court finds, after a hearing in response to an affidavit by the defendant, that the defendant is unable to pay or
provide security for the reporter's record. If the court so finds, the court shall order the reporter to prepare the
record without charge to the defendant. Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the defendant shall,
unless found by the court to be unable to pay for the reporter's record, post a cash deposit with the municipal
court for the estimated cost of the record. The cash deposit shall be based on an estimate provided by the court
reporter or the length of proceedings as indicated by the amount of tape used to electronically record the
proceedings, if any, the cost of the court reporter, typing, and other incidental services. The municipal court may
post a current schedule of the charges for transcription fees, including deposits. If the cash deposit exceeds the
actual cost of the reporter's record, the court reporter shall refund the difference to the defendant. If the cash
deposit is insufficient to cover the actual cost of the transcription, the defendant must pay the additional amount
to the court reporter before the transcription may be submitted. If a case is reversed on appeal, the court shall
promptly refund to the defendant any amounts paid for the reporter's record.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/720
(f) The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record on
appeal in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(g) If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal
bond with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later
than the 10th day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. If the defendant is in custody, the
defendant shall be committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. The appeal bond must be in the
amount of $100.00 or double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is
greater. The bond must:
(1) State that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed; and
(2) Be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to
which the appeal is taken.
Sec. 1.05.006 Court costs
Upon conviction, a defendant shall also remit to the city such court costs as are authorized by law, imposed by
the state, and established by the city.
(Ordinance 16-10 adopted 9/16/10)
Secs. 1.05.007–1.05.020 Reserved
Division 2. Fees, Costs and Special Expenses*
Sec. 1.05.021 Special expenses for defendants who fail to appear
(a) There shall be levied and collected from the defendant all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in
any arrest for the defendant's failure to appear on a personal bond.
(b) In all cases wherein defendants are to appear before the municipal court of the city and they fail to appear
as required by law, a warrant of arrest shall issue. After issuance and service of such warrant, and a
determination of guilt, a special expense of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per warrant shall be taxed against said
defendant as costs to be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
(c) Collection of the fines and special expenses provided for herein shall be by execution against the property
of the defendant, imprisonment of the defendant, or both.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-11.1)
Sec. 1.05.022 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund as permitted by article 102.017 of the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a three dollar
($3.00) security fee as a cost of court.
(c) A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred adjudication: or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/720
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the city treasurer for deposit in a
fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund.
(1977 Code, sec. 13 1/2-4)
(e) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services
for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. Security devices and/or services shall
include any and all items described in article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
(f) The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city
council.
(g) This section shall take effect immediately from and after its passage as the law in such cases provides;
provided, however, that the fee required by this section shall not be imposed on any offense which occurred
prior to the effective date hereof.
(1977 Code, sec. 13 1/2-4)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 1.05.023 Technology fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund for the city.
(b) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court in the city shall pay a technology
fee not to exceed four dollars ($4.00) for each conviction as a cost of court.
(c) For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the
person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision, or the court
defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the finance director for deposit in a
fund to be known as the “municipal court technology fund.”
(e) The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of technological
enhancements for the city municipal court, including computer systems, computer networks, computer
hardware, computer software, imaging systems, electronic kiosks, electronic ticket writers, and docket
management systems.
(f) This section shall take effect immediately from and after its passage; provided, however, that the court
costs imposed hereby shall apply only on conviction for an offense committed on or after January 1, 2000. Court
costs for convictions for an offense committed before January 1, 2000, are covered by the law in effect at the
time the offense was committed, and the former law is continued in effect for that purpose.
(1977 Code, sec. 13 1/2-5)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
ARTICLE 1.06 TAXATION*
Division 1. General Provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/720
Sec. 1.06.001 Tax levy ordinances not affected by code
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance levying any tax, and all such
ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
in this code. (1977 Code, sec. 20-1)
Sec. 1.06.002 Tax certificate fee
The city does hereby authorize its tax collector to charge a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council for
each tax certificate issued by the city. (1977 Code, sec. 20-3; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Issuance of tax certificates by taxing authority, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.08.
Sec. 1.06.003 Freeport goods
The exemption from ad valorem taxation for freeport goods pursuant to art. VIII, section 1-J of the state
constitution and section 11.251 of the Texas Tax Code shall be effective beginning with tax year 2006.
(Ordinance 21-05, sec. 2, adopted 11/3/05)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 1.06.004 Goods in transit
Beginning tax year 2012, and continuing thereafter until further action is taken by the city council, goods in
transit, as defined by Tax Code, section 11.253, as amended, shall be subject to ad valorem property taxation by
the city. (Ordinance 13-11 adopted 10/3/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
Secs. 1.06.005–1.06.020 Reserved
Division 2. Property Tax*
Sec. 1.06.021 Residence homestead exemption
Pursuant to article 8, section 1-b of the state constitution and section 11.13(n) of the Texas Tax Code, there is
hereby established an additional exemption of ten (10) percent of the appraised value, in an amount not less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), from ad valorem taxation, and such amount shall be exempt from ad valorem
taxation beginning with the tax year 2005 and continuing thereafter; provided, however, such individual
qualifies and makes application for such exemption in accordance with the Texas Tax Code, as amended. (1977
Code, sec. 20-5)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 1.06.022 Homestead exemption for persons age 65 or older
In accordance with the Texas Tax Code, and effective with the passage of this section, there is hereby provided
an exemption of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) on residence homestead property for those who have
attained the age of sixty-five (65) years prior to January 1, 2005. (1977 Code, sec. 20-2)
State law reference–Homestead exemption for persons over 65 authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13(d) and (e).
Sec. 1.06.023 Additional penalty on delinquent taxes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/720
An additional penalty on delinquent personal property taxes [is authorized] for tax years 2005 and subsequent
years as provided by section 33.11 of the Texas Tax Code if tax becomes delinquent on February 1 of a year and
remains delinquent on the 60th day thereafter. (Ordinance 26-05 adopted 12/15/05)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Secs. 1.06.024–1.06.040 Reserved
Division 3. Hotel Occupancy Tax†
Sec. 1.06.041 Definitions
As used in this division, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall
not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-15)
Sec. 1.06.042 Levy; amount
There is hereby established and levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any
hotel in the city where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. Such tax is
hereby levied at the rate of four (4) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room to the
hotel. (1977 Code, sec. 20-11)
Sec. 1.06.043 Use of revenue
The revenues from said hotel occupancy tax shall be used for any of the purposes enumerated in chapter 351 of
the Texas Tax Code and shall also be subject to the limitations stated in this division. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.044 Collection and payment
The tax levied pursuant to this division upon hotel occupancy shall be collected by each hotel within the city
upon collection by said hotel of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room. Such revenues shall
be paid by the hotel to the city through its finance department, on a quarterly basis, and shall be paid for each
quarter within ten (10) days after the last day of each calendar quarter. (1977 Code, sec. 20-13)
Sec. 1.06.045 Maintenance of and access to records
Every hotel within the city shall keep and maintain an accurate record of the consideration and the hotel
occupancy tax paid by the occupant of each sleeping room in the hotel, and any employee, agent, officer or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/720
representative of the city shall be authorized to have access to the records maintained hereunder at all reasonable
times. There shall also be furnished to the tax collector of the city, at the time of the payment of such tax, a copy
of the tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. (1977 Code,
sec. 20-14; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.046 Effective date
This division shall become effective on the first day of March, 1984. (1977 Code, sec. 20-16)
Secs. 1.06.047—1.06.060 Reserved
Division 4. Tax Abatement in Reinvestment Zones*
Sec. 1.06.061 Definitions
Abatement. The full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes of eligible property in a reinvestment zone
designated by the city for economic development purposes.
Agreement. A contractual agreement between a property owner and/or lessee and the city.
Base year value. The assessed value of eligible property on January first of the year of the execution of the
agreement plus the agreed-upon value of eligible property improvements made after January first but before the
execution of the agreement.
Deferred maintenance. Improvements necessary for continued operation which do not improve productivity or
alter the process technology.
Eligible facilities. New, expanded or modernized buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and
equipment, which are reasonably likely as a result of granting abatement to contribute to the retention or
expansion of primary employment or to attract major investment in the reinvestment zone that would be a
benefit to the property and that would contribute to economic development within the city.
Expansion. The addition of buildings, structures, machinery, equipment or payroll for purposes of increasing
production capacity.
Facility. Property improvements completed or in the process of construction which together comprise an integral
whole.
Hotel. A commercial structure which provides overnight accommodations to travelers and which contains one
hundred fifty (150) rooms or more.
Modernization. The replacement and/or upgrading of existing facilities which increases the productive input or
output, updates the technology or substantially lowers the unit cost of an operation. Modernization may result
from the construction, alteration, or installation of buildings, structures, machinery or equipment, or both.
New facility. A property previously undeveloped which is placed into service by means other than or in
conjunction with expansion or modernization.
Office building. A new office building to be occupied at least ninety (90) percent by one (1) owner or one (1)
tenant.
Productive life. The number of years a property improvement is expected to be in service in a facility.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-31)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/720
Sec. 1.06.062 Abatement authorized; eligible and ineligible property
(a) Eligible facilities. Upon application, eligible facilities shall be considered for tax abatement as hereinafter
provided.
(b) Creation of new value. Abatement may only be granted for the additional value of eligible property
improvements made subsequent to and specified in an abatement agreement between the city and the property
owner or lessee, subject to such limitations as the city may require.
(c) New and existing facilities. Abatement may be granted for new facilities and improvements to existing
facilities for purposes of modernization or expansion.
(d) Eligible property. Abatement may be extended to the value of buildings, structures, fixed machinery and
equipment, site improvements, and related fixed improvements necessary to the operation and administration of
a facility, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section.
(e) Leased facilities. If a leased facility is granted abatement, the agreement shall be executed with the lessor
and the lessee.
(f) Ineligible property. The following types of property shall be fully taxable and ineligible for tax abatement:
land, inventories, supplies, tools, furnishings, and other forms of removable personal property, housing, deferred
maintenance, property to be rented or leased except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, and property
which has a productive life of less than ten (10) years.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-32)
Sec. 1.06.063 Criteria
(a) Minimum criteria. The city will consider tax abatement only for eligible facilities and/or eligible property
which meets the following criteria:
(1) The project must result in a net increase of at least two (2) million dollars in taxable value.
(2) The project must conform to the comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(3) The project must contribute to the retention or expansion of primary employment or contribute
substantially to redevelopment efforts, and must not be expected to solely or primarily have the effect
of transferring employment from one part of the city to another.
(b) Additional standards. In addition to the minimum requirements provided in subsection (a) of this section,
the following shall be considered in determining whether to grant tax abatement and, if so, the percentage of
value to be abated and the duration of the tax abatement:
(1) The value of land and existing improvements, if any;
(2) Type and value of proposed improvements;
(3) Productive life of proposed improvements;
(4) Number of existing jobs to be retained by proposed improvements;
(5) Number and type of jobs to be created by proposed improvements;
(6) Amount of local payroll to be created;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/720
(7) Whether the new jobs to be created will be filled by persons residing or projected to reside
within affected taxing jurisdictions;
(8) Amount of local sales tax to be generated directly;
(9) Amount the property tax base valuation will be increased during the term of abatement and
after abatement, which shall include a definitive commitment that such valuation shall not, in any
case, be less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00);
(10) The costs to be incurred by the city to provide facilities or services directly resulting from the
new improvements;
(11) The amount of ad valorem taxes to be paid the city during the abatement period considering
the existing values, the percentage of new value abated, the abatement period, and the value after
expiration of the abatement period;
(12) The population growth of the city that occurs directly as a result of new improvements;
(13) The types and values of public improvements, if any, to be made by the applicant seeking
abatement;
(14) Whether the proposed improvements compete with existing businesses to the detriment of the
local economy;
(15) The impact on the business opportunities of existing businesses;
(16) The attraction of other new businesses to the area;
(17) Whether the project is environmentally compatible with no negative impact on quality of life
perceptions; and
(18) The degree to which the project makes a substantial contribution to redevelopment efforts or
special area plans by enhancing either functional or visual characteristics, e.g., historical structures,
traffic circulation, parking, facades, signs, materials, urban design, etc.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-33)
Sec. 1.06.064 Procedural guidelines
(a) Application. All applicants shall be considered on a case-by-case basis; each application will be reviewed
on its merits utilizing the criteria provided in section 1.06.063. After such review, abatement may be denied
entirely or may be granted to the extent deemed appropriate after full evaluation.
(1) Any present or potential owner of taxable property in the city may request the creation of a
reinvestment zone and tax abatement by filing a completed tax abatement application with the city.
The application shall then be forwarded to the city manager for review and recommendation to the
city council for final disposition.
(2) The application shall consist of a completed application form which shall provide detailed
information on the items described in section 1.06.063, a map and property description, and a time
schedule for undertaking and completing the planned improvements. In the case of modernization, a
statement of the assessed value of the facility, separately stated for real and personal property, shall
be given for the tax year immediately preceding the year of application.
(3) The application form may require such financial and other information as may be deemed
appropriate for evaluating the financial capacity and other factors of the applicant. Information which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/720
describes the specific processes or business activities to be conducted or the equipment or other
property to be located on the property for which tax abatement is sought is confidential and not
subject to public disclosure until the tax abatement agreement is executed.
(4) The city shall give notice as provided by the Texas Tax Code, i.e.:
(A) Written notice to the presiding officer of the governing body of each taxing unit in which
the property to be subject to the agreement is located no later than the seventh day before the
public hearing; and
(B) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within such taxing jurisdiction no later
than the seventh day before the public hearing.
Before acting upon the application, the city shall, by public hearing, afford the applicant,
the designated representative of any governing body of each taxing unit, and any
interested persons the opportunity to show cause why the abatement should or should not
be granted.
(5) The city, no more than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the application, shall, by resolution,
either approve or disapprove the application for tax abatement. The city shall notify the applicant of
approval or disapproval.
(b) Approval; execution of agreement. If approved, the city shall formally pass a resolution and execute an
agreement with the owner of the facility and lessee, as required, which shall include:
(1) The estimated value to be abated and the base year value;
(2) Percent of value to be abated each year as provided in subsection (d) of this section;
(3) The commencement date and termination date of abatement;
(4) The proposed use of the facility, nature of construction, time schedule, map, property
description and improvement list as provided in the application;
(5) Contractual obligations in the event of default, violation of terms or conditions, delinquent
taxes, recapture, administration and assignment as provided in these guidelines and criteria; and
(6) The size of investment and average number of jobs involved.
(c) Denial; timing.
(1) If denied, neither the reinvestment zone nor the abatement agreement shall be authorized if it is
determined that:
(A) The applicant failed to meet the minimum criteria;
(B) The request for abatement was filed after the commencement of construction, alteration,
modernization, expansion or new facility;
(C) There would be a substantial adverse affect on the provision of government service or tax
base;
(D) The applicant has sufficient financial capacity;
(E) Planned or potential use of the property would constitute a hazard to public safety, health
or morals;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/720
(F) Violation of other codes or laws; or
(G) Any other reason deemed appropriate by the city council.
(2) Such agreement shall normally be executed within sixty (60) days after the applicant has
forwarded all necessary information and documentation to the city.
(d) Taxability. From the execution of the abatement agreement to the end of the abatement period, taxes shall
be payable as follows:
(1) The value of ineligible property as provided in section 1.06.062(f) shall be fully taxable;
(2) The base year value of existing eligible property, as determined each year, shall be fully
taxable;
(3) The additional value of new eligible property shall be taxed in the manner and for the period
provided for in the abatement agreement; and
(4) The additional value of new eligible property shall be fully taxable at the end of the abatement
period.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-34)
Sec. 1.06.065 Administration
(a) The chief appraiser of the Dallas County Appraisal District will annually determine an assessment of the
real and personal property comprising the reinvestment zone. Each year, the company or individual receiving
abatement shall furnish the appraiser with such information as may be necessary for the abatement. Once value
has been established, the chief appraiser will notify the city of the amount of the assessment.
(b) The abatement agreement shall stipulate that employees and/or designated representatives of the city will
have access to the reinvestment zone during the term of the abatement to inspect the facility to determine if the
terms and conditions of the agreement are being met. All inspections will be made only after the giving of
twenty-four (24) hours' prior notice and will only be conducted in such a manner as to not unreasonably interfere
with the construction and/or operation of the facility. All inspections will be made with one (1) or more
representatives of the company or individual and in accordance with its safety standards.
(c) Upon completion of construction, the designated representative of the city shall annually evaluate each
facility receiving abatement to insure compliance with the agreement, and a formal report shall be made to the
city council regarding the findings of each evaluation.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-35)
Sec. 1.06.066 Default; recapture of abated taxes
(a) Should the city determine that the company or individual is in default according to the terms and
conditions of its agreement, the city shall notify the company or individual of such default in writing at the
address stated and the agreement may be terminated.
(b) In the event that the company or individual allows its ad valorem taxes owed the city to become delinquent
and fails to timely and properly follow the legal procedures for their protest and/or contest, or violates any of the
terms or conditions of the abatement agreement and fails to cure during the cure period in and after described
[sic], the agreement then may be terminated by the city and all taxes previously abated by virtue of the
agreement will be recaptured and paid within thirty (30) days of the termination.
(1977 Code, sec. 20-36)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/720
Sec. 1.06.067 Assignment of agreement
Tax abatement agreements may be transferred and assigned by the holder to a new owner or lessee of the same
facility upon the approval by resolution of the city council subject to the financial capacity of the assignee and
provided that all conditions and obligations in the abatement agreement are guaranteed by the execution of a
new contractual agreement with the city. No assignment or transfer shall be approved if the parties to the
existing agreement, the new owner or the new lessee is liable to any jurisdiction for outstanding taxes or other
obligations. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. (1977 Code, sec. 20-37)
Sec. 1.06.068 Periodic review of regulations
These guidelines and criteria are effective upon the date of their adoption and will remain in force for two (2)
years unless amended by three-quarters vote of the city council, at which time all reinvestment zones and tax
abatement agreements created pursuant to these provisions will be reviewed by the city to determine whether the
goals have been achieved. Based on that review, the guidelines and criteria will be renewed, modified or
eliminated. (1977 Code, sec. 20-38)
CHAPTER 2
RESERVED
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 3.01.001 Indemnification and defense of city officers and employees
(a) The city council hereby determines that the city shall provide indemnification and defense of the officers
and employees of the city, including members of the city council or any board, commission, or committee,
including volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorney's fees, to the extent
allowed by law, arising out of any claim, suit, judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged
negligent act or omission of such officer, employee, member or volunteer during the discharge of his duties and
within the scope of his office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the city, or in any
other case where the city is directed or authorized by law to do so; provided, however, that such indemnification
will not be provided any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance
or arising out of any conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the
intent to deceive or defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member, or
volunteer, or for the gross negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission, of such
officer, employee, member, or volunteer.
(b) “Employee” includes an officer, volunteer, or employee, a former officer, volunteer, or employee, and the
estate of an officer, volunteer, or employee or former officer, volunteer, or employee of the city. “Officer” shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/720
include any person elected or appointed to be a member of any official body of the city.
(c) The city shall pay actual damages awarded against an employee or officer of the city if the damages result
from an act or omission of the employee or officer in the course and scope of his employment for the city and
arise from a cause of action for negligence. The city shall also pay the court costs and attorney's fees awarded
against such officer or employee in such cause of action. The city may not pay damages awarded against an
employee or officer that arise from a cause of action for official misconduct or involve a wilful or wrongful act
or omission or an act or omission constituting gross negligence. The city may not pay damages awarded against
an employee or officer to the extent that the damages are recoverable under an insurance contract owned by the
city. The liability of the city under this section shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to
any one (1) person, or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any single occurrence in case of
personal injury or death, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a single occurrence of property damage.
(d) The city shall provide legal counsel to represent any employee or officer entitled to protection under this
section. The counsel provided shall be the city attorney, unless there is a potential conflict of interest between
the city and the officer or employee, in which case the city shall employ other legal counsel to defend the officer
or employee.
(e) The city may investigate, negotiate or settle any claim or suit against an officer or employee that results
from an act for which such officer or employee is entitled to indemnification under the provisions of this section.
To be entitled to indemnification by the city under the provisions of this section, such officer or employee shall
notify the city manager in writing as soon as practicable after receipt of written notice of any claim or suit and
cooperate in the investigation, negotiation or settlement of any claim or suit. Such officer or employee shall
attend any hearing or trial held in connection with such claim or suit and assist in securing and giving evidence
and obtaining the attendance of witnesses. Such officer or employee shall not give any oral or written statement
or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or suit except upon the advice of the city attorney,
or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident. Such officer or employee shall not make any
voluntary payment or assume any obligation or incur any expense with respect to any claim or suit without the
consent of the city manager.
(f) In the event of any claim or suit against any officer or employee, the insurance carrier for the city shall be
immediately notified and furnished a copy of any such claim or suit, along with the appropriate documents
giving a history of the claim or suit.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-2.1)
ARTICLE 3.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 3.02.001 Ordinances on file
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this article, but they are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained
on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.03 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.03.001 Department established; composition
A police department in and for the city is hereby created. Such department shall consist of the police chief and
such number of policemen as the city council may, from time to time, authorize. (1977 Code, sec. 16-1)
Sec. 3.03.002 Qualifications and bond of members of department
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/720
Every person appointed as a member of the police department shall be of good moral character and, when
required by the police chief or the city manager, shall furnish testimonials and may be required to give bond in a
sum to be fixed by the city manager, if the same should be deemed necessary. (1977 Code, sec. 16-2)
Sec. 3.03.003 Dismissal of members of department
Any member of the police department shall be subject to dismissal for neglect of duty or misconduct in office, or
for the violation of the lawful orders of the city manager or police chief or of any other officer appointed over
him and having authority to command. (1977 Code, sec. 16-3)
Sec. 3.03.004 Duty of policemen to obey orders
It shall be the duty of city policemen to be obedient to the orders of the city manager and the police chief
communicated to them in person or delivered to them in writing. (1977 Code, sec. 16-8)
Sec. 3.03.005 Duty of policemen to act in courteous and respectful manner
It shall be the duty of all policemen to treat all city officers, as well as other persons with whom they come in
contact in the discharge of their duties, in a courteous and respectful manner. (1977 Code, sec. 16-9)
Sec. 3.03.006 Right of entry of policemen
Policemen are hereby authorized to go into any dwelling house, store or other place in which any person may
have taken refuge or be, who has, in their presence or hearing, committed a felony or offense against the public
peace, or where any felony or offense against the public peace is about to be committed, or any noise, alarm,
outcry or disturbance within their hearing is being made. (1977 Code, sec. 16-10)
Sec. 3.03.007 Only necessary force to be used in making arrest
In making an arrest and in conveying an offender to the city jail or other suitable facility, a policeman shall use
only such force as is necessary to effect his purpose. (1977 Code, sec. 16-12)
Secs. 3.03.008–3.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Chief
Sec. 3.03.051 Office created; qualifications; appointment; oath
(a) There is hereby created the office of police chief of the city, which shall be filled by some suitable person
who possesses all of the qualifications prescribed by the city manager. Said officer shall be appointed by the city
manager and shall hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified.
(b) The police chief shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take the oath of office prescribed by
the state constitution.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-4)
Sec. 3.03.052 General powers and duties
(a) The police chief shall be the chief police officer of the city and shall operate directly under the city
manager. He shall have like power with the sheriff of the county to execute search warrants and other writs. He
shall be active in quelling riots, disorders and disturbances of the peace and violations of every kind within the
city limits, and shall take into custody all persons thus offending, and may take good and sufficient bail for the
appearance before the municipal court of any person charged with an offense which the municipal court has
jurisdiction to try. It shall be his duty to arrest all violators of the laws and ordinances and all who obstruct or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/720
interfere with him in the discharge of his duties. In the prevention and suppression of crime and the arrest of
offenders, he shall have the same powers as the sheriff of a county under the laws of the state. He shall perform
such other duties and have such other powers as the city council may, by resolution or ordinance, require or
confer, or as may be prescribed by state law.
(b) The police chief shall assign to each policeman his duties and may order any policeman to render such
service in any part of the city whenever and wherever, in his opinion, the occasion shall require it. Policemen
shall keep faithful watch in the districts so assigned to them.
(c) The police chief shall see that the policemen are equipped with the proper arms and equipment which their
duties shall require and shall see that they perform their duties promptly and in accordance with his directions
and the directions of the city manager, and he shall, as far as practicable, cause all orders of the city manager to
be faithfully executed.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-5)
Sec. 3.03.053 Chief to be member of department and subject to laws applicable to policemen
The person occupying the office of police chief shall, by virtue of such appointment and the exercise of the
duties thereof, be and become a member of the police department of the city and shall be subject to all of the
ordinances and laws applicable to policemen, including all those presently in force and which may hereafter be
enacted. (1977 Code, sec. 16-6)
Sec. 3.03.054 Reports
The police chief shall report in writing to the city manager the time actually served by each policeman, the time
absent, and such other information as he may deem proper or may, from time to time, be required by the city
manager to report. (1977 Code, sec. 16-7)
Secs. 3.03.055–3.03.090 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve Force*
Sec. 3.03.091 Established; composition; maximum number of members
An auxiliary police force to be known as the police reserve force is hereby established. It shall be composed of
persons who have voluntarily submitted application therefor and who have been approved for membership by
the chief of police as herein provided. The police reserve force shall be separate and distinct from the police
department but shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. (1977 Code, sec. 16-
41; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.03.092 Authority of chief of police; reserve commander; appointment of members
The members of the police reserve force shall be under the authority, command and control of the chief of
police, subject to all of the provisions of the city charter, ordinances of the city and this article. The chief of
police shall be authorized to appoint a reserve commander, who shall report to the chief of police. Members of
the police reserve force shall be appointed by the reserve commander, subject to the approval of the chief of
police. (1977 Code, sec. 16-42)
Sec. 3.03.093 List of eligibles; application for membership; qualifications for membership
(a) A list of eligibles, accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints, shall be compiled from applications
submitted for membership in the police reserve force. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the chief
of police and approved by the city manager, and shall state the name and residence of the applicant. Each
applicant shall be an actual resident of Dallas County, Texas, or a contiguous county, and shall furnish
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/720
satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom from communicable disease and the physical
ability to perform the duties of a member of the police reserve force.
(b) Each person appointed to membership in the police reserve force shall meet all legal requirements of the
laws of the state and shall be commissioned by the state as a peace officer. Each member of the reserve police
force shall subscribe to an oath of office as prescribed for regular employed police officers. All qualifications
and standards of training for members of the police reserve force shall be the same as for regular police officers.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-43)
Sec. 3.03.094 Duties; carrying weapon
(a) The duties of the police reserve force, subject to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of
police, shall be to assist the regular police force in a supplementary capacity, but members of the police reserve
force shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all
requirements for such regular police officers. Members of the police reserve force shall assist in the enforcement
of law and the maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency designated by the chief of police or
the mayor as provided by law. After approval, such member may carry a weapon only when authorized by the
chief of police, and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. The chief may by order
establish such other rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its members
and to provide for the maintenance of discipline as he may from time to time determine. He may change such
orders from time to time, and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of
regular police officers in carrying out their duties.
(b) The city [chief of police] may prescribe other duties to be performed by members of the police reserve
force and may call such members into service at any time he considers it necessary to have additional officers to
preserve the peace and enforce the law.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-44)
Sec. 3.03.095 Identification card; compensation of members; term of commission
(a) An identification card or other insignia or evidence of identity as prescribed by the chief shall be issued to
each member, which such member must carry at all times while on duty, and must surrender it to the chief upon
termination of his membership.
(b) Members of the police reserve shall serve without compensation, but the city council may provide from
time to time for a uniform allowance, equipment maintenance allowance, and/or reimbursement for actual
documented expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.
(c) The commission of each member of the police reserve force shall be continual until such member resigns
or is terminated from the force, and no annual renewal application shall be required.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-45)
Sec. 3.03.096 Termination of membership; resignation
(a) Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for just cause as deemed
sufficient by the chief. Any member so terminated may appeal such termination to the city manager, and the city
manager's decision shall be final.
(b) Any member may resign from the police reserve force at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the
chief of police of his resignation and to surrender all identification or other insignia issued to him as a member
of the police reserve force, and to return all city-owned equipment in his possession to the chief of police within
three (3) working days following his resignation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/720
(1977 Code, sec. 16-46)
Sec. 3.03.097 Authority to reduce or increase membership
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as
circumstances may require, subject to the maximum limitation set out in section 3.03.091. (1977 Code, sec. 16-
47)
Sec. 3.03.098 Powers
Members of the police reserve force shall, while acting in the performance of their official duties, have the same
powers and authority as regular employed police officers and shall have the same powers of arrest, unless
otherwise prescribed by the chief of police. (1977 Code, sec. 16-48)
Sec. 3.03.099 Summary dismissal of member
In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as
a member of the police reserve force or any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police
shall subject any member to summary dismissal, and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the chief.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-49)
Sec. 3.03.100 Impersonating member
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display a police reserve force identification card, or to
otherwise deceitfully represent himself to be connected with the police reserve force of the city, unless he is in
fact a member thereof in good standing. (1977 Code, sec. 16-50)
Sec. 3.03.101 Uniforms and badges
(a) The chief of police shall prescribe the uniform and badges for the members of the police reserve force and
direct the manner in which the same shall be worn. No person other than a member of the police reserve force
shall wear any such uniform or badge.
(b) Members of the police reserve force shall wear such prescribed uniforms and badges at all times while on
duty.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-51)
Secs. 3.03.102–3.03.130 Reserved
Division 4. Unclaimed Property in Possession of Police Department*
Sec. 3.03.131 Exemption of junked and abandoned vehicles
The provisions of this division shall not apply to abandoned or junked vehicles in the possession of the police
department by virtue of article 8.04 of this code, and all such vehicles shall be disposed of in accord with the
provisions of that article. (1977 Code, sec. 16-23)
Sec. 3.03.132 Authority to sell
(a) Except as otherwise provided, abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind which shall remain
unclaimed with the police department for a period of two (2) months without being claimed or reclaimed by the
owner, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at a public auction, as provided in this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/720
(b) Any property held as evidence in a case filed in the municipal court of the city which is not claimed or
reclaimed by the owner within two (2) months after the disposition of such case shall be conclusively presumed
to have been abandoned and shall be subject to sale as provided in this division.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-24)
Sec. 3.03.133 Delivery to city manager prior to sale
The chief of police shall give to the city manager a list of all property subject to sale under this division and shall
thereafter deliver such property, except motor vehicles, to the city manager before the date of sale and take a
receipt from the city manager, showing in detail all property so delivered. Motor vehicles shall be kept by the
chief of police until a sale has been made. (1977 Code, sec. 16-25)
Sec. 3.03.134 Notice of sale
Thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of the sale of property under this division, together with a
descriptive list of the property to be offered for sale, shall be posted at the regular entrance to the city hall and a
copy thereof sent by registered mail to the last known address of the owner, in the event the name of the owner
is known to the city manager. In addition, notice of the time and place of such sale shall be published at least two
(2) times in some newspaper of general circulation in Dallas County, the first notice to appear in such newspaper
at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the sale. (1977 Code, sec. 16-26)
Sec. 3.03.135 Conduct of sale
At the time and place prescribed in the notice provided for in section 3.03.134, the property described in such
notice shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for each piece of property, or assembled in
lots, whichever, in the discretion of the city manager, shall offer the best price obtainable for such property. Such
auction shall be conducted by the city manager, and all sales shall be for cash. (1977 Code, sec. 16-27)
Sec. 3.03.136 Record and report of sale
The city manager shall keep an accurate record of each article sold under this division and the price paid and bid
therefor, and shall make a complete report in writing, to be submitted to the city council at the next regular
meeting of the council. Such report shall state the time, place and manner of conducting the sale. (1977 Code,
sec. 16-28)
Sec. 3.03.137 Disposition of proceeds of sale
All funds received from the sale of property under this division shall be deposited in the general fund, within
three (3) days of receipt, to be thereafter disbursed as the city council shall order. (1977 Code, sec. 16-29)
Sec. 3.03.138 Disposition of weapons
(a) Pistols, dirks, daggers, knives, slingshots and other weapons prohibited by the Penal Code of the state shall
not be sold under this division, except as hereinafter specifically provided. Such weapons which, for a period of
two (2) years, have remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owners and which are not
being held as evidence in any pending cases filed of record shall be destroyed in the presence of the chief of
police, who shall make a report under oath to the city council, listing the make, model, type and serial number of
the property destroyed, together with the time, date, place and manner of destruction.
(b) This section shall not apply to pistols which the chief of police has determined to be serviceable, which
shall be kept in reserve by the city police department for use in the event of civil disorder or disaster.
(c) Pistols which have been classified as “antique” or “collector's items” by a qualified expert in the firearms
field shall not be destroyed pursuant to subsection (a), but shall be advertised as such and sold at public auction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/720
as provided in this division. The chief of police shall determine and select a qualified expert in the firearms field
to classify such pistols.
(1977 Code, sec. 16-30)
Sec. 3.03.139 Purchase by city officer or employee prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city, either directly or indirectly, to submit bids or to
purchase any property at a sale conducted under this division. (1977 Code, sec. 16-31)
ARTICLE 3.04 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.04.001–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission*
Sec. 3.04.031 Created; purpose
A planning and zoning commission is hereby created in order to accomplish the following purposes:
(1) To identify community needs and to advise the city council of their short-range and long-range
implications for the total development of the city.
(2) To recommend achievable community goals as a basis for long-range planning and
development programs.
(3) To recommend plans, programs and policies that will aid the entire community in achieving its
defined goals.
(4) To interpret the adopted plans and programs to concerned citizens so that private activities and
desires may be accomplished in harmony with public needs and policies.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-21)
Sec. 3.04.032 Composition; appointment and qualifications of members
The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven (7) qualified electors of the city appointed by
the city council. The city council will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have
demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in
planning and zoning and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the council that
members shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly
representative of the community. (1977 Code, sec. 2-22)
Sec. 3.04.033 Terms of members
The terms of four (4) of the members of the planning and zoning commission shall expire on the last day of June
of each odd-numbered year and the terms of three (3) of the members shall expire on the last day of June of each
even-numbered year. The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through
seven (7). The odd-numbered places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall
expire in the even-numbered years. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies
shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/720
Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-23)
Sec. 3.04.034 Compensation of members
The members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation, except for
reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. (1977 Code, sec. 2-24)
Sec. 3.04.035 Election of officers
The planning and zoning commission shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year and shall elect a
chairman and vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The
commission shall elect a secretary and such other officers as it deems necessary, either from its membership or
from staff representatives assigned by the city manager to work with the commission. (1977 Code, sec. 2-25)
Sec. 3.04.036 Powers and duties
The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested with the authority to:
(1) Inspect property and premises at reasonable hours where required in the discharge of its
responsibilities under the laws of the state and ordinances of the city.
(2) Formulate and recommend to the city council, for its adoption, a city plan for the orderly
growth and development of the city and its environs, and from time to time recommend such changes
in the plan as it finds will facilitate the movement of people and goods and the health, recreation,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(3) Formulate a zoning plan as may be deemed best to carry out the goals of the city plan and hold
public hearings and make recommendations to the city council relating to the creation, amendment
and implementation of zoning regulations and districts, as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, ch. 211, as amended, authorizing cities and incorporated villages to pass such regulations, and
all powers granted under such articles are specifically adopted and made a part hereof.
(4) Exercise all the powers of a planning and zoning commission as to approval or disapproval of
plans, plats or replats and vacations of plans, plats or replats set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, chapter 212.
(5) Study and recommend on the location, extension and planning of public rights-of-way, parks or
other public places and on the vacating or closing of same.
(6) Study and recommend on the general design and location of public buildings, bridges, viaducts,
street fixtures and other structures and appurtenances.
(7) Study and recommend on the design or alteration and on the location or relocation of works of
art which are, or may become, the property of the city.
(8) Initiate, in the name of the city, for consideration at public hearings, all proposals for the
opening, vacating or closing of public rights-of-way, parks or other public places; for the original
zoning of annexed areas; and for the change of zoning district boundaries on an areawide basis. No
fee shall be required for the filing of any such proposal in the name of the city.
(9) Formulate and recommend to the city council, for its adoption, policies and regulations
consistent with the adopted city plan governing the location and operation of utilities and public
facilities and services owned or under the control of the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-26)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/720
Sec. 3.04.037 Meetings generally; quorum
The planning and zoning commission shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings.
A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the commission. The members of the
commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission. No action can be taken by
the commission without four affirmative votes of the commission. No members of the commission shall abstain
from participation unless they have a conflict of interest as defined by state law or local ordinance. The
chairperson may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the commission and shall be entitled
to vote. (Ordinance 26-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 3.04.038 Rules of procedure; record of proceedings
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings
consistent with the provisions of this division and the requirements of law. (1977 Code, sec. 2-28)
Sec. 3.04.039 Motions; approval or denial of applications
(a) At meetings of the planning and zoning commission, a motion may be made or seconded by any member
other than the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall be entitled to vote only in case of a tie.
(b) A motion to approve or deny any matter before the commission or to recommend approval or denial of any
request requiring council action shall require a favorable majority vote of the members present. The majority of
the members present may vote to:
(1) Approve the matter before the commission;
(2) Deny the matter before the commission;
(3) Table the matter before the commission;
provided further that no request or application shall be continued beyond the next regular meeting.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-29)
Sec. 3.04.040 Disqualification of member from voting
(a) A member of the planning and zoning commission shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds
that he has a personal or monetary interest in the property under appeal, or that he will directly be affected by the
decision of the commission.
(b) A member of such commission may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent,
has sought to influence the vote of the member on his application, other than in the public hearing.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-30)
State law reference–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171.
Secs. 3.04.041–3.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Keep Seagoville Beautiful Commission
Sec. 3.04.071 Established; purpose
A Keep Seagoville Beautiful Commission is hereby created for the purpose of assisting the city council in
establishing a citywide policy for decreasing the amount of litter in the city. (Ordinance 11-06, sec. 2-41,
adopted 7/6/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/720
Sec. 3.04.072 Membership; terms of members
(a) The commission provided for herein shall be comprised of seven (7) members to be nominated by and
approved by the city council and shall be a resident or business representative of the Greater Seagoville area.
The commission may consist of representatives from business and industry, media, community organizations,
and education, and members at large. (Ordinance 11-06, sec. 2-42, adopted 7/6/06)
(b) Four (4) members of the commission originally appointed shall be for a term of one (1) year. Three (3)
members of the commission originally appointed shall be for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the term of
each commission member shall be two (2) years. (Ordinance 23-16 adopted 8/1/16)
Sec. 3.04.073 Coordinator
The city manager shall appoint a coordinator or staff liaison to the commission, who shall be a nonvoting
member of the commission. The coordinator shall be custodian of all minutes and records of the commission and
perform such other duties as the commission may deem necessary and consistent with both the responsibilities
of the commission and his/her responsibilities to the city through the city manager. The coordinator shall work
under the supervision and control of the city manager for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this
division. (Ordinance 11-06, sec. 2-43, adopted 7/6/06; Ordinance 07-07, sec. 1, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 3.04.074 Meetings, quorum and attendance; rules of procedure
(a) Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members
of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and shall serve without compensation except for
reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. The commission shall hold
an organizational meeting in August of each year and shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among
its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The commission shall meet regularly and shall
designate the time and place of its meetings.
(b) No action can be taken by the commission without four affirmative votes of the commission. The
chairperson may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the commission and shall be entitled
to vote. No members of the commission shall abstain from participation unless they have a conflict of interest as
defined by state law or local ordinance.
(c) The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance
with the provisions of this division and the charter of the city. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the
first regular meeting after their appointment.
(Ordinance 26-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 3.04.075 Powers and duties
(a) The commission shall recommend policies related to litter prevention, beautification and community
improvement, and the minimization of solid waste to the city council so all city activities might follow a
common purpose. The commission shall make recommendations to the city council regarding:
(1) Citywide refuse and environmental policy plan(s);
(2) Evaluate city actions in light of that policy;
(3) Management and program priorities on a citywide basis;
(4) Enforcement and additional program alternatives;
(5) Monitoring city performance from data collected and examined under the Keep America
Beautiful, Inc., affiliate system guidelines and make an annual report to the city council; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/720
(6) Carry out such other tasks as the city council may designate.
(b) To accomplish these responsibilities the commission may establish subcommittees such as, but not limited
to, the areas of business and industry, communications, education, finance/fundraising, and cleanup. A
commission member will chair each subcommittee with an unspecified number of community volunteers chosen
by the commission as working subcommittee members.
(Ordinance 11-06, sec. 2-45, adopted 7/6/06)
Sec. 3.04.076 Expenses
The city, within the budgetary appropriation process, shall furnish the office space, supplies, telephone, postage
and secretarial support for the coordinator. The city, within council-imposed budgetary restraints, shall also
supply additional funds for commission activities involving travel or training for the coordinator. The city shall
pay the coordinator salary. Such salary and other expenses, whether specifically enumerated in this section or
not, may be paid from donations when, as and if same are received by the city from the general public, business,
industry, foundations and other sources for the purposes embraced by the scope of the commission's purpose and
responsibilities administered in accordance with standard city policy and practice governed by statute, charter
and ordinance. (Ordinance 11-06, sec. 2-46, adopted 7/6/06)
ARTICLE 3.05 CODE OF ETHICS*
Sec. 3.05.001 Statement of purpose; definitions
(a) Statement of purpose. It is essential in a democratic system that the public has confidence in the integrity,
independence, and impartiality of those who act on their behalf in government. Such confidence depends not
only on the conduct of those who exercise official power, but also on the availability of aid or redress to all
persons on equal terms and on the accessibility and dissemination of information relating to the conduct of
public affairs. The city council adopts this code of ethics in order to promote confidence in the government of
the city and thereby enhance the city's ability to function effectively. The code establishes standards of conduct,
disclosure requirements, and enforcement mechanisms relating to city officials. The code also covers others
whose actions inevitably affect public faith in city government, such as former city officials and persons doing
business with the city. By prohibiting conduct incompatible with the city's best interests and minimizing the risk
of any appearance of impropriety, this code of ethics will further the legitimate interests of democracy.
(b) Definitions. As used in this code of ethics, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, unless the context requires otherwise or more specific definitions set forth elsewhere in this
code apply:
Affiliated. Business entities are “affiliated” if one is the parent or subsidiary of the other or if they are
subsidiaries of the same parent business entity.
Affinity. Relationship by “affinity” is defined in sections 573.024 and 573.025 of the Texas Government Code or
as amended (see attachments A and B).
Before the city. Representation or appearance “before the city” means before the city council or a board,
commission, or other city entity.
Board.
(1) A board, commission, or committee:
(A) Which is established by city ordinance, the city charter, interlocal contract between the
city and another party, or state law; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/720
(B) Any part of whose membership is appointed by the city council, but does not include a
board, commission, or committee that is the governing body of a separate political subdivision
of the state.
(2) The board of directors of the city economic development corporation is considered a board for
the purpose of this code.
Business entity. A sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company,
receivership, trust, unincorporated association, or any other business entity recognized by law.
Code of ethics, ethics code, or this code. This article.
Confidential government information. All information held by the city that is not available to the public under
the Public Information Act (chapter 552, Local Government Code, or as amended (the Act)) and any information
from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act (chapter 551, Local Government
Code, or as amended), regardless of whether disclosure violates the Act and/or the Texas Open Meetings Act.
Consanguinity. Relationship by “consanguinity” is defined in sections 573.022 and 573.023 of the Texas
Government Code or as amended.
Discretionary contract. Any contract other than those which by law must be awarded on a qualified bid basis.
Economic interest. Legal or equitable property interest in land, chattels, and intangibles, and contractual rights
having a value of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Service by a city official as an officer, director,
advisor, or otherwise active participant in an educational, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization does not
create for that city official an economic interest in the property of the organization. “Economic interest” does not
include the contract and/or business relationship that the city manager, city secretary, city attorney and/or his law
firm, and/or the municipal court judge and magistrates and/or their respective law firms have with the city.
Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an
economic interest in such securities or other assets unless the person in question participates in the management
of the fund.
Gift. A voluntary transfer of property (including the payment of money) or the conferral of a benefit having
monetary value (such as the rendition of services or the forbearance of collection on a debt), unless the donor as
quid pro quo receives consideration of equal or greater value.
Indirect ownership. A person “indirectly owns” an equity interest in a business entity where the interest is held
through a series of business entities, some of which own interests in others.
Matter. The events or circumstances of a particular situation.
Official action.
(1) Any affirmative act (including the making of a recommendation) within the scope of, or in
violation of, an official's duties; and
(2) Any failure to act, if the official is under a duty to act and knows that inaction is likely to affect
substantially an economic interest of the official or any person or entity listed in section 3.05.002(a).
Official information. Information gathered pursuant to the power or authority of the city.
Official or city official. The following persons:
(1) The mayor.
(2) Members of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/720
(3) Municipal court judges and magistrates.
(4) Members of the temporary or standing current or future boards, commissions, governing
bodies, and boards of directors when those boards, commissions, governing bodies, and boards of
directors are appointed in their entirety or partially by the city council.
Partner. Partners in general partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, joint ventures, and
any other partnership allowed by law.
Personally and substantially participated. The requirement of having “personally and substantially participated”
in a matter is met only if the individual in fact exercised discretion relating to the matter. The fact that the person
had responsibility for a matter does not by itself establish that the person personally and substantially
participated in the matter.
Representation. All forms of communication and personal appearances in which a person, not acting in
performance of official duties, formally or informally serves as an advocate for private interests, regardless of
whether the representation is compensated. Lobbying, even on an informal basis, is a form of representation.
Representation does not include appearance as a fact witness or uncompensated expert witness in litigation or
other official proceedings.
Solicitation. “Solicitation” of subsequent employment or business opportunities is defined as all forms of
proposals and negotiations relating thereto.
(c) Interpretation. The gender of the wording throughout this article shall always be interpreted to mean either
sex. All singular words shall include the plural, and all plural words shall include the singular. All references to
the laws of the state or the home rule charter, ordinances, or resolutions of the city mean “as presently enacted or
hereafter amended.”
(1977 Code, sec. 2-71)
Sec. 3.05.002 Present city officials
(a) Improper economic benefit.
(1) General rule. To avoid the appearance and risk of impropriety, a city official shall not take any
official action that substantially affects in a positive way the economic interest of:
(A) The official;
(B) His parent, child, stepchild, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of
consanguinity or affinity;
(C) His outside client and/or customer with any transaction outstanding:
(i) Client. A client is someone with whom the official has a contractual relationship; a
commitment to provide products and/or professional services from the official to the client
over a period of time. The contract could be either short-term or long-term in nature. The
person receiving the services or goods would be considered a client of the official only
during the period covered in the contract;
(ii) Customer. A customer is someone who simply purchases a product/service from an
official's business. Customer relationships are transactional; they rarely require a contract
to complete the sale and the actual business transaction is completed within minutes. For
example, the sale of an automobile is an example where a contract is signed but the
purchase is transactional in nature, and so the purchaser would be considered a customer;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/720
(D) The outside employer of the official:
(E) A business entity in which the official knows, or should know, that any of the persons
listed in subsection (a)(1)(A) or (a)(1)(B) of this section holds an economic interest;
(F) A business entity which the official knows, or should know, is an affiliated business or
partner of a business entity in which any of the persons listed in subsection (a)(1)(B) of this
section holds an economic interest;
(G) A business entity or nonprofit entity for which the city official serves as an officer or
director or in any other policy-making position; or
(H) A person or business entity from whom the official, directly or indirectly:
(i) Has solicited within the past twenty-four (24) months an offer of employment or
business opportunities;
(ii) Has received and not rejected an unsolicited offer of employment or business
opportunities; or
(iii) Has accepted an offer of employment or business opportunities which is binding or
expected by the parties to be carried out.
(2) Recusal and disclosure. A city official whose conduct would otherwise violate subsection (a)(1)
of this section must recuse himself. From the time that the conflict is, or should have been,
recognized, he shall:
(A) Immediately refrain from further participation in the matter, including discussions with
any persons likely to consider the matter;
(B) Remove himself from the room in which the meeting is being held; and
(C) Promptly file with the city secretary the appropriate form for disclosing the nature and
extent of the prohibited conduct.
A member of a board shall promptly disclose the conflict to other members of the board
and shall leave the room during the board's discussion of, or voting on, the matter.
(b) Unfair advancement of private interests.
(1) General rule. A city official may not use his official position to grant or secure, or attempt to
grant or secure, for any person (including himself) any form of special consideration, treatment,
exemption, or advantage beyond that which is lawfully available to other persons. This rule does not
apply to actions taken by a city official in the legislative process.
(2) Special rules. The following special rules apply in addition to the general rule:
(A) Acquisition of interest in impending matters. A city official shall not acquire an interest
in, or be affected by, any contract, transaction, zoning decision, or other matter (the “interest”),
if the official knows, or has reason to know, that the interest will be directly or indirectly
affected by impending official action by the city.
(B) Reciprocal favors. A city official may not enter into an agreement or understanding with
any other person that official action by the official will be rewarded or reciprocated by the other
person, directly or indirectly.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/720
(C) Appointment of relatives. A city official shall not nominate, appoint or vote to nominate
or appoint any relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity to any position of the
city
(D) Land matters. In any land matter which comes before the city council, planning and
zoning commission, or board of adjustment and in which any member of the city council or
aforementioned boards and commissions has a financial interest in any property within two
hundred feet (200) of the matter before it, such member shall disclose the existence of the
interest by filing a statement with the record-keeper. The member of the city council, planning
and zoning commission, or board of adjustment may speak on the item and thereafter leave the
room. In addition, any state law provision regarding a conflict of interest shall also be followed.
It is the intention of this provision that the term “land matter” shall be interpreted broadly to
include zoning, permit requests, variances, etc.
(E) Nonprofit organization funding requests. No city council member who is on the board of
a nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless
the nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by
the city council.
(3) Recusal and disclosure. A city official whose conduct would otherwise violate this subsection
shall adhere to the recusal and disclosure provisions stated in subsection (a)(2) of this section.
(c) Gifts.
(1) General rule. A city official shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit.
(2) Special applications. Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not include:
(A) A gift to a city official relating to a special occasion, such as a wedding, anniversary,
graduation, birth, illness, death, or holiday, provided that the value of the gift is fairly
commensurate with the occasion and the relationship between the donor and recipient;
(B) Reimbursement of reasonable expenses for travel authorized in accordance with city
policies;
(C) A public award or reward for meritorious service or professional achievement provided
that the award or reward is reasonable in light of the occasion;
(D) A loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of business on the same
terms generally available to the public;
(E) A scholarship or fellowship awarded on the same terms and based on the same criteria
that are applied to other applicants;
(F) Admission to an event in which the city official is participating in connection with official
duties;
(G) Lawful campaign contributions;
(H) Attending social functions, groundbreakings, or civic events pertinent to the public
relations and operations of the city;
(I) Exchanging gifts with his family and relatives;
(J) Exchanging gifts at church functions or city parties or functions where only city officials
and their employees are invited or attended;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/720
(K) Exchanging gifts or receiving a bonus from their place of employment.
(3) Gifts to closely related persons. A city official shall take reasonable steps to persuade a parent,
spouse, child, stepchild, or other relatives within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity not to
solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit which would violate this article if the official
solicited, accepted, or agreed to accept it.
(d) Confidential information.
(1) Improper access. A city official shall not use his position to secure official information about
any person or entity for any purpose other than the performance of official responsibilities.
(2) Improper disclosure or use. A city official shall not disclose confidential government
information or use such information to further or impede anyone's personal interests. This rule does
not prohibit:
(A) Any disclosure or use that is authorized or required by law;
(B) The confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law.
(e) Representation of private interests.
(1) Representation by member of board. A city official who is a member of a city board shall not
serve as a representative before that board or body of any person, group, or entity.
(2) Representation before city. A city official shall not represent any person, group, or entity, other
than himself, or his spouse or minor children, before the city.
(3) Representation in litigation adverse to city.
(A) Salaried officials. A salaried city official shall not represent any person, group, or entity,
other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in any litigation to which the city is a party,
if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the interests of the city.
(B) Nonsalaried officials. A nonsalaried official shall not represent any person, group, or
entity, other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in any litigation to which the city is a
party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to interests of the city and the
matter is substantially related to the nonsalaried official's duties to the city.
(f) Use of public property and resources. A city official shall not use, request, or permit the use of city
facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for private purposes (including political purposes), except:
(1) Pursuant to duly adopted city policies; or
(2) To the extent and according to the terms that those resources are lawfully available to the
public.
(g) Political activity. State law, the city charter, and city personnel rules impose limitations on the political
activities of city officials. In addition, the following ethical restrictions apply:
(1) Influencing subordinates. A city official shall not, directly or indirectly, induce or attempt to
induce any subordinate of the official:
(A) To participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate or political committee,
or engage in any other political activity relating to a particular party, candidate, or issue; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/720
(B) To refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity, except as prohibited by the city
charter.
(2) Support of candidate.
(A) In elections for candidates other than for city council, a member of the city council may
not:
(i) Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate;
(ii) Solicit or receive contributions; or
(iii) Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for candidates as required by chapter
252, Texas Election Code, or as amended.
(B) In any election, a member of the city council or city board may not:
(i) Use the prestige of the member's position with the city on behalf of a candidate,
other than for himself;
(ii) Serve as the designated campaign treasurer for a candidate as required by chapter
252, Texas Election Code, or as amended; or
(iii) Personally solicit or receive contributions for a candidate other than for himself. A
member, however, is not prohibited from serving on a steering committee for a candidate
other than for city council to plan a program of solicitation using the member's name,
without reference to the office held, when the committee as a whole is listed.
(3) Endorsements. Subsections (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section do not prohibit a member of the
city council or of a board from lending the member's name in support of a candidate so long as the
office held with the city is not mentioned in connection with the endorsement.
(4) Paid campaigning. A city official shall not accept any thing of value, directly or indirectly, for
political activity relating to an item pending on the ballot, if he participated in, or provided advice
relating to, the exercise of discretionary authority by the city council or a board that contributed to
the development of the ballot item.
(5) Campaign materials on official vehicles. A city official shall not display or fail to remove
campaign materials on any city vehicle under his control.
(6) Use of public property and resources. Limitations on the use of public property and resources
for political purposes are imposed by subsection (f) of this section.
(7) General statements encouraging voting. A general statement merely encouraging another
person to vote does not violate this rule.
(h) Actions of others.
(1) Violations by other city officials. A city official shall not knowingly assist or induce, or attempt
to assist or induce, another city official to violate any provision in this code of ethics.
(2) Using others to engage in forbidden conduct. A city official shall not violate the provisions of
this code of ethics through the acts of another.
(i) Interaction with city staff.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/720
(1) City council members' and board members' interaction with the city manager or staff must
recognize the lack of authority in any individual city council member, board member or group of city
council members or board members except when explicitly authorized by the city council or board.
(2) City council members and board members will not make public individual judgments of the
performance of the city manager, his staff, the city secretary, or the municipal judge, except as
authorized by city policy, ordinance, or the city charter.
(3) City council members and board members may not attempt to coerce or intimidate city
employees, interfere with city employees' duties, or otherwise circumvent the authority of the city
manager.
(j) Interaction with general public, press or other entities. City council members' and board members'
interaction with the public, the press or other entities must recognize the same limitations as expressed in
subsection (i) and the inability of any city council member or board member or group of city council members or
board members to speak for the city council or board except when explicitly authorized by the council, the
board, or the city charter.
(k) Prohibited interests in contracts.
(1) Prohibitions. No officer, whether elected or appointed, or any employee, whether full- or parttime,
of the city shall have a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract, other
than employment contracts, with the city; or have a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in
the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or services, except on behalf of the city as an
officer or employee. Any willful violation of this subsection shall constitute malfeasance in office
and any officer or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any
violation of this subsection with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or the
corporation contracting with the governing body of the city shall render the contract involved
voidable by the city manager or the city council.
(2) Financial interest defined. A city official has a prohibited “financial interest” in a contract with
the city, or in the sale to the city of land, materials, supplies, or service, if any of the following
individuals or entities is a party to the contract or sale:
(A) The official;
(B) His parent, child, stepchild, or spouse;
(C) A business entity of which the official directly or indirectly owns:
(i) Ten (10) percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity; or
(ii) Ten (10) percent or more of the business entity; or
(D) A business entity of which any individual or entity listed in herein is:
(i) A subcontractor on a city contract; or
(ii) An affiliated business or partner.
(3) Definitions. For purposes of enforcing the city charter under the provisions of this section:
(A) A city “employee” is any employee of the city.
(B) City “officer” is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/720
(i) The mayor or any city council member;
(ii) A municipal judge or magistrate; or
(iii) A member of a board which is more than advisory in function. The term does not
include members of the board of another governmental entity even if some or all of these
members are appointed by the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-72)
Sec. 3.05.003 Former city officials
(a) Continuing confidentiality. A former city official shall not use or disclose confidential government
information acquired during service as a city official. This rule does not prohibit:
(1) Any disclosure or use that is authorized or required by law; or
(2) The confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law.
(b) Subsequent representation.
(1) Representation by former board member. A person who was a member of a board shall not
represent before that board any person, group, or entity for a period of one (1) year after the
termination of his official duties.
(2) Representation before city. A former city official shall not represent any person, group, or
entity, other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, before the city for a period of one (1) year
after termination of his official duties, unless hired by the city under the authority granted within the
charter.
(3) Representation in litigation adverse to city. A former city official shall not, absent consent from
the city, represent any person, group, or entity, other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in
any litigation to which the city is a party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to
the interests of the city and the matter is one in which the former city official “personally and
substantially participated” prior to termination of his official duties.
(c) Discretionary contracts.
(1) Impermissible interest in discretionary contract or sale. This subsection applies only to
contracts or sales made on a discretionary basis, and not to contracts or sales made on a competitive
bid basis. Within one (1) year of the termination of official duties, a former city official shall not have
a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, and shall not be financially
interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies, or service. Any
violation of this subsection, with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the individual or business
entity contracting with the city council shall render the contract involved voidable by the city
manager or the city council. A former city official has a prohibited “financial interest” in a contract
with the city, or in the sale to the city of land, materials, supplies, or service, if any of the following
individuals or entities is a party to the contract or sale:
(A) The former official;
(B) His parent, child, stepchild, or spouse;
(C) A business entity in which the former official directly or indirectly owns:
(i) Ten (10) percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/720
(ii) Ten (10) percent or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or
(D) A business entity of which any individual or entity listed in subsection (c)(1)(A) or (c)(1)
(C) of this section is:
(i) A subcontractor on a city contract; or
(ii) An affiliated business or partner.
(2) Prior participation in negotiation or awarding. A former city official may not, within one (1)
year of the termination of official duties, perform work on a compensated basis relating to a
discretionary contract, if he “personally and substantially participated” in the negotiation or awarding
of the contract.
(3) Definitions. For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this section:
(A) A “former city official” is any person who, immediately prior to termination of official
duties, was:
(i) The mayor or a member of city council;
(ii) A municipal judge or magistrate; or
(iii) A member of a board which is more than advisory in function. The term “former
city official” does not include a former member of the board of another governmental
entity even if some or all of its members were appointed by the city council.
(B) The term “contract” means any contract other than a contract for the personal services of
the former city official.
(C) The term “service” means any services other than the personal services of the former
official.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-73)
Sec. 3.05.004 Persons doing business with city
Persons seeking contracts:
(1) Disclosure of parties, owners, and closely related persons. For the purpose of assisting the city
in the enforcement of provisions contained in the city charter and this code of ethics, an individual or
business entity seeking a contract from the city is required to disclose, on a form provided by the city:
(A) The identity of any individual who would be a party to the contract, and the names of any
persons to whom the such individual is related as parent, child, stepchild, or spouse;
(B) The identity of any business entity that would be a party to the contract; and
(C) The identity of any individual or business entity employed for purposes relating to the
contract being sought by any individual or business entity disclosed in compliance with
subsection (1)(A) of this section.
(2) Political contributions. Any individual or business entity seeking a discretionary contract from
the city must disclose, on a form provided by the city, all political contributions totaling five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more within the past twenty-four (24) months made directly or indirectly to any
member of the city council, or to any political action committee that contributes to city council
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/720
elections, by any individual or business entity whose identity must be disclosed under subsection (1)
of this section. Indirect contributions by an entity include, but are not limited to, contributions made
through the officers or owners of the entity.
(3) Briefing papers and open records. Briefing papers prepared for the city concerning any
proposed discretionary contract shall reveal the information disclosed in compliance with subsections
(1) and (2) of this section, and that information shall constitute an open record available to the public.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-74)
Sec. 3.05.005 Members of the public and others
(a) Applicability. This section applies to current and former city officials, persons doing business with the
city, and lobbyists, as well as to members of the public and any other person (including business entities and
nonprofit entities).
(b) Violations. No person shall induce, attempt to induce, conspire with, aid or assist, or attempt to aid or
assist another person to engage in conduct violative of the obligations imposed by this ethics code.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-75)
Sec. 3.05.006 Ethics review process
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the term “ethics laws” is defined as this code of ethics and chapter 171
of the Texas Local Government Code. The term “ethical violation” is defined as violations of any of these
enactments.
(b) Complaints.
(1) Filing. Any person who believes that there has been a violation of the ethics laws may file a
sworn complaint with the city secretary. The complaint shall:
(A) Identify the person or persons who allegedly committed the violation;
(B) Provide a statement of the facts on which the complaint is based;
(C) To the extent possible, identify the rule or rules allegedly violated; and
(D) Be sworn to in the form of an affidavit and be based on personal knowledge of the affiant
and be subject to the laws of perjury.
The complainant may also recommend other sources of evidence that the city attorney
should consider and may request a hearing.
(2) Confidentiality. No city official shall reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a
complaint, except as required for the performance of official duties. All papers relating to a pending
complaint are confidential.
(3) Notification. A copy of a complaint meeting subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be promptly
forwarded by the city secretary to the city attorney and to the person charged in the complaint. The
person charged in the complaint shall also be provided with a copy of the ethics rules and shall be
informed:
(A) That, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the complaint, he may file a sworn response
with the city secretary;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/720
(B) That failure to file a response does not preclude the city attorney from processing the
complaint;
(C) That a copy of any response filed by the person charged in the complaint will be provided
by the city secretary to the complainant, who may within seven (7) days respond by sworn
writing filed with the city secretary, a copy of which shall be provided by the city secretary to
the person charged in the complaint;
(D) That the person charged in the complaint may request a hearing; and
(E) That city officials have a duty to cooperate with the city attorney pursuant to subsection
(c) of this section.
(4) Assistance. The city secretary shall provide information to persons who inquire about the
process for filing a complaint.
(c) Procedure for complaints against city officials.
(1) It shall be the duty of the city attorney to make the initial determination/evaluation of the
complaint as to whether or not the facts alleged, if true, would at face value constitute a violation of
this code. If it is determined by the city attorney that the facts as alleged would not constitute a
violation, then, in accordance with the notice requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, the city
attorney shall submit a written report describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the findings
of the city attorney to the city council for its next regularly scheduled meeting. A majority of those
city council members not implicated by the allegation(s) may either invoke the investigatory
procedure as described in this section or reject the complaint. Any vote to reject the complaint shall
be in a public hearing called for that purpose.
(2) If it is determined by the city attorney that the facts as alleged could constitute a violation of
this code, then the city attorney shall notify the mayor and city council of the existence and nature of
the complaint. The city council may further consider said complaint in executive session at the next
regularly scheduled council meeting. At said meeting, the city attorney shall submit a written report
to the city council describing in detail the nature of the complaint and his initial findings and
conclusions as to a possible violation of the code. In any event, after the rendering of said report, the
city attorney shall fully investigate the alleged improprieties. The city attorney shall report back to
the city council in writing as soon as possible. Said report shall be comprehensive in support of the
attorney's opinion as to whether or not a violation of this code occurred.
(3) The city council shall consider the findings of said report at the meeting at which it is
presented, at which time the person(s) accused shall have the right to a full and complete hearing
with the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. No final action, decision, or
vote with regard to any matter shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public. Any
decision shall require a majority vote of the remaining city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-76)
Sec. 3.05.007 Enforcement mechanisms
In addition to other remedies provided by law, the following remedies are available with respect to violations of
this code of ethics:
(1) Disciplinary action. City officials who engage in conduct that violates this code may be
notified, warned, reprimanded, suspended, or removed from office or employment by the city
council. Disciplinary action under this subsection may be imposed in addition to any other penalty or
remedy contained in this code of ethics or any other law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/720
(2) Voiding of contract. If an ethics review finds that there has been a violation of any provision in
subsections (a) through (k) of section 3.05.002, subsections (a) through (c) of section 3.05.003,
section 3.05.004, or section 3.05.005 that is related to the awarding of a contract, the city council
must vote on whether to ratify or void the contract. Such action shall not affect the imposition of any
penalty or remedy contained in this code of ethics or any other law.
(3) Disqualification from contracting.
(A) Any person (including business entities and nonprofit entities) who intentionally or
knowingly violates any provision of section 3.05.004 (Persons doing business with city) may be
prohibited by the city council from entering into any contract with the city for a period not to
exceed three (3) years.
(B) It is a violation of this code of ethics:
(i) For a person prohibited from entering into a contract with the city to enter, or
attempt to enter, into a contract with the city during the period of disqualification from
contracting; or
(ii) For a city official to knowingly assist a violation of this section.
(C) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from receiving a service
or benefit, or from using a facility, which is generally available to the public, according to the
same terms.
(D) A business entity or nonprofit entity may be disqualified from contracting based on the
conduct of an employee or agent, if the conduct occurred within the scope of the employment
or agency.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-77)
Sec. 3.05.008 Other regulations; distribution of regulations
(a) Other regulations.
(1) This code of ethics is cumulative of and supplemental to applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. Compliance with the provisions of this code shall not excuse or relieve any person from
any obligation imposed by state or federal law regarding ethics, financial reporting, lobbying
activities, or any other issue addressed herein.
(2) Even if this code of ethics does not prohibit a city official from taking official action, action
may be prohibited by duly promulgated personnel rules, which may be more stringent.
(b) Distribution of regulations.
(1) At the time of application for a position of city official, every applicant shall be furnished with
a copy of this code of ethics. The applicant shall consider no application complete without a signed
acknowledgement of receipt and understanding of this code.
(2) The city attorney or city secretary shall make available materials for the city officials on the
provisions of this code of ethics and chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-78)
ARTICLE 3.06 FINANCES*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/720
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.06.001 Fee for board of adjustment hearings
There shall be levied and collected from all applicants a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council prior to a
hearing before the board of adjustment, which shall be paid in advance and is not refundable. (1977 Code, sec.
2-3; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.06.002–3.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Bidding Procedures*
Sec. 3.06.031 Professional services
The procedure to hire a professional service shall be as follows:
(1) Authorization to receive proposals. A request for authorization to receive proposals for
professional services shall be placed on the city council agenda, by the city manager, for council
approval. This request should contain the following:
(A) The purpose of the request;
(B) The reason it is needed or desired;
(C) The budget condition of the city; and
(D) The approximate cost of said service, if same is possible.
(2) Receiving proposals. Upon authorization by the council to receive proposals, the following will
then take place:
(A) Invitations to receive proposals will be submitted to those companies whose professional
services are being sought, said invitations to be at the discretion of the city manager, with a
minimum of three (3) invitations to be issued for each type of professional service sought.
Exception to the minimum of three (3) proposals will be in cases of sole service providers.
(B) Proposals will be opened upon receipt and reviewed by the city manager.
(C) The city manager will, upon review of proposals submitted, make a written report and
recommendation to the city council.
(3) Awarding proposals. Awarding of proposals will then be placed on the agenda as an action item
with the city manager's recommendation in the agenda packet. The city council will then do one (1)
of the following actions:
(A) Accept the city manager's recommendation;
(B) Make their own recommendation; or
(C) Reject all proposals.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-4(a))
Sec. 3.06.032 Nonprofessional services, contracts or skills
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/720
No nonprofessional service, contract or skill calling for or requiring the expenditure or payment of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) or more out of any fund or funds of the city or imposing an obligation or liability of any
nature or character upon the city shall be made or entered into without first submitting such proposed service,
contract or skill to competitive bid. The procedures for competitive bidding shall be as follows:
(1) Authorization to receive bids. If any department, through its department head, desires the
purchase of a service, item or skill that falls within the amount specified for competitive bidding, a
written request, by the department head, for authorization to receive bids must first be addressed to
the city manager and then placed on the council agenda for council approval. The request should
contain the following:
(A) The item being requested;
(B) The reason why it is needed or desired;
(C) The budget condition of said department;
(D) An approximate cost (if possible); and
(E) Specifications (or what the department determines must be a requirement for said item).
All bid specifications shall include the following:
(i) The city reserves the right to refuse and/or reject any or all bids received.
(ii) All bids shall be submitted in a sealed envelope with the bid item, date and time of
bid opening clearly printed on the outside of said envelope for purposes of identification.
(2) Receiving and opening bids; staff recommendation. Upon receiving authorization to receive
bids by the council, the following will then take place:
(A) Advertising of said item through the newspaper, as required by state law, and invitations
to bid to vendors;
(B) All bids received shall be kept in the office of the city secretary prior to bid opening,
where the receipt of same shall be duly recorded by the city secretary in a bid book. Said bid
book shall contain the date and time each bid is actually received, the subject of each bid and
the name of party/parties that submitted said bid;
(C) Opening of said bids shall then take place at a date, time and place that is so stipulated in
the specifications; and
(D) A tabulation of all bids received, with the staff's recommendation, in writing, to whom
the bid should be awarded, and their reason if same is not the low bidder or if the
recommendation is to reject all bids.
(3) Awarding of bids. Awarding of bids will then be placed on the council agenda as an action item
with the tabulations and recommendations in the agenda packet. The council will choose to do one of
the following:
(A) Accept the staff's recommendation;
(B) Make their own recommendation; or
(C) Reject all bids.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-4(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/720
Secs. 3.06.033–3.06.070 Reserved
Division 3. Disposition of Property
Sec. 3.06.071 Surplus, salvage or abandoned personal property
(a) Definitions.
Abandoned property. Personal property that has been abandoned, stolen or recovered, whether or not held as
evidence, which remains unclaimed with the police department for a period of at least thirty (30) days after
disposition of any pending criminal case or notice to any owner, if known, under state law.
Salvage property. Personal property, other than items routinely discarded as waste, that because of use, time,
accident, or any other cause is so worn, damaged, or obsolete that it has no value for the purpose for which it
was originally intended.
Surplus property. Personal property that is not salvage property [or] items routinely discarded as waste, is not
currently needed by the city, is not required for the city's foreseeable needs, and possesses some usefulness for
the purpose for which it was intended.
(b) Council authorization. The city manager, after authorization by resolution of the city council, may:
(1) Periodically sell the city's surplus, salvage or abandoned property by competitive bid, or live or
on-line auction, except if the purchaser is a county or a political subdivision within the state;
(2) Offer the property as a trade-in for new property of the same general type if it is determined to
be in the city's best interest;
(3) Order the property to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as worthless if the property was
first offered for sale under this section; and
(4) Dispose of the property by donating it to an organization dedicated as civic and chartered in
accordance with state law if the city manager determines:
(A) Undertaking to sell the property would likely result in no bids or a bid price that is less
than expenses required to bid; and
(B) The donation serves a public purpose.
(c) Procedure.
(1) All items are offered for sale “as is,” and without any express or implied warranty.
(2) If a department head determines that property is surplus or salvage he/she shall provide the city
manager with a detailed written description of the property and its location, condition, quantity and
estimated value.
(3) For items identified as surplus or salvage property, the department head shall inform the city
manager in writing of the description, number, location, condition, purchase date and original cost or
value, serial number, city inventory tag number, if any, and reason to remove from the inventory of
property.
(4) For items of abandoned property the chief of police shall follow the requirements of state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/720
(5) Items identified as surplus, salvage or abandoned property shall then be transferred to the city
manager, who shall then prepare such property for sale, donation, disposal, or submittal to the city
council for official declaration as surplus or salvage property, such as the case may warrant.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city, either directly or indirectly, to bid
on or purchase any property being sold under this section. No transfer of salvage, surplus or
abandoned property shall be made to any member of the city council or any officer or employee of
the city.
(d) Notice of sale. After resolution by the city council, the city manager shall cause to be published notice of
availability of such property in a newspaper in general circulation in Dallas County, and may also distribute in
other manners to enhance bidder participation. Thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of the sale of
property under this section, together with a descriptive list of the property to be offered for sale, shall be posted
at the regular entrance to the city hall. A surplus, salvage or abandoned property list will be available upon
request from the city secretary. All items are offered for sale “as is,” “here at,” and “without recourse.”
(e) Record and report of sale. The city secretary shall keep [and] maintain a record of each item of surplus or
salvage property sold and the sale price of each item to ensure that inventory records may be maintained. The
city manager shall make a complete report in writing, to be submitted to the city council at the next regular
meeting of the council. Such report shall state the time, place and manner of conducting the sale.
(f) Award of property to bidder. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any or all bids. However, should
the city manager determine that the sale shall be completed, the sale shall only be awarded to the highest bidder.
All sales shall be for cash (or payable by money order or cashier's check).
(g) Rejection of offers. The city reserves the right to accept or reject any or all bids.
(h) Disposition of proceeds of sale. The city secretary shall deposit all funds received from the sale of salvage
or surplus property under this section in the general fund, within three (3) days of receipt, to be thereafter
disbursed as the city council deems appropriate.
(i) Disposition of seized weapons and other contraband. Disposition of gambling paraphernalia, prohibited
weapons, criminal instruments, and other contraband shall be made in accordance with article 18.18 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure as it may be amended from time to time. The disposition of explosive weapons and
chemical dispensing devices shall be made in accordance with article 18.181 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
as it may be amended from time to time. The disposition of seized weapons shall be made in accordance with
article 18.19 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as it may be amended from time to time.
(j) Transfer of title. If a purchaser of surplus or salvage personal property at a sale held in accordance with this
section complies in good faith with the conditions of the sale and the applicable rules of the competitive sealed
bid or a public auction, the city manager or his designated representative shall sign and transfer title to the
property.
(Ordinance 09-06, sec. 2-1, adopted 6/1/06)
State law reference–Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed property, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 18.17.
Sec. 3.06.072 Real property
All real property owned by the city may only be disposed of in accordance with state law. (Ordinance 09-06, sec.
2-1.1, adopted 6/1/06)
State law reference–Sale of real property by public auction or sealed bid, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 253.008.
Secs. 3.06.073–3.06.100 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/720
Division 4. Sale of Seized Real Property to Nonprofit Organizations for Development of Affordable
Housing
Sec. 3.06.101 Intent
It is the intent of the city council in adopting this division to establish, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code section 253.010, as amended, an alternate manner of sale of tax-foreclosed and seized real
property to nonprofit organizations to provide for affordable housing in the city. (1977 Code, sec. 12-121)
Sec. 3.06.102 Definitions
For purposes of this division:
Land or property. Any real property that has been acquired by the city for itself or as trustee for any other taxing
unit pursuant to V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code chs. 33 and 34, as amended, by:
(1) Foreclosure of a tax lien; or
(2) Seizure.
Taxing unit. A taxing unit, as defined in V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code section 1.04(12), as amended, that is a
party to a judgment for delinquent taxes on a property or that has acquired seized property pursuant to a tax
warrant.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-122)
Sec. 3.06.103 Sale authorized; conditions
Notwithstanding any conflicting provision of this division, land on which a tax lien has been foreclosed in favor
of the city or land that has been seized by the city may be sold to a nonprofit organization for the purpose of
providing affordable housing in accordance with this division and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code section
253.010, as amended. The land may be located anywhere within the corporate city limits, but must be currently
zoned for residential use. Any nonprofit organization purchasing land under this division must develop the land
for sale or lease of affordable housing units to low-income individuals and families within three (3) years of
obtaining a quitclaim deed from the city. The affordable housing may be single-family or multifamily units.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-123)
Sec. 3.06.104 Payment
(a) A nonprofit organization that purchases land under this division shall pay the following amounts to the city
for the land:
(1) A fixed price of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for up to seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet of land purchased under a single proposal, plus one hundred thirty-three hundredths cent
($0.133) for each additional square foot of land purchased under the proposal, which amounts will be
distributed by the city in accordance with V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code section 34.06, as amended;
and
(2) A sum equal to the actual fees charged by the county clerk for recording in the real property
records the sheriff's deed and the quitclaim deed for the land.
(b) No amount paid under this section may be refunded by the city, even if the land reverts to the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-124)
Sec. 3.06.105 Quitclaim deed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/720
The quitclaim deed to the land must contain all of the following:
(1) A copy or summary of the proposal from the nonprofit organization for the land and a
requirement that the land be developed by the nonprofit organization in accordance with the proposal
and the timetable specified in the proposal.
(2) A possibility of reverter with right of reentry provided that:
(A) The property may revert to the city under the conditions set forth herein; and
(B) The nonprofit organization and its successors and assigns shall be responsible for
removal of all liens and encumbrances against the property that have occurred since the
nonprofit organization received the quitclaim deed from the city.
(3) Deed restrictions that:
(A) Restrict:
(i) The sale and resale of owner-occupied property to low-income individuals or
families for five (5) years after the date the deed from the nonprofit organization to the
initial homebuyer is filed in the real property records of the county in which the property
is located; and
(ii) The lease or occupancy of any rental property developed on the land to low-income
individuals or families for fifteen (15) years after the date of initial occupancy of the
property;
(B) Require the nonprofit organization, for fifteen (15) years from the date of initial
occupancy of rental property developed on the land, to maintain fifty (50) percent of any
multifamily housing units for occupancy by low-income individuals or families as affordable
housing;
(C) Require the nonprofit organization to develop all proposed housing units on the land in
accordance with this division and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws
within three (3) years after receiving the quitclaim deed to the land and to obtain inspections
and approval of the housing units by the city before initial occupancy;
(D) Require any low-income individual or family who purchases a housing unit on the land
or, if a housing unit is not owner-occupied, the nonprofit organization that constructed the rental
housing unit to maintain each housing unit and all improvements on the land in accordance with
this division and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws during the five-year or
fifteen-year affordability period, whichever applies;
(E) Require the five-year and fifteen-year affordability restrictions of this section, whichever
applies, to be enforced:
(i) In the case of the initial sale of owner-occupied property, by the nonprofit
organization, which must submit to the city manager verification of income information
for the purchasers of the housing unit at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to closing and
receive the city manager's written approval of the low-income qualifications of that
purchaser;
(ii) In the case of subsequent resales of owner-occupied property, by the owner of a
housing unit, who must submit verification to the city manager income information for a
subsequent purchaser at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to closing and receive the city
manager's written approval of the low-income qualifications of that purchaser; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/720
(iii) In the case of rental property, by the nonprofit organization, which must submit to
the city manager monthly tenant income and rental information as specified and required
by the city manager and permit the city to conduct annual inspections of rental property
for compliance with this division and all applicable city ordinances and state and federal
laws; and
(F) Require the nonprofit organization to provide need-based social services to tenants of any
rental property developed on the land that contains more than twenty-five (25) housing units.
(4) An indemnification of the city and other affected taxing units by the nonprofit organization.
(5) A statement and acknowledgment that the property is quitclaimed subject to all redemption
rights provided by state law.
(6) Such other terms and conditions as are required by the city for the resale of tax-foreclosed or
seized property, whichever applies.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-125)
ARTICLE 3.07 CIVIL SERVICE FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 3.07.001 Classifications and number of positions
(a) Police department. The police department of the city shall have one (1) police chief and the following
classified positions:
Captain 1
Sergeant 5
Full-time officers 17
Part-time officers* 6
*not to exceed more than 32 hours in a work cycle
(b) Fire department. The fire department of the city shall have one (1) fire chief and the following classified
positions:
Captains 3
Lieutenants 3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/720
Full-time firefighters 12
Part-time firefighters* 15
*not to exceed more than 3 shifts in a work cycle
Sec. 3.07.002 Duties established; funding of positions
The city manager by and through the chief of police and the fire chief, respectively, shall hereinafter provide for
and establish such duties for each classification as are appropriate considering the size and function of the
department. The positions created herein are subject to funding by adoption of the official budget, as amended,
of the city.
(Ordinance 11-11 adopted 9/19/11)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
Access. Admission; liberty to approach.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-1)
Abandon. The dumping, deserting or leaving of any animal on public or private property with the intent of
terminating any further responsibility for the animal; or failing to properly redeem any animal impounded or
quarantined by the city.
Adoption. The purchase of a dog or cat from the City of Seagoville for pet purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/720
Animal adoption agency. A governmental animal control or animal services department, or any organization
approved by the animal control authority and registered with the city that shelters animals for the purpose of
protection, rescue and eventual placement in a home where proper care can be given to the animal.
Animal services department. A person or persons, or an establishment authorized by the chief of police for
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs, cats or other animals which come into custody of
the city in the performance of their official duties and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Assistance animal. An animal that is specially trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an
individual with a disability or by the virtue of a natural aptitude or acquired ability is able to provide therapeutic
treatment, mitigation, safety or rescue.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Cat. Felis catus. (1977 Code, sec. 4-1)
Chicken. A domesticated fowl that is commonly raised by people for its eggs and meat; a hen or a rooster.
(Ordinance 25-2017 adopted 11/6/17)
Dog. All domesticated members of the family Canidae, but shall not include wolves, jackals, foxes or any other
wild or dangerous member of such family. An adult dog is one which is more than six (6) months of age. (1977
Code, sec. 4-1)
Domestic animal.
(1) Livestock;
(2) A dog;
(3) A cat;
(4) A ferret;
(5) Any bird, other than one in the Falconiforms or Strigiforms Order, that is commonly kept as a
human's companion;
(6) Any “pocket pet,” such as a mouse, hamster, gerbil, guinea pig, or rabbit, that is commonly
kept as a human's companion;
(7) Any fish, such as a goldfish or tropical fish, that is commonly kept as a human's companion;
and
(8) Any nonvenomous and nonconstrictor reptile or amphibian that is commonly kept as a human's
companion.
Euthanasia. A humane painless method to end life for animals including those suffering, injured, contagious, or
sick or as required by any state or federal law, as it currently exists or may be amended.
Feral cat. Any homeless, wild, or untamed cat.
Hen. A female chicken.
Hobby breeder. Any person who intentionally or unintentionally causes or allows the breeding or studding of a
dog or a cat or engages in the breeding of more than 1 (one) litter of dogs and/or cats per household or premises
per calendar year, whether or not such animal(s) are made available for sale, adoption, or other placement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/720
Hybrid. A product of the mating of two (2) different species of animals regardless of the number of generations
born since the original mating.
Inhumane treatment. Any treatment to any animal which deprives the animal of necessary substance including
food, water or protection from weather, or any treatment of any animal such as overloading, overworking,
tormenting, beating, mutilating or teasing, or other abnormal treatment as may be determined by the animal
services department or a law enforcement officer.
Keep within the city. The harboring or owning of dogs or cats permanently located or living at any location
within the city.
Kennel. House of shelter; place where animals are bred or lodged.
Litter. A litter consists of one (1) or more puppies or kittens.
Livestock. Any horses, mules, donkeys, ponies, cattle, bulls, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs, of any and all kinds
regardless of sex.
Local rabies control authority. The person designated by the city council in accordance with Texas Health and
Safety Code § 826.017.
Microchip implant. A passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a hypodermic-type
syringe device. Each microchip shall contain a unique and original number that is read by an electronic scanning
device for purposes of animal identification and recovery by the animal's owners.
Owner. Any person who owns, keeps. shelters, maintains, feeds, harbors or has temporary or permanent custody
of a domestic or prohibited animal, or who knowingly permits a domestic or prohibited animal to remain on or
about any premises occupied by that person over which that person has control. An animal shall be deemed to be
owned by a person who harbored it, fed it, or sheltered it for five (5) consecutive days or more. If a person under
the age of seventeen (17) years owns an animal subject to the provisions of this chapter, the head of the
household of which such person under the age of seventeen (17) years is a member shall be the person
responsible for the animal under this chapter. Such household head may himself be under the age of seventeen
(17) years and therefore subject to prosecution under this chapter. There may be more than one (1) person
responsible for an animal.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Pen. Small enclosure; closely confined; shut up. (1977 Code, sec. 4-1)
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity.
Prohibited animal. Any animal, except birds kept in a cage or aviary that is not regulated by international,
federal or state law, or common domestic species which include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs or laboratory
mice or rats, and regardless of state or duration of captivity, that poses a potential physical or disease threat to
the public or that is protected by international, federal or state regulations, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Class reptilian. Family Helodermatidea (venomous lizards); Family Viperidae (rattlesnakes,
copperheads, cottonmouths, other pit vipers and true vipers); Family Elapidae (coral snakes. cobras,
mambas, and other elapids); the following listed species of Family Colubridae-Dispholidus typus
(Boomslang), Hyrodynastes gigas (water cobra), Boiga (mangrove snake), and Thelotornis (African
twig snake) only; Order Phidia, Family Boidae (racers, boas, water snakes, and pythons); and Order
Crocodilia (crocodiles. alligators, caimans, and gavials);
(2) Class Aves. Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles, and vultures); Subdivision Ratitae
(such as ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus); and Order Strigiforms (such as owls);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/720
(3) Class Mammalia. Order Carnivora, Family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars,
leopards, and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; Family Canidae (such as
wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, dingos, coyotes, and jackals), except domesticated dogs; Family
Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, martens, mink, and badgers), except ferrets; Family
Procyonidae (raccoon); Family Ursidae (such as bears); Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and
common opossums); Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters, and armadillos); Order Proboscidea
(elephants); Order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, and gorillas); Order Rodentia (such as
porcupines); and Order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison, and camels); and
(4) Animals not listed. The animal services director may declare any species of animal not listed in
this subsection as “prohibited” if the confinement of the animal within the city can be shown to
constitute a threat to public health and safety.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Puppies. Dogs which are less than six (6) months of age. (1977 Code, sec. 4-1)
Rescue group. A nonprofit organization with a 501(c)3 approved by the animal services department and
registered with the city that shelters animals for the purpose of protection, rescue, and eventual placement in a
home where proper care can be given to the animal.
Retail pet store. A business that regularly sells animals for pet purposes to an ultimate owner. The term includes
any owner, operator, agent, or employee of the business.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Roam. To wander about. (1977 Code, sec. 4-1)
Rooster. An adult male chicken.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the animal services
department.
Serious bodily injury. Any physical injury that involves a substantial risk of death, disfigurement, or impairment
of any part of the body, including but not limited to a broken bone or a laceration requiring either multiple
stitches or cosmetic surgery.
Service animal. Has the same meaning as assistance animal.
Shelter. Shelter for a dog that shall effectively protect the animal from any form of cold, overheating, inclement
weather and direct effects of wind, rain, snow, ice or the sun. By way of example, and not limitation, a shelter
may consist of a three-sided structure with a roof that is nailed together to prevent any wind from coming
through. The shelter should be on a low platform to keep it off the ground. The shelter shall provide shade
during hot weather months with provisions for cooling the animal when temperatures exceed ninety (90) degrees
Fahrenheit. During temperatures fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or lower auxiliary heat or clean, dry bedding
material shall be provided for insulation against the cold and replaced as needed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/720
Sterilized. An animal rendered incalculable of reproduction.
Stray. An unrestrained domestic animal outside the boundaries of the premises owned, leased, or legally
occupied by the animal's own.
Vaccination. An injection of the United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered
by a licensed veterinarian.
Veterinarian. A veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in one (1) or more of the fifty (50) states or
a person who practices veterinary medicine on an installation of the armed forces or National Guard.
Wild animal. Any animal not normally considered domesticated regardless of the state or duration of captivity,
that can typically be found in a wild state which, because of its size, vicious nature, potential disease threat, or
other natural characteristic(s), would constitute a danger to human life, property or domestic animals, or any
animal that is restricted from ownership by any international, federal, or state law including, but not limited to,
the following animals:
(1) Reptiles. Venomous reptiles, crocodiles, alligators, any reptile that typically reaches a total
length greater than eight (8) feet, and iguanas;
(2) Birds. Emus, ostriches, or rheas;
(3) Mammals. Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, bobcats, wolves, dingoes, coyotes,
jackals, elephants, armadillos, kangaroos, wallabies, wallaroos, opossums, beavers, porcupines,
weasels, martins, minks, badgers, pandas, bears, racoons, bats, foxes, skunks, cheetahs, servals,
caracals, hyenas, squirrels, wild rabbits, or nonhuman primates;
(4) Any species illegal to own under federal or state law, or nay animal which is, or may be
hereafter, listed as a “high risk” animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act;
(5) Any hybrid of any animal classified as a wild animal.
Wild animal class I. Nonnative wildlife that present a serious threat to public health or safety including, but not
limited to, chimpanzees, gorillas, gibbons, drills, mandrills, orangutans, baboons, siamangs, cheetahs, leopards,
jaguars, tigers, lions, cougars, panthers, bears, rhinoceros, elephants, hippopotamuses, alligators, crocodiles
(except dwarf), gavials, black caimans, Komodo dragons, venomous reptiles, Africa golden cats, African
hunting dogs, and any hybrid of any animal classified as a wild animal class. For the purposes of this chapter, all
wild animals class I are wild animals by definition and subject to regulation as either or both.
Wild animal class II. Native wildlife that present as serious threat to public health or safety, including, but not
limited to, bobcats, coyotes, wolves, cougars, bears, alligators, wild hogs (also known as “feral hogs”),
rattlesnakes (any species), copperhead snakes, cottonmouth snakes, coral snakes, Massasaugas, other venomous
reptiles, badgers, coatis, fox (any species), javelina, racoons, skunks (any species), and any hybrid of any animal
classified as a wild animal class II.
Wildlife educational center. An organization that has met all of the state and federal requirements to possess and
display wild or domestic animals for educational purposes.
Wildlife rehabilitator. A person holding all current state and/or federal permits needed to temporarily house
allowed native wild animal species in his or her possession with the goal of rehabilitating the animal(s) and
releasing it back into its natural habitat in accordance with all state and federal laws.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Zoological educational outreach display. Any temporary spectacle, display, event exhibition, or act where the
operator has met all state and federal requirements to possess and display domestic, wild, or wild class I animals
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/720
for educational purposes.
Zoological park. Any facility other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of
nondomesticated animals, operated by a person, partnership, corporation or governmental agency.
(Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
Sec. 5.01.002 Methods of enforcement
In addition to imposing a monetary penalty against a person convicted of an offense under this chapter, a court
may do one or more of the following:
(1) Issue an injunction to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and may award expenses to the
prevailing party.
(2) Require the person, at the person's expense, to attend a responsible pet ownership program
approved by the director.
(3) Revoke any permit issued to the person under this chapter.
(4) Order the impoundment of any animal owned by the person, forfeit the person's ownership of
the animal, and award the animal to the city.
(5) Suspend the person's right to own an animal in the city for a period of time as specified by the
court.
(6) Require the person to have any animal owned by the person spayed or neutered within a time
period specified by the court.
(7) Impose any other conditions or restrictions that would reasonably abate the violation for which
the person was convicted.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.01.003 Animal shelter advisory committee
(a) An animal shelter advisory committee is hereby created for the city.
(b) The animal shelter advisory committee shall be composed of at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1)
city official, one (1) person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter, and one (1)
representative from an animal welfare organization. The above appointees would preferably be qualified voters
of the city, or at best [at least] have a business interest in the city.
(c) The city council shall appoint five (5) members to the advisory committee, including those listed in
subsection (b) above. The fifth member shall be required to be a qualified voter of the city. These members shall
serve a term of two (2) years, with places designated 1 through 5, places 1, 3, and 5 being two-year terms and
places 2 and 4 being one-year terms at the creation of this section, then all terms will be for two (2) years.
(d) The animal shelter advisory committee shall meet not less than three (3) times per year to assist the city
council and the city in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 823 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code with regard to the standards required for the maintenance and operation of an animal shelter, animal
health and disease control, training of personnel, humane care and treatment of animals, control of animals in an
animal shelter, and the transportation of animals.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-34)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/720
(e) Four (4) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. No action can be
taken by the committee without four affirmative votes. No members of the committee shall abstain from
participation unless they have a conflict of interest as defined by state law or local ordinance. The committee
shall hold an organizational meeting in August of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from
among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The chairman may participate in the
discussion of all matters coming before the committee and shall be entitled to vote. (Ordinance 25-14 adopted
10/6/14)
Sec. 5.01.004 Running at large generally
It shall be unlawful for any person raising or keeping any animal to cause, suffer or permit any such animal to
run at large within the city or to go upon the premises of another. “At large” as used in this section shall mean
that such animal is off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, a member of the
owner's family, or his servant or agent, by means of a leash or a chain of sufficient strength and length to control
the actions of such animal. (1977 Code, sec. 4-2)
Sec. 5.01.005 Dogs running at large
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog to permit such dog to run at large upon the streets,
alleys or any public place within the city. Such dog, when off the premises of its owner, shall be under the
control of its owner, a member of the owner's family, or his servant or agent, by means of a leash or chain of
sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such dog. At all other times, the dog shall be confined to
the premises of the owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the dog from
escaping therefrom, or inside the house or secured on the premises by a leash consisting of a metal chain of
sufficient strength to prevent the dog from escaping from the premises and so arranged that the dog will remain
upon the premises when the leash is extended to full length. (1977 Code, sec. 4-3)
State law reference–Restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 5.01.006 Limitation on number of dogs or cats
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city more than four (4) adult dogs or cats over the age of
three (3) months for each three thousand (3,000) square feet of accessible roaming space. The provisions of this
section shall not be applicable to any properly zoned veterinarian hospital or clinic, kennel or place of scientific
research. (1977 Code, sec. 4-3.1)
Sec. 5.01.007 Keeping swine
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a pig or hog on any property within the city limits, except that
pigs or hogs may be kept on property of the Dallas Independent School District when the area of such property
is greater than fifty (50) acres, and when such pig or hog is kept in connection with a school-sponsored or
authorized agricultural or animal husbandry project, sponsored either by the school, the Future Farmers of
America, or any school-authorized student organization.
(b) Every pig or hog shall be kept in a pen, shed or other enclosure, and every such pen, shed or other
enclosure located within the city for the keeping of such animals shall be a distance of at least three hundred
(300) feet from every building or structure used for sleeping, dining and living.
(c) Any pig or hog kept within the city shall be allowed five hundred (500) square feet for pen and lot. Any
additional pig or hog shall be granted an additional five hundred (500) square feet.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-4)
Sec. 5.01.008 Area and distance requirements for keeping livestock and fowl
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/720
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city with less than one (1) fenced acre
of accessible roaming space to keep or have, on his own or rented premises, any livestock, including cows,
horses, mules, jacks, jennies, goat, or sheep; provided, however, that for each acre of property, an owner shall be
permitted to keep a unit of livestock, consisting of a mother and offspring under the age of six (6) months; and
provided further that, in all cases, such livestock shall be kept at a distance of further than one hundred (100)
feet from the nearest private residence building or public building.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to keep or have a rooster or to
have more than six (6) hens on land of less than one (1) acre. However, it shall be lawful to keep or have six (6)
or less hens on land of less than one fenced (1) acre. In all cases, said hens shall be housed or kept in a structure
or enclosure at a distance of a minimum twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest private residence building or
public building.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city with less than one (1) fenced acre
to keep or have a rooster. An owner may have a rooster onland that is greater than one acre, provided there are at
least six (6) hens also on the property. For each property that is at least one fenced (1) acre in size, an owner
shall be permitted to keep up to one (1) rooster for every six (6) hens, not to exceed twenty (20) chickens total
per acre. In all cases, said chickens shall be kept at a distance of further than one hundred (100) feet from the
nearest private residence building or public building.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.01.009 Exceptions from livestock/fowl regulations
(a) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the temporary possession of cattle, sheep, goats, swine or fowl in the
hands of packinghouses or other slaughterhouses, nor shall this chapter prohibit the temporary exhibition of such
animals at the fairgrounds or at stock shows. The exceptions made in this section shall not relieve the persons in
charge of such animals or fowl from the operation of sections 5.01.011 and 5.01.012.
(b) There shall be an exception from section 5.01.008 of the livestock/fowl code stated herein for young
persons who are members of public, private or charter school FFA and/or 4-H organizations who are required to
maintain livestock/fowl projects. This exception shall become effective only after inspection and approval by the
city manager or designee. This approval shall be in writing and granted for no more than a ninety (90) day
period within any one (1) calendar year and can be withdrawn should said excepted animal cause a nuisance as
stated within this code. The exceptions made in this section shall not relieve the persons in charge of such
animals or fowl from the operation of sections 5.01.011 and 5.01.012.
(Ordinance 13-15 adopted 7/6/15)
Sec. 5.01.010 Keeping wild animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any wild animal within the city limits; provided, however,
that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions in
accordance with such regulations as may be established by the city manager or his designated representative.
(1) A person commits an offense if he possesses any wild animal within the city, with the following
exceptions:
(A) A governmental agency or entity performing a governmental function;
(B) A zoological park;
(C) A permitted wildlife educational center that is also in possession of all necessary state
and federal permits to possess the animal and is in compliance with all restrictions of the state
and/or federal permits;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/720
(D) A registered wildlife rehabilitator in possession of an allowed indigenous wild animal
who holds all necessary state and federal permits to possess the animal and is in compliance
with all restrictions of this section and their state and/or federal permits; or
(E) A permitted zoological educational outreach display that is also in possession of all
necessary state and federal permits to possess the animal and is in compliance with all
restrictions of this section and their state and/or federal permits.
(2) For the purposes of this chapter, the animal services director shall make the determination of
whether any animal in question is a domestic animal or a wild animal and whether any wild animal is
indigenous or allowed pursuant to the definitions in section 5.01.001 of this chapter.
(3) A person commits an offense if he is aware of a wild animal being possessed in the city and
fails to notify animal services.
(4) Each violation of this provision shall be a separate violation on a per diem basis. Each day that
a wild animal is found in the city shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 5.01.011 Maintenance of pens and enclosures
(a) All pens and enclosures wherein farm livestock, chickens, turkeys, geese, guineas or other animals are kept
shall be maintained and kept in such a manner as not to become unsanitary or offensive to persons residing in the
vicinity thereof and so as not to breed flies or in any manner cause any injury to the health of the public residing
in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure.
(b) The determination that such a pen or enclosure is unsanitary or offensive to such persons, that such pen or
enclosure is being maintained or kept so as to breed flies, or that such a pen or enclosure is maintained in any
manner as to cause any injury to the health of the public residing in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure shall be
made by the health officer or the city manager or his authorized representative. Such determination shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-8)
(c) All pens and enclosures wherein hens are kept on land of less than one (1) acre shall be designed, erected,
and maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city. Pens and enclosures shall be a 3 or more sided
structure with a minimum of one (1) square foot of roosting area per hen with a roof or cover to allow the hens
to remain dry and protected from the elements and have direct access from the roofing area to an outdoor
enclosure that is a minimum of ten (10) square feet of ground per hen. Pens and enclosures shall be easily
accessed, constructed and maintained to reasonably prevent the collection of standing water, predator proof,
thoroughly ventilated, and shall be cleaned of droppings, uneaten food, feathers, and other waste weekly or more
often if needed to prevent foul odor. All pens and enclosures shall contain fresh water at all times and food in
sufficient quantity and with nutritive value to maintain the health of the animal. (Ordinance 05-2018 adopted
3/5/18)
Sec. 5.01.012 Noisy animals
(a) No person shall harbor or keep on his premises or elsewhere any animal of any kind that makes or creates
an unreasonable disturbance of the peace of the neighbors or occupants of adjacent premises, or people living in
the vicinity thereof, or suffer or permit such animal to make or create unusual noises by howling, barking,
bawling or otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/720
(b) A person shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this section if such person shall have been notified
by the neighbors or the city manager or his designated representative of such disturbance and shall have failed,
for a period of twenty-four (24) hours, to correct such disturbance and prevent its recurrence.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-9)
Sec. 5.01.013 Animal microchipping and permits
(a) The owner or keeper of any dog or cat must have the animal implanted with a registered microchip before
the animal attains six (6) months of age. A dog or cat is exempt from this requirement if the dog or cat is
determined to be medically unsuitable for microchipping by a licensed veterinarian in writing. If a dog or cat is
determined to be medically unsuitable for microchipping, the owner shall have the dog or cat permanently
marked with an identifying tattoo by a licensed veterinarian. Proof of medical unsuitability for microchipping
along with the identifying tattoo number and owner's or keeper's name, address and telephone number must be
provided to animal services within thirty (30) days of tattooing. If there is a change in contact information, the
owner or keeper of a tattooed dog or cat shall update contact information with animal services within thirty (30)
days of the date of the change in contact information. If there is a change in ownership of a tattooed dog or cat,
the initial owner or keeper shall be responsible for notifying animal services of the change within thirty (30)
days of the date of the change in ownership. The new owner or keeper shall be responsible for providing animal
services with the new owner's or keeper's name, address and telephone number within thirty (30) days after the
change in ownership.
(b) The owner or keeper of any dog or cat must present a vaccination certificate issued pursuant to section
5.01.014.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
(1) The dog or cat owner is a nonresident of this city and is keeping the subject pet animal in the
city for fewer than sixty (60) days;
(2) The dog or cat owner has been a resident of this city for fewer than thirty (30) days; or
(3) The dog or cat had been abandoned or lost and the temporary owner has had the dog or cat for
fewer than thirty (30) days.
(d) Validity of previously issued license. A currently valid dog or cat license shall continue to be valid until its
expiration. On or before its expiration, the owner shall have the animal implanted with a registered microchip in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(e) Maintaining current microchip registration.
(1) The owner or keeper of a dog or cat shall maintain current registration with a microchip
registration company and animal services.
(2) If there is a change in contact information of an owner or keeper of a registered microchipped
dog or cat, the owner or keeper shall update contact information, including new address or telephone
number with the microchip registration company and animal services within thirty (30) days of the
date of the change in contact information.
(3) If there is a change in ownership of a registered dog or cat, the initial owner or keeper shall be
responsible for ensuring that the microchip is no longer registered in the initial owner's or keeper's
name within thirty (30) days of the date of change in ownership. The new owner or keeper shall be
responsible for re-registering the microchip to include any new address and telephone number and
have the registration information transferred to the new owner's or keeper's name within thirty (30)
days after the change in ownership.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/720
(f) A one-time registration fee of $25.00 will be charged to the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to register the
microchip with animal services.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
State law references–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.; confidentiality of certain
information in dog or cat registry, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.0311.
Sec. 5.01.014 Rabies vaccination for dogs and cats
Every owner of a dog or cat shall have such animal vaccinated and revaccinated against rabies as required in
state law. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 5.01.015 Confinement or quarantine of animals for rabies control
(a) Any dog, cat or domestic ferret that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits
shall be immediately and securely confined by the owner, or one having custody, at premises acceptable to the
city manager for a period of ten (10) days following the bite, scratch or attack, subject to inspection from time to
time so as to be able to determine whether such animal is affected by rabies, or such animal may be quarantined
and held for such period in any veterinary hospital approved by the city manager. After such period of time, and
in the event such animal is determined to be free from rabies, such animal may be returned to its owner, or, if not
claimed thereafter, may be given to another owner, or destroyed if a new owner cannot be found.
(b) Any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof shall be immediately and securely confined to a veterinary
hospital approved by the city manager and kept from contact with any other animal until such animal dies or
recovers.
(c) Any animal which has been exposed to rabies shall be immediately and securely confined according to the
method prescribed by the city manager for a period of not less than ninety (90) days; provided, however, that
upon authorization by the owner such animal may be humanely destroyed. Animals having current vaccination
must be revaccinated immediately and animals not having a current vaccination shall be humanely euthanized.
At the discretion of a licensed veterinarian and subject to inspection by the licensed veterinarian or his
representative from time to time to determine whether such animal is affected by rabies, such animal may be
confined by the owner of such animal at the owner's premises or at a veterinary hospital.
(d) If an animal dies while under quarantine or if an animal is determined by a veterinarian to have rabies, the
head of such animal shall be sent to the department of state health services for examination.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-12; Ordinance adopting Code)
(e) If the animal in question has a valid and current rabies vaccination, is the only animal in the household,
and wasn't in violation of any provisional section of this chapter of city ordinance at the time of the exposure, the
owner may be given the authority to quarantine the animal within his own home subject to inspection by the
animal services department at any time during the quarantine period. If the animal services director or designee
determines noncompliance has occurred approval for in home quarantine shall be revoked and the animal shall
be removed from the home and isolated at the animal shelter immediately. (Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
State law reference–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.
Sec. 5.01.016 Report of rabies or other disease communicable to humans
It shall be the duty of the owner or the harborer of any animal or practicing veterinarian to report to the city
manager all cases of rabies or other disease communicable to human beings with which he comes in contact or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/720
to which his attention has been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of
such cases. (1977 Code, sec. 4-13)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 5.01.017 Destruction of injured or sick animals
Any animal impounded or found at large within the city may be destroyed upon determination by a licensed
veterinarian that such animal has been injured or is sick and in such a state that its recovery is seriously in doubt,
or that such animal is sick and endangers the health of other animals or persons. (1977 Code, sec. 4-14)
Sec. 5.01.018 Removal of feces deposited on public or private property
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to allow an animal under such person's control or ownership to
defecate on any private or public property not owned by the person having control of the animal, without the
immediate removal of any and all feces. Any person aggrieved by such conduct shall report the name and
address of the person who has been alleged to have violated this provision. The person filing the complaint shall
appear as a witness in the municipal court. (1977 Code, sec. 4-37)
Sec. 5.01.019 Permit required for pet grooming facilities
(a) Persons wishing to operate a pet grooming facility within the city must apply for a pet grooming facility
permit. A permit shall be issued if the requisite fee is paid, and the applicant complies with the following
requirements:
(1) Cold and hot water and appropriate chemicals for disinfection/sanitizing of cages, grooming
tables, and grooming utensils is easily accessible to all parts of the animal housing areas;
(2) The temperature in the animal housing areas is maintained between 60–79 degrees Farenheit at
all times. The temperature in individual cages is maintained at a level that is healthful for the species
and breed of animals being housed and adequate ventilation is maintained in all animal housing
areas;
(3) All cages and enclosures are constructed of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and
disinfecting. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient size that at minimum the animal will have room
to stand, turn, and lie down in a natural position. Each cage and enclosure is thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected after each use;
(4) When necessary, there is sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet needs of each individual animal;
(5) All animals held overnight must be fed and watered, and all cages housing animals cleaned
every day including Sundays and holidays;
(6) Written procedures are in place to notify animal services of any local rabies control incident as
required by section 5.01.016 of this chapter.
(b) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages, or represents a pet grooming facility that requires a
permit and refuses, upon request by animal services during business hours, to make his animals, that portion of
the premises used to house or service the animals, facilities, equipment, and any necessary registrations,
veterinary records, feeding logs or permits available for inspection for the purpose of ascertaining compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) A person commits an offense if he owns, operates, manages, or represents a pet grooming facility and fails
to comply with any requirement set forth in subsection (a). Each animal or condition in violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/720
(d) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages or operates a pet grooming facility without a valid
permit.
Sec. 5.01.020 Animals as prizes, promotions, and novelties
A person commits an offense if he sells, exchanges, raffles, auctions, or gives away or offers to sell, exchange,
raffle, auction, or give away any live animal as:
(1) A prize;
(2) An inducement to enter a place of amusement or a business establishment; or
(3) An inducement to participate in a charitable fund-raising event.
Sec. 5.01.021 Intact animal permit
(a) A person commits an offense if he breeds a dog or cat without a valid intact animal permit for the dog or
cat. A separate permit is required for each dog or cat that the person keeps unsterilized for breeding purposes.
(b) An intact animal permit may only be issued for a dog or cat:
(1) That is currently in compliance with the vaccination requirements of section 5.01.014 of this
chapter;
(2) That is injected with a microchip implant and registered with a national registry and animal
services for purposes of identification and/or recovery of the animal by its owner, unless a licensed
veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat should not be injected with a microchip implant for health
reasons;
(3) Whose owner:
(A) Is a member of a purebred dog or cat club, approved by the director, that maintains and
enforces a code of ethics for breeding that includes restrictions on breeding dogs and cats with
genetic defects and life-threatening health problems common to the breed; or
(B) Has, at the owner's expense, satisfactorily completed a course on responsible pet
ownership offered by the city or otherwise approved by the director.
(c) To obtain an intact animal permit, a person must submit an application to the director (on a form provided
by the director for that purpose) and pay an annual intact animal permit fee of $250.00. The intact animal permit
application must include:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The location where the dog or cat is harbored;
(3) A description of the dog or cat;
(4) Proof that the animal is qualified for an intact animal permit under subsection (b) of this
section; and
(5) Any other information determined necessary by the director for the enforcement and
administration of this section.
(d) An intact animal permit expires one year after the date of issuance and may be renewed by applying in
accordance with subsection (c) of this section. If the director does not receive an application for a permit renewal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/720
within 45 days after the expiration of the permit, a $25.00 late fee will be added to the permit fee.
(e) An intact animal permit is not transferable.
(f) A permittee commits an offense if he allows a permitted female dog or cat to have more than one litter
during the permit term.
(g) In order to prevent the overbreeding of animals, each permit authorizes the whelping of no more than one
(1) litter per female dog or cat in any twelve-month period and no more than one (1) litter per domestic
household in any twelve-month period.
Exception: The fee may be waived if the owner provides as proof a certificate of surgical sterilization or spaying
of the female dog or cat within two (2) weeks of the breeding date or prior to whelping.
(h) A permittee commits an offense if the permittee:
(1) Allows the offspring of a female dog or cat for which he holds an intact animal permit to be
sold, adopted, or otherwise transferred, regardless of compensation, before the offspring have reached
at least eight weeks of age and have been vaccinated against common diseases;
(2) Fails to prominently display the intact animal permit number on any advertisement by the
permittee for the sale, adoption, or other transfer of any dog or cat, regardless of compensation; or
(3) Sells, adopts, or otherwise transfers any dog or cat, regardless of compensation and fails to:
(A) Include a statement signed by the permittee attesting to knowledge of the animal's health
and immunization history;
(B) Prominently display the intact animal permit number on any sales receipt or transfer
document;
(C) Provide the intact animal permit number to any person who purchases, adopts, or
receives any dog or cat from the permittee;
(D) Provide written information regarding the vaccination, registration, and sterilization
requirements of this chapter applicable to the dog or cat; or
(E) Provide to the director (on a form provided by the director for that purpose) the name,
address, and telephone number of the dog's or cat's new owner within five days after the date of
the sale, adoption, or other transfer of the animal.
(i) The director shall deny or revoke an intact animal permit if the director determines that the applicant or
permittee:
(1) Failed to comply with any provision of this chapter; or
(2) Intentionally made a false statement as to a material matter on the intact animal permit
application.
(j) If the director denies or revokes an intact animal permit, the director shall notify the applicant or permittee
in writing of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permittee may appeal the
decision of the director to the city manager. The filing of an appeal stays an action of the director in revoking the
permit until the city manager makes a final decision.
Sec. 5.01.022 Restrictions on unsterilized dogs and cats
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/720
(a) An owner of a dog or cat commits an offense if the animal is not spayed or neutered.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that:
(1) The animal is under six months of age;
(2) A licensed veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat should not be spayed or neutered for health
reasons or is permanently nonfertile:
(3) The animal is being held for sale by a retail pet store or for adoption by animal services or an
animal welfare organization;
(4) The animal is a competition cat or competition dog;
(5) The animal is a service animal; or
(6) The owner holds a valid intact animal permit issued under section 5.01.021 of this chapter for
the animal.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.01.023 Permit required for zoological educational outreach displays and zoological parks
(a) The presenter or owner of a zoological educational outreach display or zoological park must apply for an
annual permit from the animal services department. The applicable annual permit fee, as adopted in the city's
master fee schedule, must be submitted with the permit application, along with a copy of all applicable
licenses/permits as required under state and federal law. In order to qualify for a permit for a zoological
educational outreach display or a zoological park, the site must have a minimum of twenty (20) acres, and the
zoning applicable to the subject property must be a planned development providing for such use.
(1) Zoological educational outreach display. The presenter or owner of the zoological educational
outreach display or the property owner where the display is to take place must provide written notice
to the animal services department at least ten (10) business days prior to the display. The written
notice must include the exact dates, times, locations, transportation and housing arrangements, and
animals involved in each performance or display. The permit will be valid for period of no longer
than thirty (30) days, and the animal services department is authorized to approve no more than two
(2) thirty (30) day extensions per calendar year.
(2) Zoological parks. The owner or operator of a zoological park must submit an application for a
permit at least thirty (30) days prior to commencement of operations. The permit will be valid for one
year, and must be renewed on an annual basis.
(b) Permit conditions. The display of the animals in an educational outreach display or a zoo must comply
with applicable state and federal law, as well as the following conditions:
(1) All cages or other animal housing areas are kept clean and free of wastes;
(Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
(2) Fresh, potable water is available to all animals. Containers for food and water are cleaned and
disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and mounted, placed, or
weighted so the animal cannot turn them over;
(3) If indoors, the ambient temperature in the animal housing areas is maintained between 60–79
degrees Fahrenheit at all times. The temperature in individual cages is maintained at a level that is
healthful for the species of animals being housed and adequate ventilation is maintained in all animal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/720
housing areas. If outdoors, the display must immediately be halted if at any time the heat index
exceeds 95 degrees Fahrenheit;
(4) All cages and enclosures are constructed of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and
disinfecting. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient size that at minimum the animal will have room
to stand, turn, and lie down in a natural position. Each cage and enclosure is thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected each day. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient strength to contain the animal being
housed within it. Each cage and enclosure is locked or otherwise secured to prevent the escape of any
animal being kept;
(5) Daily feeding records are maintained to ensure that all animals are fed a proper and nutritious
diet specific to the species' needs. The daily feeding records shall be maintained or posted in a readily
accessible location. All veterinarians' orders must be in writing and kept on record and available for
inspection during the animal display's regular business hours. In general, all animals under six (6)
months of age are to be fed at least two (2) times per 24-hour period, or as advised by a veterinarian,
and all other animals must be fed at least one (1) time per 24-hour period, or as advised by a
veterinarian. Food for each animal shall be served in a clean dish so constructed or mounted that the
animal cannot readily tip it over and be of the type that are removable for cleaning. Disposable
feeding dishes are acceptable for one-time use only. Animals that do not require daily feedings are
exempt from the daily feeding requirement; however, feeding records shall be maintained and the
animal shall be kept in a healthful body condition;
(6) Animals exhibiting any sign or symptom of illness or disease, such as diarrhea, vomiting, nasal
discharge, or malaise, shall immediately be removed from the animal display;
(7) All animals being displayed must have a health certificate that was issued by a licensed
veterinarian within the twelve (12) months preceding the first day of the animal display;
(8) Each bird must have sufficient room to stand upright without touching the top of their housing
area and to spread their wings fully without touching a side of their housing area. Each bird shall
have access to a perch that is placed horizontal to other perches in the same cage and is of adequate
size for the species being housed. The housing area must be sufficiently ventilated. The housing area
must be cleaned every day and disinfected when birds are sold or otherwise transferred. Large birds
shall have separate cages from smaller birds. There shall be clean water and suitable food available to
the birds at all times and all troughs or other receptacles must be easily accessible to the birds and
placed so that the birds cannot turn them over or defile their contents. Injured, diseased, or dead birds
shall be immediately removed from housing areas holding healthy birds;
(9) There is sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet needs of each individual animal;
(10) All animals are fed and watered, and all cages are cleaned and disinfected every day during
the animal display, including Sundays and holidays;
(11) All animals required by the Texas State Rabies Control Act to have a rabies vaccination must
have proof of being currently vaccinated against rabies;
(12) All areas used by the presenter are thoroughly cleaned and all wastes are properly disposed of
at the conclusion of the display. All manure and soiled bedding shall be removed immediately and all
animal waste and specific tools for its removal must be stored in designated areas restricted from
public access;
(13) Written procedures are in place to notify the animal services department of any local rabies
control incident as required by section 5.01.016 of this chapter;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/720
(14) The zoological educational outreach display shall be divided into two (2) distinct areas that
are separated by a space of no less than six (6) feet to prevent accidental contact between an animal
and a spectator. The permit holder and presenter shall be responsible for controlling visitor traffic to
prevent overcrowding in either of these areas;
(15) The permit holder shall post signs and verbally notify visitors that that they are not allowed to
touch, approach, or otherwise make direct contact with an animal being displayed unless specifically
allowed by the permit holder or his representative;
(16) All areas must provide adequate ventilation for both animals and people;
(17) All displayed animals must be controlled with the restraint requirements of this section and
any wild or wild class I animals must be under direct physical control of the permit holder or his
representative at all times unless the animal is confined by a transport or holding cage designed to
prevent its escape. If the direct physical control is by means of a tether, it must be of proper strength
to control the animal, attached via an appropriately sized and fitted collar or harness, and of a length
of not more than three (3) feet. Birds may give free-flight demonstrations provided that the display is
indoors and the birds are under the direct physical control of the permit holder or his representative
when not in flight;
(18) Contact with domestic and properly restrained wild animals may occur provided that the
permit holder complies with all of the following:
(A) Allows human contact with wild animals only if the wild animal is under direct
supervision of the permit holder or his representative to prevent injuries to the audience and the
wild animal;
(B) Posts signs at all entry areas notifying visitors that they are entering an animal area and
that they are not to eat, drink, smoke, place their hands in their mouths, or use bottles or
pacifiers while in the animal area and warning visitors that senior citizens, pregnant women,
young children, and persons who are immunocompromised or mentally impaired are at an
increased risk of disease, illness, or injury and should take extra precautions to protect
themselves;
(C) Prohibits strollers, food, and beverages from being possessed, prepared, served, or
consumed in the display area and provides storage or holding areas for these items for visitors;
and
(D) Provides handwashing stations and/or hand sanitizer for all audience members that come
into direct contact with an animal. These facilities must be accessible for all visitors, including
children and persons with disabilities. Handwashing stations shall comply with all local, state,
and federal waste water restrictions and requirements;
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
(19) Class I or class II animals are allowed to be displayed only in a zoological park provided that:
(A) The wild animal class I or class II was born and raised in captivity;
(B) The wild animal class I or class II is not a venomous reptile unless the reptile is going to
be continually contained within a locked, escape-proof cage or enclosure with solid walls to
prevent contact with a person;
(C) The permit holder provides a written plan of containment, restraint, and course of action
should the wild animal class I or class II escape;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/720
(D) A physical barrier is in place between the wild animal class I or class II and the audience
and no direct contact with the animal is allowed by anyone other than the permit holder or his
representative;
(E) The permit holder possesses and makes available all of the necessary state and/or federal
permits to possess and display all animals in the display; and
(F) The permit holder agrees to comply with the animal services director's order to
immediately stop the display and/or remove the wild animal class I or class II if there is a public
safety concern that requires such action;
(20) The animal services director may waive the permit fee if the permit holder is recognized by
the Internal Revenue Service as a nonprofit organization.
(c) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages, or represents a zoological educational outreach display
or zoological park that requires a permit and denies or refuses to make available for inspection, upon request by
the animal services during the hour before and entire duration of the zoological educational outreach display, his
animals, that portion of the premises used to house or service the animals, the facilities for the animal display,
equipment for the animal display, or any necessary registrations, records, feeding logs or permits.
(d) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages, operates, represents, or hires a zoological educational
outreach display or a zoological park without a valid permit.
(e) A person commits an offense if he owns, operate, manages, represents, or hires a zoological educational
outreach display or zoological park and fails to maintain any condition in subsection (b). Each animal or
condition in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
Sec. 5.01.024 Wildlife educational centers
(a) A wildlife educational center, as defined herein, shall obtain a wildlife educational center permit from the
animal services director and shall comply with any and all applicable local, federal and state regulations. The
animal services director shall require the owner or operator of the center to present proof that the center has all
the required federal and state permits prior to issuing the permit.
(b) Permitted wildlife educational centers shall obtain written permission from the animal services director to
keep any nonindigenous wild animal or any class I wild animal, or indigenous wild animals or any class II wild
animal, and shall meet all housing requirements set forth by the animal services director for the purposes of
safely housing the animal.
(c) The animal services director shall waive the permit fee if the center is a nonprofit center.
(d) A person commits an offense if he owns, operates or manages a wildlife educational center which has a
permit issued by the city and he refuses, upon request by the animal services, to make his animals, the portion of
his premises used to house or service the animals, facilities, equipment, and any necessary registrations or
permits available for inspection during the establishment's regular business hours or at any other reasonable
hour.
(e) A person commits an offense if he owns, operates or manages a wildlife educational center without a
permit or if he owns, operates or manages a wildlife education center and fails to maintain any condition in this
section. Each animal or condition in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 5.01.025 Wildlife rehabilitators
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/720
(a) All wildlife rehabilitators, as defined herein, shall obtain a wildlife rehabilitator permit from the animal
services director and shall comply with any and all applicable federal state and local regulations regarding the
handling and release of wildlife. The animal services director shall require wildlife rehabilitator to present proof
that he has any required federal and state permits for wildlife rehabilitation prior to issuing the permit.
(b) A person commits an offense if he is a permitted wildlife rehabilitator and he refuses, upon request by the
animal services, to make his animals, the portion of his premises that is used to house or service animals,
facilities, equipment, and any necessary registrations or permits available for inspection during business hours. If
there are no regular business hours, then the inspection may occur during reasonable hours.
(c) A person commits an offense if he operates as a wildlife rehabilitator and fails to register with the animal
services.
(d) A person commits an offense if he operates as a wildlife rehabilitator and is in possession of:
(1) Nonnative wildlife and class I wildlife;
(2) Venomous reptiles;
(3) Native wild cats, including but not limited to, ocelots, jaguarundis, margays, bobcats, and
cougars;
(4) Native wild canines including, but not limited to, wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
(5) Native javelinas, feral hogs, or deer; or
(6) Any hybrid of any animal whose possession is prohibited by this chapter;
(e) The prohibition in subsection (d) shall not apply to the possession of deer on property that is properly
zoned for livestock.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.01.026 Permit required for animal exhibition
(a) The presenter or owner of the animal exhibition, or the property owner where the exhibit is to take place,
must apply for an animal exhibition permit at least ten (10) business days before the performance or display and
provide exact dates, times, locations, transportation and housing arrangements, and animals involved in each
performance or display. Permits shall only be issued to animal exhibitions that are in possession of all state and
federal permits required to present such exhibitions. A permit shall be issued and remain valid for an exhibition
period of no longer than thirty (30) days, and the animal services department is authorized to approve no more
than two (2) thirty (30) day extensions per calendar year. The animal exhibition must pay the required fee and
comply with the following requirements: (Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
(1) All cages or other animal housing areas are kept clean and free of wastes;
(2) Fresh, potable water is available to all animals at all times. Containers for food and water are
cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and mounted,
placed, or weighted so the animal cannot turn them over;
(3) If indoors, the ambient temperature in the animal housing areas is maintained between 60–79
degrees Fahrenheit at all times. The temperature in individual cages is maintained at a level that is
healthful for the species of animals being housed and adequate ventilation is maintained in all animal
housing areas. If outdoors, the exhibition must immediately be halted if at any time the heat index
exceeds 95 degrees Fahrenheit;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/720
(4) All cages and enclosures are constructed of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and
disinfecting. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient size that at minimum the animal will have room
to stand, turn, and lie down in a natural position. Each cage and enclosure is thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected each day. Each cage and enclosure is of sufficient strength to contain the animal being
housed within it. Each cage and enclosure is locked or otherwise secured to prevent the escape of any
animal being kept;
(5) Daily feeding records are maintained to ensure that all animals are fed a proper and nutritious
diet specific to the species' needs. The daily feeding records shall be maintained or posted in a readily
accessible location. All veterinarians' orders must be in writing and kept on record and available for
inspection during the animal exhibition's regular business hours. In general, all animals under six (6)
months of age are to be fed at least two (2) times per twenty-four (24) hour period, or as advised by a
veterinarian, and all other animals must be fed at least one (1) time per 24-hour period, or as advised
by a veterinarian. Food for each animal shall be served in a clean dish so constructed or mounted that
the animal cannot readily tip it over and be of the type that is removable for cleaning. Disposable
feeding dishes are acceptable for one-time use only. Animals that do not require daily feedings are
exempt from the daily feeding requirement; however, feeding records shall be maintained and the
animal shall be kept in a healthful body condition;
(6) Animals exhibiting any sign or symptom of illness or disease, such as diarrhea, vomiting, nasal
discharge, or malaise, shall immediately be removed from the animal exhibition;
(7) All animals being exhibited must have a health certificate that was issued by a licensed
veterinarian within the twelve (12) months preceding the first day of the animal exhibition;
(8) Each bird must have sufficient room to stand upright without touching the top of its housing
area and to spread its wings fully without touching a side of its housing area. Each bird shall have
access to a perch that is placed horizontal to other perches in the same cage and is of adequate size
for the species being housed. The housing area must be sufficiently ventilated. The housing area must
be cleaned every day and disinfected when birds are sold or otherwise transferred. Large birds shall
have separate cages from smaller birds. There shall be clean water and suitable food available to the
birds at all times and all troughs or other receptacles must be easily accessible to the birds and placed
so that the birds cannot turn them over or defile their contents. Injured, diseased, or dead birds shall
be immediately removed from housing areas holding healthy birds;
(9) There is sufficient clean, dry bedding to meet needs of each individual animal;
(10) All animals are fed and watered, and all cages are cleaned and disinfected every day during
the exhibition, including Sundays and holidays;
(11) All animals required by the Texas State Rabies Control Act to have a rabies vaccination must
have proof of being currently vaccinated against rabies;
(12) Animals being used to give rides or doing other work are in good physical condition,
including their hooves or feet, and given not less than a 30-minute break for each three (3) hours
worked;
(13) All areas used by the exhibitor are thoroughly cleaned and all wastes are properly disposed of
at the conclusion of the exhibition. All manure and soiled bedding shall be removed immediately and
all animal waste and specific tools for its removal must be stored in designated areas restricted from
public access;
(14) Written procedures are in place to notify the animal services department of any local rabies
control incident as required by section;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/720
(15) The animal exhibition is divided into three (3) distinct areas that are separated by barriers:
(A) Nonanimal areas: Where animals, with the exception of service animals, are not
permitted;
(B) Transition areas: Located at both entrances and exits to animal areas; and
(C) Animal areas: Where animal contact with human beings is possible.
(16) The animal exhibition shall be designed so that there is a single entrance transition area
leading to the animal area and a separate exit transition area leading out of the animal area. The
permit holder shall be responsible for controlling visitor traffic to prevent overcrowding in any of
these areas;
(17) Entrance transition areas must be designed to facilitate education. Signs shall be posted at all
entry transition areas notifying visitors that they are entering an animal area and that they are not to
eat, drink, smoke, place their hands in their mouths, or use bottles or pacifiers while in the animal
area. Signs warning that senior citizens, pregnant women, young children, and persons who are
immunocompromised or mentally impaired are at an increased risk of disease, illness, or injury and
should take extra precautions to protect themselves shall also be posted in the entrance transition
area;
(18) Strollers, food, and beverages are allowed to be possessed, prepared, served, or consumed
only in nonanimal areas. The animal exhibition permit applicant must provide storage or holding
areas for these items for visitors;
(19) Exit transition areas must be designed to facilitate handwashing. Signs shall be posted
instructing visitors to wash their hands and illustrating proper handwashing techniques. An
appropriate number of handwashing stations shall be present in the exit transitional area.
Handwashing stations must be accessible for all visitors, including children and persons with
disabilities. Handwashing stations shall comply with all local, state, and federal waste water
restrictions and requirements. A staff member must be positioned in the exit transition area at all
times to encourage handwashing;
(20) Animal areas must provide adequate ventilation for both animals and people. Visitors may not
be allowed to access animal food or water sources. Toys, pacifiers, baby bottles, strollers, food,
beverages, or tobacco products may not be present in the animal area at any time. All manure and
soiled bedding shall be removed immediately and all animal waste and specific tools for its removal
must be stored in designated areas restricted from public access. Animals exhibiting any sign of
illness or disease, such as diarrhea, vomiting, nasal discharge, or malaise, shall immediately be
removed from the animal area. No pregnant animal may be exhibited at any time. Every animal that
is required by state law to have rabies vaccinations must have the appropriate documentation stating
that this requirement has been met. Every animal being exhibited must have a health certificate that
was issued by a licensed veterinarian within the twelve (12) months preceding the last date of the
animal exhibition;
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
(21) Any wild animal, as defined in this chapter, may not be exhibited in any animal exhibition or
otherwise possessed within the city, unless the possession is specifically allowed by and complies
with another section of this chapter. (Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
(b) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages, or represents an animal exhibition that requires a
permit and denies or refuses to make available for inspection, upon request by the animal services department
during business hours of the animal exhibition, the animals, that portion of the premises used to house or service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/720
the animals, the facilities for the animal exhibition, equipment for the animal exhibition, including any
equipment used to transport the animals, or any necessary registrations, records, feeding logs, or permits.
(c) A person commits an offense if he owns, manages, operates, represents, or hires an animal exhibition
without a valid permit. Each animal or condition found in violation of this chapter during an animal exhibition
that does not possess a valid permit shall constitute a separate offense.
(d) A person commits an offense if he owns, operates, manages, represents, or hires an animal exhibition
under this section and fails to maintain any condition in subsection (a). Each animal or condition in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 5.01.027 Display of permits required
A person commits an offense if he holds a permit for an animal establishment, commercial breeder, animal
exhibition, pet grooming facility, zoological educational outreach display, or wildlife educational center and fails
to prominently display a copy of the current permit in a public area at all times. A person commits an offense if
he holds a permit as a wildlife rehabilitator and fails to provide proof of such permit at the request of any city
enforcement agent.
Sec. 5.01.028 Imminent health hazard
(a) Ceasing operations and reporting.
(1) All permit holders shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the animal services
department if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency, such as a fire, flood,
extended interruption of electrical or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic
materials, onset of an apparent contagious illness outbreak, or other circumstance that may endanger
public health or the health of the animals possessed in that location.
(2) A permit holder need not discontinue operations in an area that is unaffected by the imminent
health hazard, provided that the unaffected area is able to be completely separated from the affected
area and no animals or the public are allowed or kept in the affected area.
(3) If the permit holder fails to immediately cease operations, the animal services director may
issue a written order to the permit holder to cease operations. Any animals found to be in the affected
area shall be immediately impounded by a city enforcement agent until such time as the animal(s)
can be returned to their rightful owner(s) or until the permit holder gains permission to resume
operations in accordance with this chapter.
(b) If operations are discontinued as specified under subsection (a), the permit holder shall obtain written
approval from the animal services director prior to resuming operations.
(c) A person commits an offense if they fail to comply with the requirements of subsection (a).
(d) A person commits an offense if he resumes operations after they are discontinued without obtaining
written approval as required in subsection (b).
Sec. 5.01.029 Permit revocation and denial
(a) An animal services authority may issue a notice of revocation of any permit or deny an application for a
permit under this chapter without prior warning, notice, or hearing if the permittee or applicant fails to meet the
standards required in this chapter, refuses to make the premises or animals in his possession available for an
inspection, seriously or repeatedly violates this chapter in ways that threaten the health or well-being of the
permit holder's or applicant's customers, employees, neighbors, or animals in their care, or otherwise violates
this chapter in any other way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/720
(b) The permittee or applicant may reapply for a new permit under this chapter at any time.
(c) The issuance of a suspension shall be a remedy in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalty authorized by
this chapter, and shall not limit any other rights of the animal services director to pursue other enforcement
actions or remedies, to address any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ordinance 28-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
Sec. 5.01.030 Retail sale of dogs and cats
(a) It is unlawful for any retail pet store or its operator to display, offer for sale, deliver, barter, auction, give
away, transfer, lease, or sell any dog or cat in the city that is purchased, supplied or otherwise obtained from any
source other than those permitted by subsection (c) of this section, including, but not limited to, from any dealer
and/or breeder and/or hobby breeder.
(b) No permit or other applicable license or entitlement for use, including but not limited to the issuance of a
business license, building permit, conditional use permit, or other land use approval, shall be approved and/or
issued for the establishment of any retail pet store within the jurisdiction of the city that would engage in the
retail sale of dogs and/or cats purchased, supplied or otherwise obtained from any dealer and/or breeder and/or
hobby breeder.
(c) Exceptions - permitted sources. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a retail pet store or its operator from
providing space and appropriate care for animals owned by or purchased directly from a publicly operated
animal shelter or animal control enforcement agency, or a nonprofit humane society or animal rescue
organization, and maintained at the retail pet store for the purpose of adopting and/or selling those animals to the
public.
Sec. 5.01.031 Sale of animals from public property
(a) A person commits an offense if he sells, exchanges, barters, or gives away, or offers to sell, exchange,
barter, or give away, any animal from:
(1) Any public property; or
(2) Any property to which the public has access that does not have a valid certificate of occupancy
allowing the sale of animals on the property.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the person is:
(1) Animal services; or
(2) An animal adoption agency.
Sec. 5.01.032 Sale of dogs and cats
(a) A person commits an offense if he sells, exchanges, barters, gives away, or transfers, or offers or advertises
for sale, exchange, barter, give away, or transfer, a dog or cat four months of age or older unless:
(1) The dog or cat is currently vaccinated or cannot be vaccinated due to health reasons as verified
by a licensed veterinarian; and
(2) The person has a current registration receipt and registration tag for the dog or cat.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if the person is:
(1) Animal services;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/720
(2) An animal welfare organization; or
(3) An animal adoption agency.
ARTICLE 5.02 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Sec. 5.02.001 Definitions
In this article:
Animal control authority. Director of animal services or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another domestic animal that causes bodily injury
and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was
reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or (1977 Code, sec. 4-
15; Ordinance 21-06, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/06)
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those
acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that
person.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the animal control
authority.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-15)
Serious bodily injury. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that
would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment.
Unprovoked. An action by a dog that is not:
(1) In response to being tormented, abused, or assaulted by any person;
(2) In response to pain or injury;
(3) In protection of itself or its food, kennel, immediate territory, or nursing offspring; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/720
(4) In response to an assault or attempted assault on a person.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.02.002 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the thirtieth day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the
person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure;
(3) Obtain liability insurance or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog
causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or
financial responsibility to the animal control authority; and
(4) Comply with the applicable ordinance, regulation, requirement, or restriction of the city on
dangerous dogs.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-16)
(5) Have an unsterilized dangerous dog spayed or neutered
(6) Have the dangerous dog injected with a microchip implant and registered with a national
registry for dogs and animal services.
(7) Post a sign at each entrance to the enclosure in which the dangerous dog is confined stating
“beware of dangerous dog.”
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal
control authority not later than the thirtieth day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(c) If, on application of any person, the municipal court of the city finds, after notice and hearing, that the
owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with this section, the court shall order the animal control
authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or
order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions.
(d) The owner shall pay any costs or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, impoundment, and
destruction of the dog.
(e) The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not
complied with this section before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the
authority.
(f) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before
the fifteenth day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog.
(g) For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 5.02.001;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/720
(2) The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog
under this article; or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog under
this article.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-16)
Sec. 5.02.003 Determination that dog is dangerous
(a) If a person reports an incident described in section 5.02.001, the animal control authority may investigate
the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines
the dog is a dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of that fact.
(b) An owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the
owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the municipal court.
An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases from the
municipal court.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-17)
Sec. 5.02.004 Reporting of incidents
(a) A person may report an incident described in section 5.02.001 to the municipal court. The owner of the
dog shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the fifth day after the date on which the
owner receives notice that the report has been filed.
(b) If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by this section, the court shall order the animal control
authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or
order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the
court orders the disposition of the dog. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the dog. The court shall
determine, after notice and hearing as provided in this article, whether the dog is a dangerous dog.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-18)
Sec. 5.02.005 Hearing
(a) The municipal court, on receiving a report of an incident under section 5.02.004 or on application under
section 5.02.002, shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog or whether the
owner of the dog has complied with section 5.02.002. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after
the date on which the dog is seized or delivered.
(b) The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to:
(1) The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and
(2) The person who made the complaint.
(c) Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing.
(d) An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the manner
provided for the appeal of cases from the municipal court.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-19)
Sec. 5.02.006 Registration
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/720
(a) The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of:
(A) Liability insurance or financial responsibility as required by section 5.02.002;
(B) Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; and
(C) The secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee as adopted by resolution of the city council.
(b) The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later
than the fourteenth day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in
which the new address is located. On presentation of the current owner of a dangerous dog's prior registration
tag and payment of a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council, the animal control authority shall issue a
new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered
of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-20; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.02.007 Attacks
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an
unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog
destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, personnel of a recognized animal shelter or a humane society who are
trained in the humane destruction of animals, or the animal control authority.
(c) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). On direction of the city council, the city attorney may
file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall
be retained by the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-21)
Sec. 5.02.008 Defenses
Any defense to prosecution under subchapter D, chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended,
is a defense to prosecution for a violation under this article.
Sec. 5.02.009 Dangerous dog owned or harbored by minor
If the owner of a dangerous dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor is liable for all injuries sustained
by any person or another animal in an unprovoked attack by the dog.
Sec. 5.02.010 Prohibition of owning a dog determined dangerous by another jurisdiction
(a) A person commits an offense if he owns a dog in the city that has been determined to be a dangerous dog
by any other jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/720
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the person owned the dog in the city prior to the
date of adoption of this section.
Sec. 5.02.011 Surrender of a dangerous dog
A person who owns a dog that has been ordered to be seized or impounded under this article commits an offense
if the person does not surrender the dog to the director within the time period ordered by the director or the
municipal court, whichever applies.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
ARTICLE 5.03 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 5.03.001 Authorized; right of occupants to confine animals found on premises
(a) The city manager or his designated representative shall take up and impound any animal found running at
large in the city.
(b) If any animal is found upon the premises of anyone not the owner of such animal, the owner or occupant
of such premises shall have the right to confine such animal. He shall notify the city manager or his designated
representatives within a reasonable length of time to come and impound such animal. When so notified, it shall
be the duty of such officers to at once cause such animal to be impounded.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-25)
Sec. 5.03.002 Notice to owner
Upon the impoundment of an animal under this article, the city manager or his authorized representative shall
immediately notify the owner, by telephone and in writing, that the animal has been seized and impounded while
at large within the city. Such notice shall state the amount of fees and costs which have accrued because of
impoundment at the time of such notice, the rate at which additional fees and costs shall accrue and the time at
which disposition of the animal will be made unless redeemed. (1977 Code, sec. 4-26)
Sec. 5.03.003 Fees
For each animal impounded under this article, fees shall be charged as adopted by resolution of the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.03.004 Redemption generally
The owner of any animal which is impounded under this article may redeem the animal by paying all expenses
of impoundment and keeping, together with the cost of advertising, microchipping and fines, at any time prior to
the disposition of such animal in accordance with section 5.03.006.
Sec. 5.03.005 Redemption of dogs and cats
(a) The owner of any dog or cat impounded under the terms of this article may redeem such dog or cat within
seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment by paying the fees described in section 5.03.003 and, if the dog or cat
is not currently microchipped, by microchipping the animal and paying the registration fee prescribed by section
5.01.013; provided, however, in order for the owner of a dog or cat not vaccinated and microchipped under the
provisions of this chapter to obtain its release, such owner must sign a statement giving the name of the owner
and the address where such dog or cat shall be immediately confined, and stating that he will have the dog or cat
vaccinated and microchipped immediately in accordance with the provisions of section 5.01.014. Failure to have
such dog or cat immediately vaccinated and confined shall be grounds for the immediate return of the dog or cat
to the city pound and such dog or cat may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/720
(b) After the owner has failed to redeem the dog or cat within seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment, the
dog or cat shall become the property of the city. The city manager or his designated representative shall retain
sole authority to determine the final disposition of each animal in its custody once that animal becomes the
property of the city.
Sec. 5.03.006 Disposition of unredeemed animals generally
(a) After the owner has failed to redeem the animal within seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment, the
animal shall become the property of the city. The city manager or his designated representative shall retain sole
authority to determine the final disposition of each animal in its custody once that animal becomes the property
of the city.
(b) If any animal impounded under this article is not redeemed by the owner and cannot be sold it may be
given away; if an animal cannot be sold and has not been given away or redeemed, it shall be forthwith
humanely destroyed.
(c) This section shall not apply to unredeemed dogs and cats, which shall be disposed of in accord with
section 5.03.007.
(d) The redemption of wild animals or animals of known vicious propensity shall not be required nor shall it
be permitted. If the animal cannot be sold to a party who will keep it outside the city limits or given away to an
institution suitable for the keeping and care of wild animals, it shall forthwith be humanely destroyed.
Sec. 5.03.007 Disposition of unredeemed dogs and cats
(a) Adoption.
(1) The animal services department shall be authorized to place for adoption dogs or cats
impounded by city under the following conditions:
(A) The animal services director or his designee shall evaluate all animals to determine if it is
an adoption candidate, based on its health, temperament, and appropriateness for vaccination.
However, authorization to place a dog or cat for adoption shall not constitute a warranty of the
health, temperament, or age of the animal.
(B) There will be an adoption fee for all dogs and cats at an amount set by the director of the
animal services department or his designee. The fee will include the cost of sterilization,
vaccination, and implantation of a microchip.
(C) All animals adopted from the animal services facility shall be implanted with a
microchip, vaccinated against rabies according to state guidelines, and sterilized.
(D) If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, there is a legitimate health risk justifying the
delay of sterilization, the person adopting the animal must provide a signed statement from the
veterinarian stating why the sterilization should be delayed and when the procedure may be
performed. A legitimate health risk cannot be based solely on the age of the animal if the
animal is at least eight (8) weeks old. The owner shall provide written proof to the animal
services of the completed sterilization within forty-eight (48) hours of the procedure.
(2) If an adopted animal dies on or before the sterilization completion date, the adopting person
must provide written documentation to the animal services that the animal has died.
(3) If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization date, the adopting person must
provide written documentation to the animal services department stating that the animal is lost or
stolen and a copy of the police report, if any, of the theft. In order to be sufficient, the letter shall be
delivered to the animal services department not later than the seventh (7th) business day after the date
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/720
of the animal's disappearance and shall describe the circumstances surrounding the disappearance and
the date of disappearance.
(b) Transfer to releasing agency or foster care.
(1) The animal services director or his designee may transfer ownership of the animal to a
releasing agency that has a signed transfer agreement for dogs and cats on file with the animal
services department provided that the group sterilizes and microchips the animal prior to placing it
into an adoptive home.
(2) The animal services director or designee may temporarily place the animal in a foster home that
has a signed foster agreement for dogs and cats on file with the animal services.
(c) Euthanasia. The animal services department may euthanize the animal due to the animal's health or
temperament, space limitations, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the animal services director or designee.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
Sec. 5.03.008 Records
The city manager or his designated representative shall cause to be kept a record, giving the description of all
animals impounded by him, the date of impounding, the date of sale or release to the owner, the amount realized
for such animals, if sold, and the name and address of the purchaser or person obtaining the release of the
animal. (1977 Code, sec. 4-32)
Sec. 5.03.009 Live traps
(a) The local animal control authority may issue a live trap to any person(s) requesting a trap within the
corporate limits of the city. Each person shall sign an animal trap agreement and pay a fee prior to receiving the
trap. The fee will be as adopted by resolution of the city council and will be charged per business week;
however, in the event said trap is returned prior to the end of such business week the fee shall be based on a per
day rate and a refund provided. Lease of a live animal trap shall not exceed a period of two (2) weeks. Any
person requesting a trap will be responsible for keeping the trap in proper working order, and for the cost to
repair or replace a damaged, destroyed, or lost trap.
(b) Humane traps shall be used to trap animals within the city, whether on public or private property. The
person who places the trap, or who requests its placement by the city, shall be responsible for checking the trap,
the care of the animal while it is in the trap, and the notification to the city of any captured animal. All traps shall
be checked at least daily. No traps shall be placed upon public property without written authorization from the
city. It shall be the responsibility of the person setting the trap to properly label the trap indicating the owner and
the date permission was obtained from the city.
(c) All captured domesticated animals shall be turned over to the city. All captured wild animals shall be
turned over to the city, a wildlife educational center, or state-licensed wildlife rehabilitator as soon as possible.
(d) Offenses. A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Places, or places and baits, or permits the placing or placing and baiting of any steel jawed trap
(commonly known as a “bear trap,” “wolf trap,” “leg hold trap,” or “coyote trap”), any body hold
trap (commonly known as “conibear trap”), or any other trap designed to be lethal;
(2) Places any substance, article, or bait that has in any manner been treated with any poisonous or
toxic substance, including antifreeze, or any drug in any place accessible to human beings, birds,
dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to kill or harm animals;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/720
(3) Places, or places and baits a trap or permits the placing or placing and baiting of any trap
designed for trapping animals in any highway, street, alley or other public place within the corporate
limits of the city unless specific written authorization by the city has been granted. This subsection
shall not apply to a city enforcement agent or an agency working with written permission from the
city from placing the traps on public property;
(4) Removes, alters, damages, or otherwise tampers with a trap or equipment belonging to or set
out at the request of the city.
(e) This section shall not be interpreted to restrict the extermination of rats, mice, insects, other vermin, or any
animal deemed a nuisance by state law, through the use of traps, poisons, or other commercially available means
when used in that person's residence, property, accessory structure, or commercial establishment and in
accordance with the manufacturer's directions as long as reasonable precautions are taken to ensure that no
human, pet, or wild animal, other than the targeted species, comes into contact with the traps, poisons, or other
means and that does not violate any other section of this chapter.
(Ordinance 28-15 adopted 12/14/15)
ARTICLE 5.04 ANIMAL CARE*
Sec. 5.04.001 Generally
Animals shall be provided humane care, and treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of
V.T.C.A., Penal Code sections 42.09 and 42.092, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code tit. 10, as amended, or any
other provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances and rules. (1977 Code, sec. 4-41(a))
Sec. 5.04.002 Prohibited acts
(a) A person commits an offense if:
(1) A person fails to provide an animal under his or her care, custody, control and/or ownership
with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather, and
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;
(2) A person having charge or care, custody or control of an animal places or confines such animal,
or allows such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer or other enclosure under
such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack
of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal;
(3) A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code
sections 42.09 and 42.092, as amended, or V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, as amended;
(4) A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells or offers for sale any animal which is to be
used for the purpose of fighting, or to be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of
causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked, except
that this section shall not apply to guard dogs;
(5) A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection does not
apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary medical autopsies, or biology
class use of animals for educational purposes;
(6) A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person;
(7) A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an animal's ears, or
castrates an animal; provided, however, this section shall not apply to normal livestock operations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/720
occurring within the city;
(8) A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds;
(9) A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent the
animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the
vehicle, or fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to
passersby. Provided, however, the provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an
effectively confined or tethered dog(s) in the open bed of a pickup truck;
(10) A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock within
the corporate limits of the city and fails to report the accident to the city enforcement agent as soon as
practical;
(1977 Code, sec. 4-41(b))
(11) Abandons any animal that he or she has possession or ownership of at the animal services
facility, at any other place of business, on public property, or with any person that has not consented
or has revoked consent to be responsible for the care of the animal. (Ordinance 05-2018 adopted
3/5/18)
(12) A person ties or tethers a dog in a manner that prevents the animal from access to adequate
shelter, food and water;
(13) A person ties or tethers a dog in such a manner that the animal could become entangled or
injured;
(14) A person cruelly confines an animal in a manner that prevents the animal from being able to
stand to his full height, stretch out, turn around and lie down and make normal postural adjustments
comfortably for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more;
(15) A person confines an animal in such way that the animal is forced to stand and/or lay within
its own feces, standing water or other unsanitary conditions.
(1977 Code, sec. 4-41(b))
(16) Fails to reclaim any animal that he owns from the animal services facility or any person who
had temporary possession of the animal.
(17) An owner of an animal commits an offense if he fails to:
(A) Keep any cage, pen, enclosure, or other area in which the animal is kept in a sanitary
condition; or
(B) Remove all animal excreta from the cage, pen, enclosure, or other area in which the
animal is kept as often as necessary to maintain a healthy environment.
(18) Permits any yard, ground, premises, or structure belonging to, controlled by, or occupied by
him to become nauseating, foul, offensive, or injurious to the public health or unpleasant and
disagreeable to adjacent residents or persons due to the accumulation of animal excreta.
(b) Animals seized pursuant to this section may be impounded and the animal services authority may petition
the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether the animal was inhumanely treated and to determine the
disposition of the animal. The petition shall be filed within forty-eight (48) hours of the seizure. If the court is
not open during this 48-hour period, the petition shall be filed the next day the court is open for business. If a
hearing is not requested, then the animal shall be returned to the owner upon request of the owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/720
Sec. 5.04.003 Minimum length of chains, ropes and other fixed restraints
(a) An owner of a dog commits an offense if he tethers the dog or allows the dog to be tethered in any manner
or by any method that:
(1) Allows the dog to leave the premises owned, leased, or occupied by the dog's owner;
(2) Allows the dog to become entangled;
(3) Does not allow the dog access to food, water, and appropriate shelter if outside; or
(4) Does not meet the requirements for tethering a dog under subsection (b) of this section.
(b) The following requirements apply to a dog tethered within the city:
(1) The dog must be properly fitted with and wearing a harness or collar made of leather or nylon.
(2) The tether must be attached to the dog's harness or collar and not directly to the dog's neck.
(3) The tether must be at least five (5) times the length of the dog from nose to tail.
(4) The tether may not, due to its weight, cause injury or visible discomfort to the dog.
(5) May only be tethered for a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three (3) hours in a twentyfour
(24) hour period, or no longer than necessary to complete a temporary task that required the dog
to be restrained.
(Ordinance 05-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 7.02 ALARM SYSTEMS†
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/720
Sec. 7.02.001 Definitions
Alarm signal. An audible or visual signal, or both, indicating the existence of an emergency fire condition.
Audible devices may be bells, horns, chimes, speakers or similar devices.
Alarm site. A premises or location served by an alarm system.
Commercial. All types of occupancies other than residential, as defined in this section.
Emergency medical assistance alarm notification. A notification intended to summon emergency medical
assistance from the fire department.
Fire alarm system. An alarm system that is a combination of approved compatible devices with the necessary
electrical interconnection and energy to produce an alarm signal that would summon or cause to be summoned a
fire department response in the event of fire or system activation. A fire alarm system shall meet the
requirements of the adopted fire code, fire alarm rules of the state, and other nationally recognized standards.
Fire alarm system does not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless installed at a permanent site;
(2) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises.
Issuing authority. The chief of police or his representative when referring to a burglary or robbery alarms, and
the chief of fire when referring to fire or emergency medical assistance alarms.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity.
Police alarm system. A device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon, or that
would reasonably be expected to summon, emergency services of the city. Alarm system shall include, but not
limited to, local alarms, cable television alarm systems, and other alarms designed or intended to initiate a
response by the police department to a possible burglary, robbery, or other criminal incident. Police alarm
system does not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless installed at a permanent site;
(2) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises.
Police and fire local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from
the exterior of a structure and has as its purpose the summoning of aid from the police or fire department.
Residential. All single-family dwellings or duplexes.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-1)
Sec. 7.02.002 False alarm service fee
(a) If, within a calendar year, five (5) false alarm notifications, of any type, are emitted from an alarm site, the
issuing authority shall assess the person in control of that alarm site a fee for each subsequent false alarm
notification emitted from the alarm site within that calendar year. The service fees for false alarm notifications
required by the provisions of this section are as adopted by resolution of the city council.
(b) The number of false alarm notifications emitted from an alarm site shall determine the service fee, if any,
required.
(c) The city may set standards for systems to be permitted and may refuse to permit particular systems which
it has determined, in its sole discretion, have a history of unreliability. The city may terminate its law
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/720
enforcement response to a burglary permit holder because of excess false alarms, if the false alarm fees are not
paid in full. Other categories of permits may be suspended upon failure to pay assessed fees by the permit
holder.
(d) A person commits an offense if he allows an alarm notification to be emitted from an alarm site that does
not have a valid permit.
(e) A permit may be reissued when proof of repairs has been presented to the issuing authority.
(f) A permit holder shall pay any fee assessed under this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice
of assessment.
(g) A permit holder will be exempt from any fee charged for a false alarm notification which is later shown to
have not been a false alarm. The burden of proof shall be on the permit holder.
(h) The on-scene police or fire supervisor will make the determination as to whether or not an alarm
notification is false. In the absence of an on-scene supervisor, the police or fire officer assigned to respond to an
alarm site will make that determination. An alarm is not a false alarm unless a response is made within thirty
(30) minutes of the alarm notification and the on-scene officer determines from an inspection of the interior or
exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.02.003 Use of noncomplying intermediary reporting service
A permit holder shall not report his alarm signals through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the
requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the issuing authority or is not licensed
by the state private security board. (1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-3)
Sec. 7.02.004 Operation and maintenance
(a) The permit holder shall:
(1) Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of his alarm system in order to
suppress false indication of force so that the alarm system will not be activated due to flashes of light,
vehicular noise, electrical power fluctuations or other forces unrelated to an actual emergency.
(2) Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that insures proper operation of the
alarm system.
(b) A person in control of a local alarm shall:
(1) Cause an adjustment to be made to the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no
longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated; and
(2) Provide personnel, within thirty (30) minutes after being notified by the city, to reset the alarm
system and provide access to the premises.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-4)
Sec. 7.02.005 Manual reset required; message format
(a) A person in control of a local alarm or an alarm system that causes a police or fire alarm notification to be
sent directly to the city shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation the system
will transmit only one (1) alarm signal, and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually
reset.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/720
(b) The message transmitted shall be intelligible and in a format approved by the issuing authority or his
representative and will be given twice. The duration of the message shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-5)
Sec. 7.02.006 Inspections; annual test
(a) Upon reasonable notification, the issuing authority may inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a permit
holder.
(b) A test of the fire alarm system shall be conducted by a certified alarm company within the fourth quarter
of each calendar year. A copy of the test is to be hand delivered to the fire marshal's office within thirty (30)
days of the test date.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-6)
Sec. 7.02.007 Indirect alarm reporting
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall:
(1) Send notification of an alarm to the city by a human operator;
(2) Report alarms only over a special telephone number, or numbers, designated by the issuing
authority; and
(3) Furnish the name, address, and telephone number of an alarm company, licensed by the state
private security board, responsible on a twenty-four-hour, seven-days-a-week basis for correcting any
malfunction that may occur.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-7)
Sec. 7.02.008 Direct alarm reporting
A permit holder whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm notifications directly to the city over the normal
telephone system shall:
(1) Transmit in the form and content specified by the issuing authority;
(2) Transmit over special telephone lines designated for such use;
(3) Design his system so that it will notify the permit holder, or his designated agent identified on
the permit application, when an alarm is transmitted to the city;
(4) Furnish the issuing authority, upon request, with satisfactory copies of the alarm operation
procedures, maintenance procedures, and an up-to-date circuit diagram of the components of the
alarm system; and
(5) Furnish the name, address, and telephone number of the company or the person responsible for
correcting any malfunction that may occur.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-8)
Sec. 7.02.009 Direct dial reporting
(a) Tape dialers are not an approved method of transmitting fire alarms.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/720
(b) Only digital communicators, UL-approved for police and fire alarm systems, shall be allowed to transmit
police and fire alarms through an approved monitoring company.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-9)
Secs. 7.02.010–7.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 7.02.041 Fee; duration
A nonrefundable fee as adopted by resolution of the city council is required for the issuance or renewal of a
permit, valid for up to one (1) year. (1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.02.042 Suspension or refusal to renew
(a) The issuing authority may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit for any violation of this article.
(b) A permit holder having more than five (5) false alarms within a calendar year may have his permit
suspended by the issuing authority if he fails to pay the false alarm fees required by this article. The issuing
authority may refuse to reinstate the permit until the permit holder can satisfactorily demonstrate that the alarm
system is reliable and will be properly operated.
(c) The suspension of a permit at a multifamily site will be based on five (5) false alarms at any individual
unit.
(d) A suspension may be lifted or permit renewed upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused
the action have been corrected, and if the issuing authority determines that the alarm system is likely to be
maintained and operated in a responsible manner, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during a period of suspension or after the
issuing authority refuses to renew his permit.
(f) Upon suspension of the alarm use permit, a reinstatement service fee as adopted by resolution of the city
council will be paid by the permit holder to the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 7.02.043–7.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 7.02.071 Administrative hearing on assessed service fees
(a) The permit holder may request a hearing on assessed service fees by notification to the clerk of the
municipal court within ten (10) days of the date of the fee assessment. A hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days upon request, but may be continued by the hearing officer for good cause upon request by either party or
upon the hearing officer's own motion.
(b) For the purposes of providing hearings hereunder, the city municipal court judge and such alternate judges
as may be authorized by the governing body shall act as hearing officers.
(c) Hearings shall be informal. Evidence as admitted in administrative hearings, generally, shall be admissible.
(d) Absent questions of constitutional deprivations, the finding of the hearing officer shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/720
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-31)
Sec. 7.02.072 Appeal from denial or suspension of permit
(a) If the issuing authority refuses to issue or renew a permit, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the
applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement
of the right to appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the issuing authority to the city
manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing setting forth the reasons for the appeal,
within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the issuing authority. The filing of a request for an appeal
hearing with the city manager stays an action of the issuing authority from suspending a permit until the city
manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for appeal is not made within the
ten-day period, the action of the issuing authority is final.
(b) The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider
evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the
hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The
city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the hearing officer by a majority vote; failure to reach a
majority decision on a motion shall leave the hearing officer's decision unchanged.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-32)
Sec. 7.02.073 Violations
(a) A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that
imposes upon him a duty or responsibility.
(b) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a
corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent
acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, and within the scope of his employment.
(1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-33)
Sec. 7.02.074 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day or portion of a day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1977 Code, sec. 2 1/2-34)
ARTICLE 7.03 AMBULANCES*
Sec. 7.03.001 Private ambulance services
(a) All calls for medical emergencies and emergency transport shall be made to the city's 911 service and all
emergency transports shall be made by the city or its designated provider.
(b) Calls for non-emergency medical services may be made to a private ambulance service provided that said
private ambulance service has first registered and received a permit to operate within the city. All fees associated
with non-emergency service shall be established by city council resolution for the private emergency ambulance
service permit.
(Ordinance 01-09 adopted 1/15/09)
Sec. 7.03.002 Collection of fees; records
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/720
The emergency ambulance service company with whom the city has contracted to provide such service shall be
responsible for the collection of emergency ambulance fees and for establishing and maintaining appropriate
records for the emergency ambulance service. (1977 Code, sec. 21 1/2-14)
ARTICLE 7.04 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.04.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, except where the context indicates otherwise:
Canvassing. For the purpose of this article, to examine or discuss in detail; to make subject of discussion or
debate; go through places or among people asking, requesting or engaging for vote/opinions concerning
religious, political, or other topics of public concern; but in no event shall the term canvass be construed to mean
solicitation of funds or soliciting merchandise as provided in this article.
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy,
sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the
benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association of organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic
organization, or the benefit of any educational institution. Charitable purpose shall not be construed to include
any direct benefit to the individual making the solicitation, to include the benefit of any political group or
political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
(Ordinance 08-08 adopted 3/20/08)
Coercion.
(1) To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to
believe that the person is being threatened with:
(A) Imminent bodily injury; or
(B) The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon property in
the person's immediate possession;
(2) To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response;
(3) To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person;
or
(4) To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a
solicited person to accede to demands.
(Ordinance 21-16 adopted 6/20/16)
Commercial solicitation or soliciting. The act of asking, bartering, or communicating in any other such manner,
whether orally, by written and/or printed material including but not limited to handbills or leaflets, hand signing
or by any other method, direct or implied, by an individual or group of individuals for a for-profit purpose which
includes promoting, advertising, receiving or obtaining money, alms, gifts or items of value, real or intrinsic for
said individual or group of individuals, or for-profit organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
club, company, corporation, business trust, or establishment. However the term does not include solicitation for
religious, political, charitable, or other non-commercial purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/720
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for
personal, family or household purposes.
Consumer transaction. A sales transaction in which one (1) or more of the parties are a consumer.
Handbill. Includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
Handbill distributor. Includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing
handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation
directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.
Handbill sponsor. Includes any person, firm or corporation who utilizes handbills as a medium of advertising or
spreading a message.
Home solicitation. Soliciting in person or by telephone call from house to house for the purposes of selling or
attempting to sell goods, merchandise, wares, services or anything of value or to take or attempt to take orders
for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares, or any personal property of any nature whatsoever, or to
take or attempt to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future.
Home solicitation transaction. A consumer transaction for the purchase of goods, services, or realty, payable in
installments or in cash, in which the merchant engages in a person solicitation of the sale to the consumer at a
resident, in person or by telephone, and the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is given at the residence
to the merchant in person or by telephone. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant
to a preexisting revolving charge account or retail charge agreement, or a sale made pursuant to prior
negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are
offered or exhibited for sale; or a sale of realty in which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed
attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker.
Individual. A natural person.
Itinerant vendor. Any person who sets up and operates a temporary business on privately owned property,
whether improved or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take
orders for any goods or services. A temporary business is one that continues for forty-five (45) days or less; and,
exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or freestanding. Any business that exists more than forty-five
(45) days shall be deemed to be a permanent occupancy and is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy from
the building inspection department.
Job placement activities. Any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability for, or of
employment, or seeks to secure employment. Job placement activities shall be deemed complete when made
whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.
Merchant. A party to a customer transaction other than a consumer.
Person. An individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association or any other legal entity.
Political purpose. Any form of communication relating to a political issue, a particular candidate to a position or
non-partisan office, or to a political party.
(Ordinance 08-08 adopted 3/20/08)
Public property.
(1) Any property open or devoted to public use or owned by the city; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/720
(2) Any area dedicated to the public use for sidewalk, street, highway, or other transportation
purposes, including, but not limited to, any curb, median, parkway, shoulder, sidewalk, alley, drive,
or public right-of-way.
(Ordinance 21-16 adopted 6/20/16)
Public right-of-way. The traveled portion of a roadway, traffic medians and the area that is within ten feet (10')
of the curbline. In the absence of a curbline, the area within ten feet (10') of the shoulder of a road or highway.
Residence. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained
within any type of building or structure.
Residential street. A public right-of-way, however, designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land.
(1) Major thoroughfares (also arterial streets, primary thoroughfares, etc.) provide vehicular
movement from one neighborhood to another, to distant points within the urban area or to freeways
or highways leading to other communities.
(2) Collector streets (also feeder streets, secondary thoroughfares, etc.) provide vehicular
circulation within neighborhoods and from minor streets to major thoroughfares. Due to similarity of
traffic volume and wheel loadings, streets through commercial and industrial areas are frequently
constructed to same design as collector streets.
(3) Local residential streets (also minor thoroughfares or streets, etc.) are primarily for providing
direct vehicular access to abutting residential property.
Solicit funds or solicitation of funds. Any home solicitation transaction; any request for money, property, or
anything of value; or the pledge of a future payment of money, or delivery of property, or anything of value; or
the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or person, or delivery of tangible or intangible, whether of
value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to
publications. Expressly excluded from the meaning of solicit funds or solicitation of funds is any offer of
membership in any organization. A solicitation of funds is complete when the solicitation is communicated to
any individual then located within the corporate limits of the city.
Solicitation, soliciting, solicited, or any other form of the word solicit. The act of asking, begging, bartering, or
communicating in any other such manner, whether orally, by written and/or printed material including but not
limited to handbills or leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, by an individual or group
of individuals for the purpose of, receiving or obtaining money, or items of value, real or intrinsic for said
individual or group of individuals, an organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, or any other organization or affiliate thereof, and includes a home
solicitation and home solicitation transaction.
(Ordinance 08-08 adopted 3/20/08)
Vehicle. Shall have the meaning given that term in chapter 541, Texas Transportation Code.
Sec. 7.04.002 Solicitation to occupants of vehicles on public roadways prohibited
(a) No person who is within a public right-of-way may solicit or sell or distribute any material to the occupant
of any motor vehicle stopped on a public roadway in obedience to a traffic-control signal light. It is specifically
provided, however, that a person, other than a person twelve years of age or younger; may solicit or sell or
distribute material to the occupant of a motor vehicle on a public roadway so long as he or she remains on the
surrounding sidewalks and unpaved shoulders, and not in or on the roadway itself, including the medians and
islands.
(b) Exceptions to this section are limited to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/720
(1) Summoning aid or requesting assistance in an emergency situation;
(2) A law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties; or
(3) The solicitor has been granted the authority pursuant to section 552.0071 of the Texas
Transportation Code.
Sec. 7.04.003 Solicitation within one thousand (1,000) feet of specified public rights-of-way prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, at any time, in the public rights-of way, within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the following intersections:
(1) U.S. Highway 175 Service Road at its intersection with:
(A) Malloy Bridge Road; and
(B) Hall Street.
(b) The restrictions in this section do not apply to a solicitor who has received authorization pursuant to
section 552.0071 of the Texas Transportation Code.
Sec. 7.04.004 Solicitation and handbill distribution on private property
(a) A person commits an offense if that person:
(1) Solicits, seeks, or begs contributions for himself or on behalf of another or distributes
advertising matter, upon the premises of a private office or commercial building or public building
without first having obtained written consent from the owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in
charge of the operation of the private office building or public building;
(2) Conducts a solicitation by coercion; or
(3) Conducts commercial solicitation upon residential property within the city, without first
obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this article.
(Ordinance 21-16 adopted 6/20/16)
(b) All solicitation on private property, including the distribution of handbills, shall occur only during the time
that is one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset, except when the solicitor is on the property by
the express prior invitation of the owner or occupant of the property.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, handbill distributor or handbill sponsor, to distribute or cause to be
distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered, or cast any handbill upon any private premises which are
inhabited and which are not posted as provided by this article except by handing or transmitting such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises, or by placing
or depositing the same in a manner to secure and to prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about
such premises, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by applicable federal or state law.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown,
scattered or cast any handbill upon any premises if requested by the owner or any occupant thereof not to do so,
or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the premises, a
weatherproof card, not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size bearing the words “no trespassing,”
“no peddlers,” “no advertisements,” “no solicitation,” “no handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
The letters on such cards shall be not less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/720
(e) No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door or
create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose
of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation, if a card
described in subsection (d) above is exhibited in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance of the
residence, unless at the request of the owner or occupant.
(f) No person, other than the occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface or render illegible a card placed
by the owner or the occupant under subsections (d) and (e) above.
(g) Any person who has gained entrance to a premises or an audience with the occupant, whether invited or
not, shall immediately depart such premises when requested to leave by the occupant.
Sec. 7.04.005 Display of identification cards
(a) The person(s) in charge of conducting commercial solicitation shall provide each commercial solicitor
with a copy of the permit issued by the city as prescribed by this section. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to
engage in commercial solicitation without having a copy of the permit in their possession. It shall be unlawful
for any commercial solicitor to fail or refuse to show or display such copy upon the request of any person.
(b) The applicant for the permit required under this article shall at the time application is made provide, by a
separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom permits are to be issued.
Sec. 7.04.006 Display of permit to solicit
The person(s) in charge of conducting the solicitation shall provide each solicitor with a copy of the permit
issued by the city as prescribed by this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation
without having a copy of the permit required by this article in such person's immediate possession while
engaged in such solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in a solicitation to fail or refuse to show
or display such copy of the permit upon the request of any person, or to display a permit issued in the name of
another person.
Sec. 7.04.007 Solicitation for other purpose
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to solicit in the city for a purpose other than that set out in the application
upon which the permit was issued.
Sec. 7.04.008 Itinerant vendors on private property
(a) Permit required. No itinerant vendor may intermittently occupy any privately owned property for the
purpose of operating a temporary business within the city without having previously obtained a temporary sales
permit from the city. The applicant must have such permit within his or her personal possession during the time
that the temporary business is in operation and must display the permit in such a manner that it is clearly visible
from the abutting street.
(b) Permit fee. Every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee established by
resolution of the city council, from time-to-time. The city will not require payment of this permit fee by locally
based charitable organizations or organizations engaged in activities such as bake sales or carwashes.
(c) Permit duration. A permit requested under this article will issue for a minimum of five (5) days, but not to
exceed forty-five (45) days. Each eligible property may only allow use of the property for a temporary business
for a maximum of forty-five (45) days per calendar year.
(d) Requirements for permit issuance. The city shall only issue a permit if the applicant has complied with the
following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/720
(1) The itinerant vendor must conduct his business on the property in a manner that does not
violate any code of the city, including all zoning, building, and health codes. The city will exempt an
itinerant vendor from zoning provisions where the proposed location of the temporary business is an
improved property that contains an active institutional use, such as a church or school;
(2) The itinerant vendor must possess a valid state sales tax certificate or proof of a tax exemption;
(3) The itinerant vendor must provide the city with a copy of either a lease or written permission
from the owner of the private property showing that the itinerant vendor may use the property;
(4) The itinerant vendor must submit a dimensioned or scaled site plan indicating the location of
the display area, curb cuts, and parking area;
(5) The itinerant vendor must provide one unisex portable sanitary facility. In lieu of the portable
sanitary facility, the vendor may provide a permission letter from the owner or manager of a property
located within a two-hundred-foot radius of the temporary business granting permission to use their
sanitary facilities; however, the property where the itinerant vendor has permission to use the sanitary
facilities cannot be located across a thoroughfare of four lanes or larger; and
(6) If the sale involves food products, the itinerant vendor must obtain all the necessary health
permits.
(e) An itinerant vendor may not use a tent or temporary building, except a portable sanitary facility, in
conjunction with a temporary sale.
Secs. 7.04.009–7.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 7.04.031 Permit; fee
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial solicitation within the city without first
obtaining a written permit from the city police department.
(b) Every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee established by resolution of the city
council, from time to time. A permit fee shall be charged for each person engaged in a solicitation.
Sec. 7.04.032 Permit application
(a) A person or organization who desires to conduct commercial solicitation within the city shall make written
application with the city's police department on a form provided by the city. Such application shall contain at a
minimum the following:
(1) The full and legally recognized names and any associated aliases, logos, nicknames, and
abbreviated names of the entity or person applying for the permit;
(2) If the purpose of the solicitation is for the distribution of handbills, the name of the handbill
distributor and handbill sponsor;
(3) Whether the person applying is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and:
(A) The business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant;
(B) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and
telephone number of each partner;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/720
(C) If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of
this state or is a foreign corporation, and must include the mailing address, business address,
telephone number, name of the individual in charge of such corporation, and, if a foreign
corporation, the place of incorporation;
(D) If an association, the application shall state the association's principal business address
and telephone number if any, and shall state the names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless in excess of ten (10)
members, in which event the application shall so state and the application must contain the
name and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and
directors or trustees of the association. If the association is a part of a multi-state organization or
association, the application shall state the mailing address and business address of its central
office, in addition to the mailing address and business address of the local office.
(4) The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation;
(5) The time period and dates during which the solicitation is to be made the date of the
commencement of solicitation and its projected conclusion, and how often the applicant will solicit
during the year;
(6) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is to be accomplished;
(7) The nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, or the nature of the services to be
furnished;
(8) Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
(9) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, such permit will not be used as or
represented to be an endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees;
(10) Any other information which the city deems necessary for the administration of this article.
(b) The application must be signed by the applicant, if the person applying is an individual; if the applicant is
a partnership, by the partner charged with disbursing funds solicited; if a corporation or an association, by the
officer charged with disbursement of the funds solicited. The individual signing the application shall sign the
application and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that such person has carefully read the
application and that all the information contained therein is true and correct.
(c) The application information provided by the applicant will be subject to verification by the police
department.
(d) The application shall also contain satisfactory written proof of the individual's authority to represent the
applicant.
(e) The application must be accompanied by a copy of a valid state sales tax certificate, if applicable.
(f) The application shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable permit fee. No permit shall be issued until such
fee has been paid by the applicant.
Sec. 7.04.033 Permit issuance, duration and form
(a) A permit applied for under this division shall be issued by the city police department within ten (10) days
after a completed permit application is filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or
incomplete information.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/720
(b) A permit applied for under this division shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed
thirty (30) days. Permits for handbill distribution shall be exempt from this time limitation.
(c) The city shall prescribe the form of the permit. Each such permit shall be printed in black except that the
following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: “The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the
city or any of its officers or employees.” Each permit shall bear a permit number which is the same as the file
containing the application filed by the same applicant.
Sec. 7.04.034 Denial or revocation of permit to solicit
A permit required under this division may be denied or revoked, and the person prohibited from reapplying for
the period covered by the original application, when it has been determined that:
(1) An applicant has knowingly given false or misleading information in an application;
(2) A permit holder is charged and subsequently convicted of theft or fraud, or a violation of any
city, state, or federal law, in connection with a solicitation in the city;
(3) A permit holder has made, or caused to be made, false statements or misrepresentations to any
member of the public with regard to the solicitation;
(4) A permit holder violates any provision of this article; or
(5) A permit holder creates a traffic or safety hazard to themselves or others.
Sec. 7.04.035 Appeal from denial or revocation of permit to solicit
A person denied a permit or who has had a permit revoked, may appeal that action to the city manager, or
designee, by submitting a letter to the city secretary within ten (10) days of the complained action. A hearing on
such appeal will then be scheduled within seven (7) days after the receipt of the appeal, with the hearing to be
held within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal. The city manager, or designee, shall render a decision on
the appeal within three (3) days after the date of the hearing which shall be final.
Sec. 7.04.036 Supervision of child solicitors
It shall be unlawful for any person to use children thirteen (13) years of age or less for any type of solicitation or
handbill distribution purposes unless said children are actively supervised by a person at least eighteen (18)
years of age, who has been issued a permit under this division, or who is the agent of the permittee. In all cases
the supervising person shall be within one hundred (100) yards of the child solicitor.
(Ordinance 08-08 adopted 3/20/08)
ARTICLE 7.05 PURCHASE AND SALE OF REGULATED PROPERTY
Sec. 7.05.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
Jewelry. Includes stones removed from a mounting.
Personal identification certificate. A certificate issued by the state department of public safety under V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code chapter 521.
Power tools. Includes pneumatic equipment and welding equipment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/720
Purchase. A transaction in which a person takes title to regulated property in exchange for valuable
consideration.
Regulated property. New or used:
(1) Electronic equipment;
(2) Business machines;
(3) Photographic equipment;
(4) Power tools;
(5) Musical instruments;
(6) Firearms; or
(7) Jewelry.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-21)
Sec. 7.05.002 Records of purchases
A person who purchases regulated property for the purpose of resale shall:
(1) Keep a sales record which indicates the manufacturer or authorized vendor from whom the
regulated property was purchased; or
(2) If the regulated property was purchased from other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor,
the person shall:
(A) At the time of purchase, record in a legible manner the name, address and driver's license
number or personal identification certificate number of the seller, together with a description of
the property purchased;
(B) At the time of purchase, determine that the photograph on the driver's license or personal
identification certificate is a photograph of the seller; and
(C) Maintain on file the information required by subsections (A) and (B) for one year from
the date of purchase or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-22)
Sec. 7.05.003 Seizure of property with defaced identification number
If a police officer finds regulated property offered for sale which has had the manufacturer's identification
number or any other identifying mark removed, defaced or altered, he may seize the property, and it may be
retained for a reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days. At the time of seizure of property under this
section, the officer shall issue the owner a receipt for the property notifying him that the property may be
redeemed in thirty (30) days, unless it is otherwise required by law to be held, or unless sooner released. (1977
Code, sec. 12-23)
Sec. 7.05.004 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if he:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/720
(1) Violates any provision of section 7.05.002.
(2) Offers for sale regulated property purchased for resale for which he does not have a sales
record indicating the manufacturer or authorized vendor from whom it was purchased or for which he
does not have recorded the name, address and driver's license number or personal identification
certificate number of the seller from whom he purchased the regulated property;
(3) Withholds the production of records required by section 7.05.002 for inspection by an officer
with a request to do so at a reasonable time by the officer with respect to a particular item of
regulated property; or
(4) Purchases for resale, offers for sale, or sells regulated property which has had the
manufacturer's identification number or any other identifying mark removed, defaced or altered.
(b) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section, unless the
provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-24)
ARTICLE 7.06 OCCASIONAL SALES
Sec. 7.06.001 Definition
For the purposes of this article, “occasional sales,” including “garage sales” and “patio sales,” are defined as
sales of tangible personal property at retail by persons who do not hold themselves out as engaging in, or do not
habitually engage in, the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail. (1977 Code, sec. 18-21)
Sec. 7.06.002 Permit
(a) No person shall hold or conduct any occasional sale in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so
from city hall. An application for such permit shall include the name of the applicant and the place and date of
sale. The city shall collect a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council for each such application for a
permit to defray the expense of inspections and processing of such application.
(b) Charitable organizations and their representatives shall be required to obtain permits as herein provided,
but the fee may be waived at the discretion of the city manager.
(c) Not more than one (1) permit shall be issued under this section to the same applicant during any six-month
period.
(1977 Code, sec. 18-22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.06.003 Duration
The duration of an occasional sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days. (1977 Code, sec. 18-23)
Sec. 7.06.004 Merchandise to be owned by permit holder; location of sale
Property sold at an occasional sale must be legally owned, at the time of the sale, but [by] the person to whom
the permit was issued under this article, and such sale shall be conducted only on premises owned or leased by
the permit holder. (1977 Code, sec. 18-24)
Sec. 7.06.005 Sale of new merchandise or merchandise acquired for resale
New merchandise or merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale shall not be sold at an occasional
sale, and any holding out for sale of such merchandise shall be a violation of this section. (1977 Code, sec. 18-
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/720
25)
ARTICLE 7.07 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.07.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Massage. Any process consisting of kneading, rubbing, or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body of a
human being, either with the hand or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus,
but shall not include massage by duly licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors and registered physical
therapists or registered nurses or licensed vocational nurses who treat only patients recommended by a licensed
physician and who operate only under such physician's direction. The term “massage” shall not include
massages authorized by the state in establishments licensed by the state or in beauty shops and barbershops
staffed by licensed barbers and beauticians.
Massage establishment. Any building, room, place or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital,
where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly
licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor or a registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse acting at the
direction of a doctor, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall
include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include, however, duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops or
a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and
operate only under such physician's direction.
Masseur. Any person, of either the male or female sex, who shall administer a massage, as such term is herein
defined. Such term shall also include a masseuse.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-1)
Sec. 7.07.002 Compliance with article
This article prescribes the standards for operation of any massage establishment. It shall be unlawful for any
license holder, owner, operator or manager of a massage establishment to do or commit any of the acts
prohibited by this article, or to fail to comply with such standards, or to knowingly permit any employee so to
do. It shall further be unlawful for any employee or patron of a massage establishment to do or commit any of
the prohibited acts or fail to comply with such standards, where such standards are imposed upon them. (1977
Code, sec. 11-2)
Sec. 7.07.003 Inspections
(a) The health officer and the chief of police shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to
determine the condition of any massage establishment, in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(b) If, in the opinion of the health officer or the chief of police, or their designated representatives, there is
probable cause to enter a massage establishment for the purpose of making inspections and examinations
pursuant to this article, the health officer or the chief of police shall request the owner or occupant thereof to
grant permission for such entry and, if refused, he shall make application to a magistrate for a search warrant,
showing the magistrate why such search warrant should be issued.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-3)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/720
Sec. 7.07.004 Operation in residential districts prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to be operated in any section of the city which is zoned for
residential purposes. (1977 Code, sec. 11-4)
Sec. 7.07.005 Distance from schools, churches and residential districts
A massage establishment cannot operate within a distance of one thousand (1,000) measured feet from any
school, church, or zoned residential area. (1977 Code, sec. 11-15)
Sec. 7.07.006 Operation in connection with living or sleeping quarters prohibited
No massage establishment shall be operated or conducted in connection, either directly or indirectly, with any
place used for living or sleeping quarters. (1977 Code, sec. 11-5)
Sec. 7.07.007 Hours of operation
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00
a.m. (1977 Code, sec. 11-6)
Sec. 7.07.008 General maintenance and sanitary requirements
(a) All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities in a
massage establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry
heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. Clean and sanitary towels and linens
shall be provided for each patron of the establishment and shall not be furnished for use by another patron until
thoroughly laundered.
(b) It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at
all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic and bathing devices, or
parts thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method
of sterilization before initial use, and any such instrument and device or parts thereof, after having been used
upon one patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-7)
Sec. 7.07.009 List of services and charges
The person to whom a license is issued under this article for the operation of a massage establishment shall
cause, at all times, to be prominently and publicly posted, in letters and numbers of a size not less than one inch,
a detailed list of the various massage procedures, treatment and services performed in such establishment and the
respective charge or cost therefor. If any change is made in such services or charges, the chief of police shall be
given notice thereof. (1977 Code, sec. 11-8)
Sec. 7.07.010 Cleanliness of masseurs
All masseurs shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulations to any patron of a
massage establishment. (1977 Code, sec. 11-9)
Sec. 7.07.011 Health of employees
No person suffering from a communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. (1977
Code, sec. 11-10)
Sec. 7.07.012 Treatment of diseased patrons prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/720
No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the
owner, person in control or an employee of such establishment, such person is suffering from a communicable
disease. (1977 Code, sec. 11-11)
Sec. 7.07.013 Required clothing for masseurs and patrons
(a) A masseur shall, at all times while either administering a massage or while in the presence of any patron of
a massage establishment, be clothed from the shoulders to the knees.
(b) A patron of a massage establishment shall, at all times during massage or while in the presence of a
masseur, wear clothing over the genital areas. (1977 Code, sec. 11-12)
Sec. 7.07.014 Massaging or touching genitals
It shall be unlawful for any masseur or other person working in or operating a massage establishment to
massage, touch or cause to be touched the genitals of any person upon the premises of the massage
establishment. (1977 Code, sec. 11-13)
Sec. 7.07.015 Separate facilities to be provided for male and female patrons
A massage establishment, if open to patrons of both the male and female sex, shall be divided into separate
dressing and massage areas for the separate and exclusive use of male and female patrons, respectively. Such
areas shall be divided by wall partitions not less than eight (8) feet in height, and patrons of one sex shall not be
admitted to massage or dressing area designated for the opposite sex. (1977 Code, sec. 11-14)
Sec. 7.07.016 Segregation of masseurs and patrons by sex
No person shall administer a massage to a person of the opposite sex or be present when a person of the opposite
sex is unclothed or whose body is unseemly exposed. Separate facilities or separate hours shall be maintained
for members of the opposite sex and no mingling shall be allowed. (1977 Code, sec. 11-16)
Secs. 7.07.017–7.07.060 Reserved
Division 2. Establishment License and Masseur's Permit
Sec. 7.07.061 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without a current license therefor
issued by the chief of police in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to act as or perform the services of a masseur in a massage
establishment unless he has a current permit so to do issued by the chief of police in accordance with the
provisions of this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for the owner, manager or licensee of a massage
establishment to employ therein any masseur who does not have such a permit.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-25)
Sec. 7.07.062 Application
(a) Any person desiring to obtain a license or permit under this division shall make application to the chief of
police. Such application shall contain the following information:
(1) The full name and present address of the applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/720
(2) The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(3) All convictions for violation of any federal, state or local law.
(b) In addition to the requirements of subsection (a), each application for a massage establishment license
shall contain:
(1) The business license history of the applicant; and whether such person, in previously operating
in this or another city or state under a license, has had such license revoked or suspended, and, if so,
the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation.
(2) The names and addresses of all employees of the establishment.
Each such application for a license shall also be accompanied by a copy of the list of services and charges
referred to in section 7.07.009.
(c) Such application for a license or permit under this division shall contain such other identification and
information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified
as required to be set forth in the application.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-26)
Sec. 7.07.063 Fee
(a) The annual fee for a license for a massage establishment shall be as adopted by resolution of the city
council, which fee shall be paid prior to the issuance or renewal of the license. No part of such fee shall be
refunded for any reason.
(b) No fee shall be charged for a masseur's permit.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.07.064 Issuance or denial
(a) Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) below, the chief of police shall issue a license or permit
applied for under this division if the applicant has complied with all applicable provisions of this article.
(b) No license to operate a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the building official
reveals that the establishment complies with all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, and
unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official.
(c) No license or permit required by this division shall be issued or renewed if the chief of police determines:
(1) That the applicant or, in the case of an applicant for a massage establishment license, any
employee of the applicant has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or a misdemeanor
involving immoral conduct. This shall include, but not be limited to, theft, fornication, sodomy,
procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy house, keeping an assignation house, engaging in prostitution
or engaging in assignation. The record of conviction shall be conclusive evidence of the named
felony or misdemeanor.
(2) That the applicant knowingly made any false statement in an attempt to secure the license or
permit or secured a prior license or permit by fraud or deceit.
(3) That the applicant is addicted to the use of any narcotic drugs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/720
(1977 Code, sec. 11-28)
Sec. 7.07.065 Issuance does not grant vested rights
No license or permit issued under this division shall be deemed to grant a vested or property right, but such
license or permit shall remain subject to the terms and provisions of this article and subject to such future
regulations as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance, and any investment made by an applicant
or licensee or permittee shall be made subject to this article. (1977 Code, sec. 11-29)
Sec. 7.07.066 Expiration
A license or permit issued under this division shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next following its
issuance. (1977 Code, sec. 11-30)
Sec. 7.07.067 Sale or transfer of licensed establishment
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the license issued for such establishment
shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by the person to whom the establishment is sold or
transferred and a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council shall be payable for each such application. Any
such sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application for an extension or
expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and
shall require compliance with all sections of this article. (1977 Code, sec. 11-31; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.07.068 Suspension or revocation authorized; grounds
(a) The chief of police shall revoke or suspend any license or permit issued under this division if the holder of
such license or permit, or the owner, operator, manager or employee of any massage establishment, is convicted
of a violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city or law of the state regulating massage
establishments or masseurs or is convicted of any offense mentioned in section 7.07.064(c). The employment of
any person by a massage establishment who has been convicted for any such offense prior to their employment
shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the establishment's license.
(b) In case the chief of police elects to suspend, rather than revoke, a license or permit under this section, such
suspension shall be for a period of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-32)
Sec. 7.07.069 Notice of and appeal from denial, suspension or revocation
(a) If the chief of police refuses to issue or renew a license or permit applied for under this division, or
revokes or suspends such a license or permit after its issuance, he shall give written notice of such action to the
applicant or the licensee or permit holder. Such notice shall be served upon such person by delivering it to him in
person or by leaving it at his place of business or residence in the custody of a person of suitable age and
discretion.
(b) In the event the applicant or licensee or permit holder cannot be found, and the service of such notice
cannot be made in the manner provided in subsection (a), a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully
prepaid, addressed to him at his place of business or residence.
(c) In the event that the chief of police shall refuse to issue or renew a license or permit applied for under this
division, or if he revokes or suspends a license or permit previously issued, this action shall be final, unless the
applicant or permit or license holder shall, within ten (10) days after the receipt of written notice of such action,
file with the city council a written appeal. Such ten-day appeal period shall begin on the day the notice is served
under subsection (a) or, if the notice is mailed under subsection (b), it shall begin five (5) days after it was so
mailed. The written appeal shall set forth the reasons why such license or permit should not be denied, revoked
or suspended, as the case may be.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/720
(d) The city council shall, within thirty (30) days after an appeal is filed under subsection (c), consider all the
evidence in support of or against the action appealed, and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the
action. In the case of a revocation or suspension, the chief of police may order any license or permit suspended
pending such hearing, and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business or engage in any activity
authorized by such license or permit until the license or permit has been reinstated by the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 11-33)
ARTICLE 7.08 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.08.001 Purpose and intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations with
regard to sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of these sections have neither the purpose
nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of these sections to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(b) It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of these sections are promulgated pursuant
to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243, as they apply. It is the intent of the city council that all other
provisions of these sections are promulgated pursuant to the city charter.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-81)
Sec. 7.08.002 Definitions
In this article:
Achromatic. Colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and
light earth tones. The term does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts attention.
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment that as one (1) of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities.”
Adult cabaret. A commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of live entertainment
that:
(1) Is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/720
(2) Is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing,
or relating to “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
Adult motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized
by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified
anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city the chief's designated agent.
Child care facility. A facility that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for
persons under 14 years of age who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the
facility, whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one (1) of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment. Any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical
areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/720
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast;
or
(2) A state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
Operates or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part
owner, or licensee of the business.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Residential district. A single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or other residential district as defined in the
comprehensive zoning ordinance.
Residential use. A single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or other residential use.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Sign. Any display, design, pictorial, or other representation that is:
(1) Constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened, or manufactured in any manner
whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business; and
(2) Used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise available at the
sexually oriented business.
The term “sign” also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a
sexually oriented business establishment or to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated.
Specified anatomical areas.
(1) Any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and
opaquely covered:
(A) Any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
(B) Any buttock; or
(C) Any portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/720
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) through (3) above.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor area exists as of its original permitting.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-82)
Sec. 7.08.003 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-83)
Sec. 7.08.004 Penalty; defenses
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b), any person violating these sections, upon conviction, is punishable
by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/720
(b) It is a defense to prosecution that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class
operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state; or a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
(B) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale
or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-104)
Sec. 7.08.005 Injunction
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in
violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. (1977
Code, sec. 12-105)
Sec. 7.08.006 Inspections
(a) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, the fire department, the
department of streets, sanitation, and code enforcement services, and the building official to inspect the premises
of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(c) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a
customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-87)
Secs. 7.08.007–7.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 7.08.041 Required; application
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by
the city for the particular type of business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/720
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of these sections.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the
application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than
an individual, each individual who has a twenty (20) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under these sections and each applicant
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(e) The fact that a person possesses a valid license for another licensed activity does not exempt the person
from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-84)
(f) Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license for a location not previously licensed or permitted
shall, not later than the 60th day before the date the application is filed for the license, place at the proposed
location an outdoor sign (at least 24 inches x 36 inches in size) which provides notification and information
specifically stating that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises and providing the
name and business address of the applicant. All lettering on the sign must be at least two (2) inches in size.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.08.042 Issuance; qualifications
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of these
sections, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within
two (2) years immediately preceding the application.
(5) Any fee required by these sections has not been paid.
(6) An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within
the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the
sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action
by law enforcement officers.
(7) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
other provision of these sections.
(8) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/720
(A) Involving:
(i) Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43:
a. Prostitution;
b. Promotion of prostitution;
c. Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
d. Compelling prostitution;
e. Obscenity;
f. Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor;
g. Sexual performance by a child;
h. Possession of child pornography;
(ii) Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21:
a. Public lewdness;
b. Indecent exposure;
c. Indecency with a child;
(iii) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code
ch. 22;
(iv) Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in
V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or
(v) Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing
offenses;
(B) For which:
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is of a felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the
date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
applicant's spouse under subsection (a).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/720
(c) An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in
subsection (a)(8)(A) may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by
subsection (a)(8)(B) has elapsed.
(d) The chief of police, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall send to the
applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant
must pay the license fee and obtain the license. The chief of police's approval of the issuance of a license does
not authorize the applicant to operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required
by these sections and obtained possession of the license.
(e) The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-85)
Sec. 7.08.043 Fees
(a) The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council.
(b) In addition to the fee required by subsection (a), an applicant for an initial sexually oriented business
license shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable fee as adopted by resolution of the city
council for the city to conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance
with the locational restrictions set forth in these sections.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-86; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.08.044 Expiration
Each license expires one (1) year from the date of issuance, except that a license issued pursuant to a locational
restriction expires on the date the exemption expires. A license may be renewed only by making application as
provided in these sections. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date, and, when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not
be affected by the pendency of the application. (1977 Code, sec. 12-88)
Sec. 7.08.045 Suspension
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with these sections;
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business
premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
article;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises;
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and
law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-89)
Sec. 7.08.046 Revocation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/720
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in these sections occurs and the license
has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police
during the application process;
(2) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 7.08.042 for which the time period
required has not elapsed;
(6) On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an
offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 7.08.042 for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed;
(7) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual
contact” shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code section 21.02; or
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or
sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or
employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual
contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated,
the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another
license until the appropriate number of years required under section 7.08.042 has elapsed.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-90)
Sec. 7.08.047 Appeals
If the chief of police denies the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of
police shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the
action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the
applicant or licensee whose application for a license or license renewal has been denied or whose license has
been suspended or revoked has the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court
must be filed within thirty (30) days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The
applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. (1977 Code, sec. 12-91)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/720
Sec. 7.08.048 Transfer
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (1977 Code, sec. 12-
92)
Secs. 7.08.049–7.08.080 Reserved
Division 3. Location
Sec. 7.08.081 Prohibited locations; nonconforming uses
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within
one thousand (1,000) feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined in these sections;
(4) A public park;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in these sections;
(6) A hospital or clinic;
(7) A child care facility; or
(8) A funeral home or cemetery.
(b) A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement,
or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more
than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion of a building or structure, or
the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion of a building or
structure containing another sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement must be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church, public or private elementary or secondary school, hospital, or child care facility or to the nearest
boundary of an affected public park, residential district, historic district, or residential lot.
(e) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented
businesses must be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating as of the effective date of these sections that is in
violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section is a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed six (6) months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. The nonconforming use may not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/720
sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible
location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming.
(g) An owner of a nonconforming sexually oriented business who cannot recoup actual investments in the use
within six (6) months may request an extension of the compliance date from the board of adjustment. The
request must be in writing and filed with the city building official.
(h) The board of adjustment shall conduct a hearing on the request for extension in accordance with applicable
procedures set forth in the city zoning ordinance. If the board of adjustment determines that the owner of the
nonconforming sexually oriented business cannot recoup actual investments in the use within six (6) months, it
may by written order provide a new compliance date to the owner in accordance. Any extension granted by the
board of adjustment must specify a date certain for closure of the sexually oriented business and is not valid for
operation of the business at any other location.
(i) The board of adjustment's decision on a request for an extended compliance date is final unless appealed to
the district court within ten (10) days in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211.
(j) A sexually oriented business that remains in operation pursuant to an extension granted under this section
is not considered as having a license for purposes of measuring distances between a sexually oriented business
and a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a boundary of a residential district, a public
park, the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, a hospital, a child care facility, or another sexually
oriented business.
(k) A sexually oriented business fully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by
the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or
private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, historic district, residential lot, hospital,
or child care facility within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies
only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a
license has expired or has been revoked.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-93)
Sec. 7.08.082 Exemptions
(a) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business establishment is in violation of these sections, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10)
calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption
from the locational restrictions.
(b) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the board of adjustment shall
consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the
written request is received.
(c) A hearing by the board may proceed if at least four (4) of the board members are present. The board shall
hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
(d) The board may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions if it makes the
following findings:
(1) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect
on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of these sections;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/720
(3) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property
values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(4) That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to
any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and
(5) That all other applicable provisions of these sections will be observed.
(e) The board shall grant the exemption only by a four-fifths (4/5) or more vote. Failure to reach such a vote
shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the board is final.
(f) If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the board's
action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational
restrictions until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(g) If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least twelve
(12) months have elapsed since the date of the board's action.
(h) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of these sections other
than the locational restrictions.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-94)
Secs. 7.08.083–7.08.110 Reserved
Division 4. Operation
Sec. 7.08.111 Appearance of exterior portions of business
(a) An owner or operator of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if he allows:
(1) The merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the
establishment;
(2) The exterior portions of the establishment to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent
permitted by these sections; or
(3) The exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single
achromatic color, except that this subsection does not apply to an establishment if the following
conditions are met:
(A) The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and
(B) The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center,
including the exterior portions of the establishment, are painted the same color as one another
or are painted in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of
the commercial multiunit center.
(b) Nothing in this section requires the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually
oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/720
(c) The exterior of any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of these sections is
not required to comply with subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section until alterations, repairs, remodeling,
and repainting that cumulatively affect more than fifty (50) percent of the exterior are performed on the sexually
oriented business during any twelve-month period.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-95)
Sec. 7.08.112 Signs
(a) Notwithstanding any provision of any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, the owner
or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if he erects, constructs, or
maintains any sign for the establishment other than one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided
in this section.
(b) A primary sign may have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each display surface must:
(1) Not contain any flashing lights;
(2) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(3) Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
(4) Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
(c) A secondary sign may have only one (1) display surface. The display surface must:
(1) Not contain any flashing lights;
(2) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(3) Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
(4) Not exceed five (5) feet in height or four (4) feet in width; and
(5) Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment.
(d) A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner, and may contain only:
(1) The name of the establishment; and/or
(2) One or more of the following phrases:
(A) “Adult arcade.”
(B) “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store.”
(C) “Adult cabaret.”
(D) “Adult motel.”
(E) “Adult motion picture theater.”
(F) “Adult theater.”
(G) “Escort agency.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/720
(H) “Nude model studio.”
(I) “Sexual encounter center.”
(e) A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the phrase “Movie Titles Posted on
Premises” in addition to the phrases listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section.
(f) Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of a solid color, and each letter must be
the same print-type, size, and color. The background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or
secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color.
(g) Notwithstanding the sign requirements of this section, any sign lawfully existing on the premises of a
lawfully operating sexually oriented business on the effective date of these sections may continue to be
maintained on the premises until:
(1) The sign is intentionally removed or destroyed by the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business or abandoned by the owner or operator of the sexually oriented business; or
(2) The city requires removal, relocation, or reconstruction of the sign in accordance with
applicable state law.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-96)
Sec. 7.08.113 Escort agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-97)
Sec. 7.08.114 Nude model studios
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on
the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under
eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a
state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(e) An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense
if the employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(f) A customer at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any
specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
(g) A licensee or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customer access to
an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk-through of the premises
without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/720
(1977 Code, sec. 12-98)
Sec. 7.08.115 Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of
nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under eighteen (18)
years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-99)
Sec. 7.08.116 Adult motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same
sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term “rent” or “subrent” means the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-100)
Sec. 7.08.117 Adult cabarets
(a) An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the
employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(b) A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any
specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
(c) A licensee or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an
area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk-through of the premises
without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-101)
Sec. 7.08.118 Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/720
(32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the
prior approval of the chief of police or his designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee
is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any
patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
(1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (8) above commits an offense if he knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-102)
Sec. 7.08.119 Display of sexually explicit material to minors
(a) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen
(17) years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or videocassette, the cover of which
depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or
perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/720
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered.
(b) In this section, “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from
an employee of the business establishment:
(1) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-103)
ARTICLE 7.09 SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS
Sec. 7.09.001 Purpose
This article is an exercise of the city's police power to promote, through regulation of secondary metals
recyclers, the recovery of stolen property. This article provides licensing and recordkeeping requirements and
enforcement procedures that will enable the police department to identify and recover public and private
property composed of certain metals that may have been illegally appropriated.
Sec. 7.09.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein.
Chief. The chief of police for the city or a designated representative.
Ferrous Metal. A metal that contains significant quantities of iron or steel.
Hold notice. Written notification by the chief to a secondary metals recycler stating that the secondary metals
recycler may not sell, redeem, or dispose of certain regulated metal property that the chief has reasonable cause
to believe has been stolen.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license has been issued under this article or a person listed as an applicant
on the application for a license.
Nonferrous metal. A metal that does not contain significant quantities of iron or steel, including, but not limited
to, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and their alloys.
Passport. A passport issued by the United States government or issued by another country and recognized by the
United States government.
Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, and any other legal entity.
Personal identification certificate. A personal identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public
Safety under chapter 521, subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, or a similar card or
certificate issued by another state.
Purchase transaction. A transaction in which a secondary metals recycler gives consideration in exchange for
regulated metal property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/720
Regulated metal property. Any item composed in whole or in part of any ferrous or nonferrous metal, other than
an item composed in whole of tin.
Secondary metals recycler. Any person who:
(1) Is engaged in the business of purchasing, collecting, or soliciting regulated metal property; or
(2) Operates or maintains a facility where regulated metal property is purchased or kept for
shipment, sale, transfer, or salvage.
Seller. Any person who, in a purchase transaction, receives consideration from a secondary metals recycler in
exchange for regulated metal property.
Sec. 7.09.003 Records required
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain an accurate and legible record of each purchase transaction.
Each transaction must be recorded separately.
(b) The record of each purchase transaction must be in English and contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the secondary metals recycler;
(2) The name or initials of the individual recording the information required by this section for the
secondary metals recycler;
(3) The seller's name, address, sex, and birth date and the identifying number from the seller's
driver's license, military identification card, passport, or personal identification certificate;
(4) The license number of any motor vehicle in which the regulated metal property is delivered in a
purchased transaction;
(5) The place, date and time of the purchase transaction;
(6) The weight, quantity, or volume and a description, made in accordance with the custom of the
trade, of the regulated metal property purchased;
(7) A general description of the predominant types of regulated metal property purchased in the
purchase transaction;
(8) The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metal property;
(9) A signed statement from the seller in a purchase transaction affirming a legal right of
ownership and the right to sign over title to the regulated metal property offered for sale; and
(10) A photograph, videotape, or similar likeness of the seller that clearly depicts the seller's facial
features.
(c) A person selling or attempting to sell regulated metal property to a secondary metals recycler shall:
(1) Display to the secondary metals recycler the person's driver's license, military identification
card, passport, or personal identification certificate; and
(2) Sign a written statement provided by the secondary metals recycler affirming that the person is
the legal owner of, or is lawfully entitled to sell, the regulated material offered for sale.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/720
(d) The secondary metals recycler or the recycler's agent shall visually verify the accuracy of the identification
presented by the seller at the time of each purchase of regulated metal property.
(e) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information required by this article for not less than
one (1) year from the date of the purchase transaction. A secondary metals recycler shall make these records
available for inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the secondary metals recycler's place of business
during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
(f) The recordkeeping requirements of this article, other than subsections (b)(7) and (b)(10), do not apply to
purchase transactions involving regulated metal property composed solely of the following nonferrous metal
materials for which definitions and recordkeeping requirements are provided by chapter 1956, subchapter A of
the Texas Occupation Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass material in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
(g) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(10) of this section that:
(1) A photograph of the seller, taken within the preceding six months, was currently on file with
the secondary metals recycler; and
(2) At the time of the purchase transaction, the secondary metals recycler, or an employee of the
secondary metals recycler, visually verified that the seller was actually the person depicted in the file
photograph.
Sec. 7.09.004 Notice to sellers
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall at all times maintain in a prominent place in the secondary metals
recycler's place of business, in open view to a seller of regulated metal property, a notice in two-inch lettering
that contains the following or similar language approved by the chief. “A Person Attempting to Sell Any
Regulated Metal Property Must Present Sufficient Identification Required by City of Seagoville Ordinance.”
(b) The notice required by this section may be contained on a sign that contains another notice required by law
to be displayed by the secondary metals recycler.
Sec. 7.09.005 Facsimile, telecopier, or similar equipment required
A secondary metals recycler shall maintain at its place of business, or otherwise have immediate access to, a
facsimile, telecopier, or other equipment of similar function on which notifications of stolen property or other
notifications relating to regulated metal property may be expeditiously received from the police department. The
equipment must be operable at all times during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals
recycler. The secondary metals recycler shall maintain the facsimile number or other access number of the
equipment on file with the chief and shall notify the chief within 24 hours after any change in the number.
Sec. 7.09.006 Restrictions on the purchase of regulated metal property
(a) A secondary metals recycler shall conduct all purchase transactions only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(b) A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any item of regulated metal property from an intoxicated
person.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/720
(c) A secondary metals recycler shall not purchase any of the following items or regulated metal property
without obtaining proof that the seller owns the property (such as by a receipt or bill of sale) or proof that the
seller is an employee, agent, or contactor of a governmental entity, utility company, cemetery, railroad,
manufacturer, or other person, business, or entity owning the property and the seller is authorized to sell the item
of regulated metal property on behalf of the person, business, or entity owning the property:
(1) A manhole cover.
(2) An electric light pole and its fixtures and hardware.
(3) A guard rail.
(4) A street sign, traffic sign, or traffic signal and its fixtures and hardware.
(5) Communication, transmission, and service wire.
(6) A funeral marker or funeral vase.
(7) A historical marker.
(8) Railroad equipment, including but not limited to a tie plate, switch plate, E clip, or rail tie
junction.
(9) Any metal item that is marked with any form of the name, initials, or logo of a governmental
entity, utility company, cemetery, or railroad.
(10) A copper or aluminum condensing or evaporator coil from a heating or air-conditioning unit.
(11) An aluminum or stainless steel container or bottle designed to hold propane for fueling fork
lifts.
(d) A secondary metals recycler shall maintain on file the information required by subsection (c) of this article
for not less than one (1) year from the date of purchase of the item of regulated metal property. A secondary
metals recycler shall make these records available for inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the
secondary metals recycler's place of business during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary
metals recycler.
(e) The requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of this section do not apply to purchase transactions involving
regulated metal property composed solely of the following nonferrous metal materials for which definitions,
recordkeeping requirements and other regulations provided by chapter 1958, subchapter A of the Texas
Occupation Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass materials in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
Sec. 7.09.007 72-hour hold on regulated metal property; segregation, labeling, and inspection of
regulated metal property; exceptions
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a secondary metals recycler shall retain possession of
purchased regulated metal property at the secondary metals recycler's local place of business and withhold the
property from alteration, processing, resale, or salvage use for 72 hours after purchase, unless the property is
released sooner by written order of the chief or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/720
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a secondary metals recycler shall segregate all
regulated metal property purchased from a seller from regulated metal property purchased from other sellers and
attach to the property, or to the container in which the property is held, a label indicating the name of the seller,
the date on which the property was purchased, and the number of the receipt on which the purchase information
is recorded. If in any single purchase transaction there are multiple items of regulated metal property of the same
general type, only one representative item from each type of regulated property must be segregated and labeled
in accordance with this subsection.
(c) The hold, segregation, and labeling requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to
any item of regulated metal property composed solely of ferrous metal material, unless the secondary metals
recycler has received notice that the chief has, in accordance with this subsection, designated the item or type of
item as being subject to those requirements. The chief shall periodically review theft statistics on ferrous
regulated metal property and establish a list of items or types of items that the chief determines are subject to the
requirements of subsection (a) and (b). A current list must be maintained on file in the chief's office, or in
another designated office of the police department, so that it may be inspected by the public during the city's
normal business hours. Notice of the list must be given to secondary metals recyclers in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the chief. A secondary metals recycler is presumed to have received
notice of the list if the police department transmits the list to the facsimile number or access number provided by
the secondary metals recycler under this article.
(d) While in possession of purchased regulated metal property, a secondary metals recycler shall make the
property available for inspection by any police officer at the secondary metals recycler's place of business during
the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metals recycler.
Sec. 7.09.008 Hold on stolen regulated metal property; hold notice
(a) Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain items of regulated metal property in
the possession of a secondary metals recycler are stolen, the chief may issue a hold notice. The hold notice must:
(1) Identify those items of regulated metal property alleged to be stolen and subject to hold; and
(2) Inform the secondary metals recycler of the restrictions imposed on the regulated metal
property under subsection (b) of this section.
(b) A secondary metals recycler may not, for 60 days from the date of receiving a hold notice under this
section, process or remove from the secondary metals recycler's place of business any regulated metal property
identified in the hold notice, unless the property is released sooner by the chief or by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction. At the expiration of the hold period, the hold is automatically released, and the secondary
metals recycler may dispose of the regulated metal property unless otherwise directed by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(c) This section does not apply to items of regulated metal property composed solely of the following
nonferrous metal materials for which definitions and hold notice requirements are provided by chapter 1956,
subchapter A of the Texas Occupation Code, as amended:
(1) Copper or brass materials in excess of 50 pounds.
(2) Bronze material.
(3) Aluminum material in excess of 40 pounds.
Sec. 7.09.009 Offenses; defenses; penalty
(a) A person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to perform a duty required of him under
this article, commits an offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each item of regulated metal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/720
property involved in a violation of this article. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the regulated metal property involved:
(1) Was purchased from a charitable, philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic, social, or
school-sponsored organization or association or from any organization that is exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended;
(2) Was purchased from any public officer acting in an official capacity as a trustee in bankruptcy,
executor, administrator, or receiver; from any public official acting under judicial process or
authority; or from a sale on the execution, or by virtue, of any process issued by a court;
(3) Consists of aluminum food or beverage containers, used food or beverage containers, or similar
food or beverage containers for the purpose of recycling, other than beer or beverage kegs; or
(4) Was purchased from a manufacturing, industrial, or other commercial vendor that generates or
sells regulated metal property in the ordinary course of its business.
(c) The culpable mental state required for the commission of an offense under this article is governed by this
code.
(Ordinance 03-09 adopted 4/2/09)
ARTICLE 7.10 SHOPPING CARTS
Sec. 7.10.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein.
Abandoned shopping cart. Any unattended shopping cart removed from a business establishment's premises,
which is located on public property for a period greater than twelve (12) hours.
Owner. Any person or entity within a business establishment who owns or provides shopping carts for customer
use. Owner includes, but is not limited to, the store owner, manager, on-site manager, on-duty manager, or other
designated agent of a business establishment.
Premises. The entire area owned or otherwise utilized by the business establishment that provides shopping carts
for use by its customers, including any parking area and pedestrian accessway between a street right-of-way and
the establishment. For a business establishment that is part of a shopping center or shopping complex,
“premises” shall include all business establishments in the shopping area center or complex and all areas used by
the customers of those businesses in common, including all parking areas designated for use by the customers of
the shopping center or complex.
Shopping cart. A basket, which is mounted on wheels or a similar device, generally used in a retail
establishment by a customer to transport goods of any kind.
Sec. 7.10.002 Offenses; defenses
(a) A person commits an offense if he possesses a shopping cart at a location other than the premises of the
retail establishment that owns the shopping cart.
(b) It shall be unlawful to leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the premises or parking
area of the retail establishment that owns the shopping cart.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/720
(c) It is a defense to the prosecution under subsection (a) above that the person was an owner, employee, or
agent of the retail establishment that owns the shopping cart and was delivering, retrieving, or returning the
shopping cart to the retail establishment.
(Ordinance 14-16 adopted 3/7/16)
Sec. 7.10.003 Requirements
(a) Every owner of a business establishment providing shopping carts to customers shall affix to the shopping
cart a durable, all-weather, and legible decal identifying the name of the retail establishment.
(b) Every owner of a business establishment providing shopping carts to customers must post signs at all
entrances to the parking areas, in both English and Spanish, and in a conspicuous place near the business
establishment's exit doors, informing customers that cart removal from the premises is prohibited and constitutes
a violation of state and local law.
(Ordinance 17-16 adopted 3/21/16)
Sec. 7.10.004 Retrieval and impoundment by the city
(a) The city may retrieve and impound any abandoned shopping cart located on public property.
(b) A shopping cart recovered by the city will be released to the owner, or designee, upon payment to the city
of a recovery fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per shopping cart.
Sec. 7.10.005 Disposal of abandoned shopping carts
Shopping carts impounded shall be held for a period of not more than thirty (30) days to allow for retrieval by
the owner or his designee. In the event the shopping carts are not reclaimed by the owner within such thirty (30)
days period of impoundment, the city shall sell or dispose of the same.
Sec. 7.10.006 Enforcement authority
The city manager or designee(s) shall have the authority and powers necessary to determine whether a violation
of this article exists and to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this article and
applicable state laws.
Sec. 7.10.007 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be subject to the
same penalty as provided for in this code, as heretofore amended, and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Every day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 14-16 adopted 3/7/16)
CHAPTER 8
RESERVED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/720
CHAPTER 9
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Burning of grass, weeds or other growth
(a) The burning of grass, weeds or other growth or underbrush within the city limits, except under the actual
physical standby supervision of the fire department, is hereby expressly prohibited.
(b) Any person desiring to burn grass, weeds or other growth or underbrush shall first contact the fire chief or
the fire marshal, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the date and time desired for such burning, and
shall make arrangements with such official, suitable and agreeable to the fire department, for the supervision of
such burning. In no event shall such burning be commenced except at the express order of an authorized member
of the fire department on the scene at the time, with standby equipment as arranged for and authorized by the fire
chief or the fire marshal.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-2)
Sec. 9.01.002 Impeding access to fire lane or fire zone
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to leave, park or stand any vehicle or other device which
may impede access of the fire department in the discharge of their duty in any marked fire lane or zone in the
city limits.
(b) Any vehicle or device in violation shall be impounded by the city fire department or the city police
department at the vehicle owner's expense.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-6)
Sec. 9.01.003 Obstructing fire hydrant
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, to place, to stop, or to stand any vehicle or cause to be placed, any
telegraph, telephone, electric light pole or any obstruction whatsoever, within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.01.004 Unlawful use of fire hydrant
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or close any fire hydrant connected with the water system of the city,
or lift or remove the cover of any gate valve or shutoff thereof, without permission of the water and sewer
superintendent, except in case of fire, and then only under direction of the officers of the fire department. (1977
Code, sec. 8-4)
ARTICLE 9.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 9.02.001 Office created
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. (1977 Code, sec. 8-21)
Sec. 9.02.002 Appointment; qualifications; removal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/720
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager and he shall be properly qualified for the duties of his
office. (1977 Code, sec. 8-22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.003 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. (1977 Code, sec. 8-23)
Sec. 9.02.004 Right of entry in case of fire
The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1977 Code, sec. 8-24)
Sec. 9.02.005 Taking of testimony; authority to summon witnesses, require production of evidence and
administer oaths
(a) The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing.
(b) The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter
which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production
of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered
to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-25)
Sec. 9.02.006 Investigations may be private; sequestering witnesses
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1977 Code, sec. 8-26)
Sec. 9.02.007 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify or disobeys any lawful order of the fire
marshal, including an order to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under examination,
after having been summoned to give testimony or provide such book, paper, or document in relation to any
matter under investigation by the fire marshal as provided in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances. (1977
Code, sec. 8-27)
Sec. 9.02.008 Duty when evidence indicates crime
If the fire marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson,
or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection
with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of
them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of
witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony
taken in the case. (1977 Code, sec. 8-28)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/720
Sec. 9.02.009 Inspection of premises; order to remove or remedy dangerous conditions
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon
and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger
persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges,
furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the
same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful
storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products,
ashes, or combustible, flammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character
or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the
same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of
such building or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five
(5) days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and, unless by his
authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by such owner or
occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1977
Code, sec. 8-29)
Sec. 9.02.010 Record of fires
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances,
including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation
required by this article. (1977 Code, sec. 8-30)
Sec. 9.02.011 Reports to state fire marshal
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions,
together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. (1977 Code, sec. 8-31)
ARTICLE 9.03 FIRE CODE
Sec. 9.03.001 Adopted
The International Fire Code, 2018 edition, including appendices B–N. and amendments are hereby adopted by
reference. A copy of the code, with approved amendments, shall be kept on file in the office of the fire marshal
for reference and inspection, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
Sec. 9.03.002 Definitions
Building official. Whenever the words “building official” are used in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition,
they shall be held to mean the fire marshal.
Bureau of fire prevention. Whenever the words “bureau of fire prevention” are used in the International Fire
Code, 2018 edition, they shall be held to mean the city's fire department.
Chief of the bureau of fire prevention. Whenever the words “chief of the bureau of fire prevention” are used in
the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal or his/her designated
representative.
City. Whenever the word “city” is used in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, it shall be held to mean the
city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/720
Corporate counsel. Whenever the words “corporate counsel” are used in the International Fire Code, 2018
edition, they shall be held to mean the city attorney.
Fleet vehicle. Whenever the words “fleet vehicle” are used in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, they
shall be held to mean a motor vehicle which is one (1) of a group of motor vehicles owned or operated as a unit
and used in the ongoing course of business.
Jurisdiction. Whenever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, it shall be
held to mean the corporate limits of the city.
Police chief. Whenever the words “police chief” are used in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, they shall
be held to mean the chief of police for the city.
Sec. 9.03.003 Amendments
The sections of the International Fire Code are changed, added, or deleted as follows. Underlined type is added.
Lined-through type is deleted text.
Section 101.1; amend as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Seagoville, hereinafter
... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.1; amend item 3 as follows:
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in chapter 11 or in specific sections
of this code.
Section 102.7; amend as follows:
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in chapter 80, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as
further regulated in sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2.
102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes
and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a
referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code and any
adopted amendments, the provisions of this code and any adopted amendments, as applicable,
shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
Section 105.3.3; amend as follows:
105.3.3 Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied
prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections
indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met.
Section 105.7; add subsection 105.7.26 as follows:
105.7.26 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or
modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in section 503 and section 1008. A
separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that
may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code
is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/720
Section 110.4; amend as follows:
110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than [amount] dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding [number of days], or both such fine and imprisonment. ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 112.4; amend as follows:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
Section 202; amend definitions as follows:
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or ...{bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... already
incapable. This group may include but not be limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Procedures involving sedation
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers
ATRIUM. An opening connecting two three or more stories ...{remainder unchanged}
Section 202; add definition as follows:
DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and
trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves
remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building.
Section 202; amend definitions as follows:
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a
building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required
by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early
signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department.
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and/or activated by
ignition with a match, electronic match, or other heat producing device that meets the definition ...
{remainder unchanged}
Section 202; add a second paragraph to amend definition as follows:
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE:
Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 6,000 square feet
(464.5 square meters) that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet (4267 mm), making it possible to be
used for storage in excess of 12 feet (3658 mm), shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/720
specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be
installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height.
Section 202; amend definitions as follows:
HIGH-RISE BUILDING: A building with an occupied floor located more than 75 55 feet (22 860
16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or
replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
Section 202; add definitions as follows:
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of
renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing
personal property on a self-service basis.
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel approved by the fire chief. When
utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as
normally calculated by the jurisdiction.
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or
replaced includes, but is not limited to the following:
* Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model
* Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one
* Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system
* Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices.
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement:
* Firmware updates
* Software updates
* Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware
Section 307.1.1; amend as follows:
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning shall be prohibited within the territorial limits of
the City of Seagoville when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous
shall be prohibited.
Exception: {Unchanged}
Section 307.2; amend as follows:
307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with
Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management
practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning a bonfire. Application for such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/720
approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is
to be kindled.
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but
not be limited to the following:
1. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) guidelines and/or restrictions.
2. State, County, or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
3. Local written policies as established by the fire code official.
Section 307.3; amend as follows:
Extinguishment Authority. When open burning creates or adds to a hazardous situation, or a
required permit for open burning has not been obtained, the fire code official is authorized to order
the extinguishment of the open burning operation. The fire code official is authorized to order the
extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open
burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
Section 307.4; amend as follows:
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 300 feet (15 240 91,440 mm)
from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 300
feet (15 240 91,440 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions: {Unchanged}
Section 307.4.3, exceptions; add exception #2 as follows:
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
Section 307.4; add subsections 307.4.4 and 307.4.5 as follows:
307.4.4 Permanent outdoor firepit. Permanently installed outdoor firepits for recreational fire
purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material.
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the
International Building Code.
307.4.5 Trench burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance
with section 307.2.
Section 307.5; amend as follows:
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, recreational fires, and use of portable
outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the... {remainder unchanged}
Section 308.1.1; add sentence as follows:
Unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not
limited to sky lanterns shall be prohibited.
Section 308.1.4; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/720
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other oOpen-flame cooking devices,
charcoal grills and other similar devices used for cooking shall not be operated located or used on
combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water
capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas
capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers).
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater
than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an
aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers).
3. {Unchanged}
Section 308.1.6.2, exception 3; amend as follows:
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with section 308.4 308.1.3.
Section 308.1.6.3; amend as follows:
308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an untethered unmanned
free-floating device containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky
lantern.
Section 311.5; amend as follows:
311.5 Placards. Any The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned
buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to section 110 of this code relating to
structural or interior hazards, shall be marked as required by section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5.
Section 401.3.2; amend as follows:
401.3.2 Alarm activations. Upon activation of a fire alarm, signal employees or staff shall
immediately notify the fire department shall communicate directly to a licensed fire alarm company
and upon receipt of said notification shall contact the local fire department.
Section 401; add subsection 401.9 as follows:
401.9 False alarms and nuisance alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given,
signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.
Section 403.5; amend as follows:
403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with
Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing
both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted
in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections
403.5.1 through 403.5.3.
Section 404.2.2; add Number 4.10 as follows:
4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/720
Section 405.4; amend as follows:
405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at
unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case
of fire.
Section 501.4; amend as follows:
501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection
is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and
approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation
of any structure. , such protection shall be installed and made serviceable prior to and during the time
of construction except when approved alternative methods of protection are provided. Temporary
street signs shall be installed at each street intersection when construction of new roadways allows
passage by vehicles in accordance with section 505.2.
Section 503.1.1; add sentence as follows:
Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten
foot (10') (3 048 mm) wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure.
Section 503.2.1; amend as follows:
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20
24 feet (6096 mm 7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in
accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6
inches (4115 mm) 14 feet (4267 mm). Fire apparatus access roads shall be located outside the
collapse zone, equal to no less than the full height of the building plus ten (10) feet.
Section 503.2.2; amend as follows:
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the
minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue
operations.
Section 503.2.3; amend as follows:
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support imposed
loads of 80,000 lbs. (36 287 kg) for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather
driving capabilities. Note: All fire lanes shall meet fire lane design per TCSS standards.
Section 503.3; amend as follows:
503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices or
markings that include the words NO PARKING - FIRE LANE Striping, signs, or other markings,
when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify
such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. The means by which fire lanes are designated Striping,
signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be
replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
(1) Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of
red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO
PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch (4") white
letters at 25-foot (7.50 meters) intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire
lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/720
(2) Signs - Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING”
and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters
and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a
stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be 6 feet 6 inches (2 meters) above finished
grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than 50 feet (15 meters) apart along both sides of the fire
lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the fire chief.
Section 503.4; amend as follows:
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be
obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances
established in section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in section 503.3 shall
be maintained at all times.
Section 505.1; amend as follows:
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings ... {text unchanged} ...be not less than 4-
6-inches (102 152 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2- 0.75-inch (12.7 19 mm), provided
the building is within 100 feet of the road. If the buildings sets back greater than 100 feet, each
character shall not be less than 12-inches (305 mm) in height and not less than 1-inch (25 mm) in
width. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional
approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road, the
building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be
used to identify the structure. Apartment building numbers must be 12-inches (305 mm) in height
with unit numbers 6-inches (152 mm) in height on a 20-inch by 30-inch (508 mm by 762 mm) plaque
with contrasting background. Plaques shall be placed on all street frontages. Address identification
shall be maintained.
Section 507.4; amend as follows:
507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation
of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 “Recommended Practice
for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants” and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The
fire code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed
by the fire code official, as required or approved documentation of the test shall be provided to the
fire code official prior to final approval of the water supply system. The exact location of the
static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire
protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as
approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of
the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable
water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based
on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference section
903.3.5 for additional design requirements.
Section 507.5.4; amend as follows:
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts,
fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near
fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner
that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire
department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection
equipment or fire hydrants.
Section 509.1; add new section 509.1.2 as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/720
509.1.2 Sign requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by
this section shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and 4
inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of
a color that contrasts with the background.
Sections 603.3.1 through subsection 603.3.2.1; amend as follows:
603.3.1 Fuel oil storage in outside, above-ground tanks. Where connected to a fuel-oil piping
system, the maximum amount of fuel oil storage allowed outside above ground without additional
protection shall be 660 gallons (2498 L). The storage of fuel oil above ground in quantities exceeding
660 gallons (2498 L) shall comply with NFPA 31 and Chapter 57.
603.3.2 Fuel oil storage inside buildings. Fuel oil storage inside buildings shall comply with
Sections 603.3.2.1 through 603.3.2.5 or and Chapter 57.
603.3.2.1 Quantity limits. {Body unchanged}
1. 660 gallons (2498 L) in unsprinklered buildings, where stored in a tank complying
with UL 80, UL 142 or UL 2085 for Class III liquids, and also listed as a doublewall/
secondary containment tank for Class II liquids.
2. 1,320 gallons (4996 L) in buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where stored in a tank complying with UL 142 or UL
2085 as a double-walled or secondary containment tank.
3. {Unchanged}
Section 603.3.2.2; amend as follows:
603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with section 603.3.2 shall be
used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning or generator equipment installed in accordance with
section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made
using closed piping systems.
Section 807.5.5.2; amend as follows:
807.5.5.2 Artwork in corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from
floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material
suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA
701 in accordance with section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
Section 807.5.5.3; amend as follows:
807.5.5.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains,
draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall
meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with section 807 or be
noncombustible.
Section 901.6.1; add new subsection 901.6.1.1 as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/720
901.6.1.1 Standpipe testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as
per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that
is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the fire department connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be
backflushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps are
missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system.
Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the
different types of standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant
or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water
through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions
properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry
standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function
properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such
caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. All FDC connections shall be equipped
with 5-inch Storz connectors with caps.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as
“fifth year” for type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe
Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the fire code official shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III
standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting
equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved
cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official.
Section 901.6.4; add new subsection 901.6.4 as follows:
901.6.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given,
signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner.
Section 901.7; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/720
901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event
of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified
immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an
approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the
fire protection system has been returned to service. ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 903.1.1; amend as follows:
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
section 904 shall be permitted instead of in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where
recognized by the applicable standard and, or as approved by the fire code official.
Section 903.2; add paragraph as follows:
Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and
elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip
requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine
room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating
“ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
Section 903.2.9; add subsection 903.2.9.3 as follows:
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all self-service storage facilities.
Section 903.2.11; amend as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with section
1510 of the International Building Code, with an occupant load of 30 or more located 55 35 feet
(16,764 10.5 m) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the
finished floor.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International
Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.
2. {Delete}
Section 903.2.11; add subsections 903.2.11.7, through 903.2.11.10 as follows:
903.2.11.7 High-piled combustible storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system.
903.2.11.9 Buildings 6,000 sq. ft. (557 sq. m) and larger. An automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout all buildings with a building area of 6,000 square feet (557 square meters) or
greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 6,000 square feet (557 square meters) or
greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building
Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/720
903.2.11.10 Vacant buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all vacant buildings
with a building area of 6,000 square feet (557 square meters) or more and in all existing buildings
that are enlarged to be 6,000 square feet (557 square meters) or greater which have lost their legal
nonconforming status. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.
Section 903.3.1.1.1; amend as follows:
Section 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers
... {remainder of body unchanged}.
1. {Unchanged}
2. {Unchanged}
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated ...
{remainder unchanged}.
4. {Delete}
5. Fire service access Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than
pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any
circumstances.
6. {Delete}
Section 903.3.1.2.3; amend as follows:
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages and Attics. Sprinkler Attic protection is required in attached
garages, and in the following attic spaces shall be provided as follows:
1. {Unchanged}
2. {Unchanged}
3. Attic spaces of buildings that are 2 or more stories in height above grade plane or above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
34. Where located in a building of Type III, Type IV, or Type V construction designed in
accordance with Section 510.2 or 510.4 of International Building Code, Group R-4, Condition 2
occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the
following if the roof assembly is located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level
of required fire department vehicle access:
34.1 {Text unchanged}
34.2 {Text unchanged}
34.3 {Text unchanged}
34.4 {Text unchanged}
34.5 Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the
building fire alarm system.
Section 903.3.1.3; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/720
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and
two-family dwellings, group R-3; and group R-4, Condition 1; and townhouses shall be permitted to
be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.
Section 903.3.1; add new subsection 903.3.1.4 as follows:
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to
allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the
rest of the building, and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable
referenced NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved
by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph as follows:
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards. However, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design requirements.
Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions as follows:
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph as follows:
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to
the fire department connection.
Section 905.2; add sentence as follows:
Manual dry standpipes shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum 40-psig-air
pressure with a high/low alarm.
Section 905.3; add subsection 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/720
905.3.9 Building area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet (929 square meters) in area per
story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (61 m) of travel,
vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, class I automatic
wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in
NFPA 14 where approved by the fire code official.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.
Section 905.4, amend as follows:
1. In every required interior exit stairway, a ... {remainder unchanged}.
2. {Unchanged}
3. {Unchanged}
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit
stairway ... {remainder unchanged}.
4. {Unchanged}
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve
the roof or at the highest landing of an interior exit stairway ... {remainder unchanged}.
6. {Unchanged}
7. When required by this chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required
exits to the structure and at 200 feet (61 m) intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise
approved by the fire code official.
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after Exceptions as follows:
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 907.1; add new subsection 907.1.4 as follows:
907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be
addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating
devices.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion
initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When
cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building must comply within 12
months of permit application.
Section 907.2.1; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/720
Section 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system
in accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies where the having an
occupant load due to the assembly occupancy is of 300 or more persons, or where the Group A
occupant load ... {remainder unchanged}.
Exception: {Unchanged}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux)
at the walking surface level; and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
Section 907.2.3; amend as follows:
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire ... {bulk of text unchanged} ... installed in Group E educational
occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or
detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarms system. An approved smoke detection system
shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100 feet (30
m) open space, all buildings, whether portable or the main building, will be considered one building
for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Section 907.2.3; delete Exception 1 and replace as follows:
1. Residential in-home day care with not more than 12 children may use hard-wired interconnected
single station detectors with battery backup in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five
children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)
Section 907.2.13; amend Exception 3 as follows:
3. Open air portions of bBuildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with section
303.1 of the International Building Code. However, this exception does not apply to accessory uses
including but not limited to skyboxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas.
Section 907.4.2; add new subsection 907.4.2.7 as follows:
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.
Section 907.6.1; add new subsection 907.6.1.1 as follows:
907.6.1.1 Wiring installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not
interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be
installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable
devices (class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA
72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of 4 feet (1219 mm) separation
horizontal and one foot vertical (305 mm) between supply and return circuit conductors. The
initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired class B,
provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is 10 feet (3048 mm) or less.
Section 907.6.3; delete all four Exceptions.
Section 907.6.6; add sentence as follows:
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/720
Section 909; add new subsection 909.22 as follows:
909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization
alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure,
interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa)
and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all
interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect
and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate
firefighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required
from the fire department as per Section 105.7.
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp
pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved
location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway
or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the
mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be
independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power
wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to
the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the
smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the
smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through
ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section
707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
711 of the Building Code, or both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the
building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical
equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section
707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable
system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit
protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation
systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in
accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/720
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the
system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is
operating in compliance with these requirements.
Section 910.2; amend Exception 2 and 3 follows:
2. Only manual sSmoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual sSmoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*s)1/2 or less that are
listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat
removal is prohibited.
Section 910.2; add subsection 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square
feet (1 394 square meters) in single floor area.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
2. In areas of buildings in group H used for storing class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive)
materials, or class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity
classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
Section 910.3; add subsection 910.3.4 as follows:
Section 910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by
approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform
to the provisions of sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
Section 910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate
automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at
a temperature rating at least 100 degrees (F) (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than
the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
Section 910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with
an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100 degrees F (56 degrees C) and 220
degrees F (122 degrees C) above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out.
Section 910.4.3.1; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/720
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor
level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The ... {remainder
unchanged}.
Section 912.2; add subsection 912.2.3 as follows:
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 25 feet (7620 mm) of
the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.
Section 913.2.1; add second paragraph and exception as follows:
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an
exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3-feet (1 m) in width and 6 feet 8 inches (2
m) in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this
door, as required by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an
exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building
shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as
approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by
section 506.1.
Section 914.3.1.2; amend as follows:
Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 420 120 feet (128 37 m) in
building height, required ... {remainder unchanged}.
Section 1006.2.2; add subsection 1006.2.2 as follows:
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply.
Reference the electrical code as adopted.
Section 1009.8; add Exception 7 as follows:
7. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans,
including variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of Section 1009 and chapter 11.
Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt Locks; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S
... {remainder unchanged}.
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M, or S ... {remainder unchanged}.
Section 1020.1 construction; add exception 6 as follows:
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction
within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection
within the corridor. The actuation of any detector must activate self-annunciating alarms audible in
all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors must be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm
system where such system is provided.
Section 1029.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers; delete this section.
Section 1031.2; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/720
Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free
from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency where the
building area served by the means of egress is occupied. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used
for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress.
Section 1103.3; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows:
Provide emergency signage as required by section 606.3.
Section 1103.5.1; add sentence to read as follows:
Fire sprinkler system installation shall be completed within 24 months from date of notification by
the fire code official.
Section 1103.5.3; amend as follows:
1103.5.3 Group I-2, Condition 2. In addition to the requirements of Section 1103.5.2, existing
buildings of Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy shall be equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed as established by the adopting ordinance of this amendment to the International Fire
Code.
Section 1103.5; add subsection 1103.5.5 as follows:
1103.5.5 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with section 2404.
Section 1103.7; add subsections 1103.7.7 and 1103.7.7.1 as follows:
1103.7.7 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or
replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or
heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system,
remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm
system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation
exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18
months of permit application.
1103.7.7.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable
requirements.
Section 1203; amend as follows:
1203.1 {Unchanged}
1203.1.1 {Unchanged}
1203.1.2 {Unchanged}
1203.1.3 Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance
with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing
installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in
Chapter 11.
1203.1.4 through 1203.1.9 {Unchanged}
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/720
1203.1.10 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power
Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that
require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national
security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70.
1203.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required
by Sections 1203.2.1 through 1203.2.1826 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other
referenced code.
1203.2.1 through 1203.2.3 {Unchanged}
1203.2.4 Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be
provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or
as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be
capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in
NFPA 72.
Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3
Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4.
Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.11
High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.12
Atriums, Section 907.2.13
Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.18
1203.2.5 through 1203.2.13 {Unchanged}
1203.2.14 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of
egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes)
1203.2.15 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in
temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6. (90 minutes)
Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane
structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours)
Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated
membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4.
1203.2.16 {Unchanged}
1203.2.17 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control
systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in
Section 909.11:
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8
Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.2.5
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/720
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A), International Building Code,
Section 411.1
Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2.
1203.2.18 {Unchanged}
1203.2.19 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in
accordance with Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3.
1203.2.20 Airport Traffic Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in
airport traffic control towers more than 65 feet (19 meters) in height. Power shall be provided to
the following equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
1203.2.21 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power
shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated
automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2.
1203.2.22 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator
pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5.
1203.2.23 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be
provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with
the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3.
1203.2.24 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided
for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance
with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, Item 7.
1203.2.25 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical
ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the
International Building Code, Section 421.
1203.2.26 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be
provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the
fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.)
1203.3 through 1203.6 {Unchanged}
1203.7 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this
chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and
standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than
2-hour full-demand operation of the system.
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is
approved.
Section 2304.1; amend to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/720
2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be
conducted by a qualified attendant or shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant at all
times or shall be in accordance with section 2204.3 the following:
1. Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or
2. Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or
3. Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with section 2304.3
At any time the qualified attendant of item number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall
be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with section 2304.3.
Section 2401.2; delete this section.
Section 3103.3.1; delete this section.
Table 3206.2 footnote h; amend as follows:
h. Not required Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast-response (ESFR)
sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50
(m*s)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers,
installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated
engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas.
Table 3206.2; add footnote j to row titled ‘High Hazard' and ‘Greater than 300,000'; footnote text as follows:
j. High hazard high-piled storage areas shall not exceed 500,000 square feet (4.6 hectares). A 2-
hour fire wall constructed in accordance with Section 706 of the International Building Code shall be
used to divide high-piled storage exceeding 500,000 square feet (4.6 hectares) in area.
Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows:
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they
shall be approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond completion of the
foundation of any structure.
Section 5601.2.4; amend as follows:
5601.2.4 Financial responsibility. Before a permit is issued, as required by Section 5601.2, the
applicant shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he/she carries workers'
compensation insurance for his/her employees. The applicant shall also file with the city secretary of
the City of Seagoville a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of $100,000 not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) issued by an authorized surety company to transact business in the state,
listing the City of Seagoville as the bond holder or a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying
of public liability insurance policy issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in
the state for the same amount as the certificate holder or beneficiary?, for the purpose of payment of
all damages to persons or property that arise from, or are caused by, the conduct of any act authorized
by the permit upon which any judicial judgment results. The fire code official is authorized to specify
a greater or lesser amount when, in his or her opinion, conditions at the location of use indicate a
greater or lesser amount is required. Government entities shall be exempt from this bond
requirement.
Section 5703.6; add a sentence to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/720
5703.6 Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible
liquids shall be in accordance with section 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of
secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1; amend as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids
in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by laws as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited of the City of Seagoville.
Section 5704.2.11.4; amend as follows:
5704.2.11.4 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with sections
5704.2.11.4.1 and 5704.2.11.4.2 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary
containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.
Section 5704.2.11.4.2; amend as follows:
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved
method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in
accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in section 5704.2.11.4.3.
Section 5704.2.11.4; add subsection as follows:
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4-inches (102 mm) in
diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible
liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12-inches (305 mm) below the average grade
of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank
site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes.
Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the tank
excavation and one every 50 feet (15 240 mm) routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a
minimum of two are required.
Section 5704.2.14.3; add subsection as follows:
5704.2.14.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4-inches (102 mm) in
diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible
liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12-inches (305 mm) below the average grade
of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank
site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes.
Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the tank
excavation and one every 50 feet (15 240 mm) routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a
minimum of two are required.
Section 5706.2.4.4; amend as follows:
5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II
liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within the limits established by laws as the limits of
districts in which such storage is prohibited of the City of Seagoville.
Section 5707.4; add paragraph to read as follows:
Mobile fueling sites shall be restricted to commercial, industrial, governmental, or manufacturing,
where the parking area having such operations is primarily intended for employee vehicles. Mobile
fueling shall be conducted for fleet fueling or employee vehicles only, not the general public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/720
Commercial sites shall be restricted to office-type or similar occupancies that are not primarily
intended for use by the public.
Section 5806.2; amend as follows:
5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of
buildings is prohibited within the limits established by laws as the limits of districts in which such
storage is prohibited of the City of Seagoville.
Section 6104.2; amend as follows:
6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits of the City of Seagoville,
established by laws restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily
populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2000 gallons (7570 L).
Exception: {Unchanged}
Section 6104.3; add subsection 6104.3.3 as follows:
6104.3.3 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not available,
an LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such
container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of
containers.
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is
located may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved
containers.
Section 6107.4; amend as follows:
6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... with
NFPA 58 Section 312.
Section 6109.13; delete exception.
Table B105.2; amend footnote a as follows:
a. The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,000 1,500 gallons per minute.
Section D102.1; amend as follows:
D102.1 Access and loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall
be accessible to the fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with
an asphalt, approved engineered concrete, or other approved driving surface capable of supporting
the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing 80,000 pounds (36 287 kg). See City of Seagoville
General Design Standards for roads.
(Ordinance 14-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Sec. 9.03.004 Aboveground storage of flammable liquids
The aboveground storage of flammable liquids shall be permitted provided tanks have a secondary concrete
containment that will hold two (2) times the volume of all the aboveground tanks being stored and have the
following specifications:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/720
(1) UL 2085 listed as both a “protected” and a “fire resistant” AST;
(2) UL 2085 listed for “insulated secondary containment”;
(3) Both inner and outer steel tanks are built to UL 142 specifications;
(4) NFPA 30 and 30A are complied with;
(5) Ballistics protection per UL 2085 is provided;
(6) Impact protection per UL 2085 is provided;
(7) California Air Resources Board Testing Requirements for Air Emissions are met;
(8) Steel Tank Institute Standard F941 for Thermally Insulated Above Ground Storage Tanks is
met;
(9) Comply with the fire code;
(10) Aboveground tanks may only provide storage for diesel fuel; and
(11) Aboveground tanks may only be for private use of the owner, and may not be used for resale.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-1(d))
State law reference–Standards for flammable liquid storage tanks, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 753.001 et seq.
Sec. 9.03.005 Enforcement
(a) The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the
city, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire
department.
(b) The chief (or fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the city on the
basis of examination to determine his qualifications.
(c) The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall
from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city the employment of
technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to
determine their fitness for the position. The examinations shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire
department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for
cause.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-1(b))
Sec. 9.03.006 Appeals
Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the city
council, sitting as a board of appeals, within thirty (30) days after such decision date, or within the time allowed
by a specific section of the code, whichever is applicable. Any provision of the code establishing a board of
appeals or fire code appeal board shall be revised and amended to read “city council.” (1977 Code, sec. 8-1(h))
Sec. 9.03.007 New materials, processes or occupancies that may require permits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/720
The city manager/fire marshal, the chief and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to
determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the
bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons. (1977 Code, sec. 8-1(i))
Sec. 9.03.008 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code or standards hereby adopted or who shall
violate any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall do so when such an order has been affirmed or modified by the board of
adjustment or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances. The
imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy any such violations or defects within a reasonable time.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the forced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1977 Code, sec. 8-1(j))
ARTICLE 9.04 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 9.04.001 Sale; display; storage
(a) No person, firm, corporation shall sell, offer for sale, display, barter or exchange, store, use, discharge,
cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or have in their possession any fireworks, as defined by
International Fire Code, adopted article 9.03 fire code, section 9.03.001 of this code, within the jurisdiction
limits of the city.
(b) The provisions of this section as to sale or display shall not apply to the following:
(1) Property zoned as a planned development with allowable uses consistent with light
manufacturing districts and a regulation allowing the sale, display and storage of the fireworks under
specific conditions, including, but not limited to, a stand-alone structure with a minimum of 6,000
square feet, fire sprinkler system, and minimum liability insurance coverage of $20,000,000.00 per
occurrence, naming the city as an additional insured.
(Ordinance 37-16 adopted 12/19/16)
(2) Property contiguous on the north side of State Highway 175 which was annexed into the city
after May 1, 2012. The provisions of this subsection shall expire on April 30, 2022. However, the
property described in this subsection shall be exempt from the provisions of this section after April
30, 2026 if the property is zoned as a planned development with allowable uses consistent with light
manufacturing districts and a regulation allowing the sale, display and storage of the fireworks under
specific conditions, including minimum liability insurance coverage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence,
naming the city as an additional insured, and the owner must installed an adequate fire suppression
sprinkler system within six months of receiving access to city water system. (Ordinance 09-2017
adopted 5/1/17)
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article for the possession of fireworks if:
(1) The defendant was operating or was a passenger in a motor vehicle that was being operating in
a public place; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/720
(2) The fireworks were not in the passenger area of the vehicle.
(Ordinance 37-16 adopted 12/19/16)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
CHAPTER 11
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS†
Sec. 11.02.001 Required; persons eligible for temporary vendor issuance; transferable; posting required
(a) No person shall operate a food service establishment or temporary food establishment who does not have a
valid permit, license, or certificate issued to him by the city in accordance with this article. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such permit, license, or
certificate. Permits, licenses, or certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be
posted in every food service establishment.
(b) No person shall operate a food establishment, mobile food establishment, or temporary food establishment
within the corporate limits of the city without compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 11.02.002 Establishment of food service inspection fees
Each food service establishment holding any permit, license, or certificate issued by the city shall pay a fee in
such amount as provided by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be paid on or before January 1st of
each year, or at the time a food service establishment is first issued a permit, license or certificate by the city.
Such fee shall be made payable to the city secretary or designee.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
Sec. 11.02.003 State rules adopted
All food service establishments, mobile food establishments and temporary food establishments shall be subject
to the inspection of its establishment, vehicle or temporary establishment; the issuance, suspension and
revocation of any permits to operate; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the
enforcement of this article shall be regulated in accordance with the current edition of the Texas Department of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/720
Health's “Texas Retail Food Rules,” 25 TAC sections 228.1–228.278; and, all such establishments shall comply
with the requirements of the Texas Retail Food Rules unless specifically exempt in this article. (Ordinance 03-16
adopted 2/1/16)
Sec. 11.02.004 Definition
The definitions established in the Texas Food Establishment Rules, as amended, shall apply except as been
otherwise adopted in this chapter.
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas or its designee.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
Flea market food vendor. A person, as defined in this section, that rents a space at the flea market on weekends
for the purpose of bartering, distributing and/or selling fresh produce, raw foods, prepared foods and/or
prepackaged foods for human consumption. For the purposes of this article, a flea market vendor shall comply
with the regulations set forth for temporary food establishments. (Ordinance 08-14 adopted 8/25/14)
Person. Any natural person, firm, corporation, business or legal entity. (Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
Texas Retail Food Rules or food code. The Texas Retail Food Establishment Rules, 25 TAC sections 228.1–
228.278. (Ordinance 03-16 adopted 2/1/16)
Sec. 11.02.005 Inspection frequency; fees
An inspection of each food service establishment shall be performed at least once every six (6) months by the
city. Additional inspections of each food service establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the
enforcement of this article.
Sec. 11.02.006 Access
Representatives of the city, including any sanitarian employed by the health department of Dallas County or
Kaufman County, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. The
representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to
food and supplies purchased, received or used.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
Sec. 11.02.007 Report of inspections
Whenever an inspection of a temporary food establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be
recorded on the inspection report form set out in 25 TAC sections 228.1–228.278 of the state rules adopted
herein. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted
point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the
section violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total
of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the
inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. (Ordinance 03-16 adopted 2/1/16)
Sec. 11.02.008 Correction of violations
(a) The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the corrections of the
violations found, which shall not be later than 90 days from the date of inspection; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/720
(1) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup
into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations
shall not be resumed until authorized by the city.
(2) All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in
any event, within ten (10) days following inspection. Within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, the
holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall submit a written report to the city stating that the
four- or five-point weighted violations have been corrected. A followup inspection shall be conducted
to confirm correction.
(3) All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event,
by the time of the next routine inspection.
(4) When the rating score of the establishment exceeds thirty (30) demerits, the establishment shall
initiate corrective action on all identified violations within forty-eight (48) hours. One (1) or more
reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to ensure correction.
(5) In the case of temporary food service establishments all violations shall be corrected within
twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the city.
(b) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in
cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time
limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the city within ten (10) days following
cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the request.
(c) Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease operations,
it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease
operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
Sec. 11.02.009 Requirements for food manager certification and food handler cards
(a) Food manager certification requirements.
(1) No person or company shall operate a food establishment unless the establishment has a person
on duty who has completed an approved Texas Department of Health Food Protection Management
class.
(2) A food establishment with multiple shifts shall ensure that a person in charge of each shift has
completed an approved food protection management class.
(3) The person on duty and in charge shall make available to the city personnel their food manager
certificate when inspections are conducted or when proof of class completion is required.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
(4) The food manager certificate shall be valid for not less than five (5) years at which time an
approved food protection recertification class must be completed within forty-five (45) days after the
expiration of the original certificate, and every five (5) years thereafter. (Ordinance 11-15 adopted
6/1/15)
(5) Temporary food vendors, mobile food vendors who sell only prepackaged foods, and small
retail vendors who sell only prepackaged foods shall be exempt from the requirements of this section
of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/720
(b) Food employee requirements.
(1) All food employees shall complete a state approved food handler class within thirty (30) days
of employment at a local food establishment. A food employee is any person employed in a food
premises, who at any time may be involved in the manufacturing, preparation, serving or packing of
food for sale.
(2) Food handler cards shall be made available to city personnel when inspections are conducted or
when proof of course completion is requested.
(3) Food handler cards shall be valid for not less than two (2) years, at which time the card must be
renewed. Employees must renew the card within forty-five (45) days of the expiration of the original
card and every two (2) years thereafter.
(4) Any person not completing a food protection management class must complete an approved
food handler class.
(5) A food handler class may not be taken in place of a required food protection management class.
(6) Mobile food vendors who sell only prepackaged foods shall be exempt from this subsection.
(7) Temporary food vendors shall be exempt from this subsection.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
Sec. 11.02.010 Examination and condemnation of food
Food may be examined or sampled by the city as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. The city
may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor,
place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of 25 TAC sections 228.1–228.278 of the state
rules adopted by section 11.02.003 or any other section of this article. The city shall tag, label, or otherwise
identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from
the establishment. The city shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless
storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and that
if no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be
held within twenty (20) days after receipt of this request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to
denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 03-16
adopted 2/1/16)
Sec. 11.02.011 Review of plans
(a) Submission. Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever
an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the city for review and
approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and
model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The city shall approve the plans and specifications if they
meet the requirements of this article. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled,
or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city.
(b) Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (a) of this section
to be submitted to the city, the city shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations, to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/720
Sec. 11.02.012 Procedure when infection is suspected
(a) Generally. When the city has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of
a food service establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other
investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action. The city may require any or all of the following
measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food establishments.
(2) The immediate closing of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the
city, no further danger of disease outbreak exists.
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be
no danger of transmitting disease.
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and of
his and their body discharges.
(b) Fees for inspection services. Fees for inspection services shall be determined from time to time by the city
council, and rates authorized by the council shall be on file with the city secretary.
Sec. 11.02.013 Service of notices
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in
the records of the city.
Sec. 11.02.014 Injunctive relief
The city may seek equitable relief to enjoin violations of this article in addition to seek other forms of relief
under law.
Sec. 11.02.015 Issuance
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment, food sales, temporary vending of food shall
make written application for a permit on forms provided by the city. Such application shall include the name and
address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food being served or sold and the signature of
the applicant.
(b) Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or certificate, the city shall inspect the proposed
temporary food establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. If the applicant has
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with chapter 62 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(c) The city shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the
proposed temporary food establishment complies with the requirements of this article and the state regulations
adopted herein.
Sec. 11.02.016 Suspension
(a) The city may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit, license, or certificate to operate a
food service establishment if the holder of the permit, license, or certificate does not comply with the
requirements of this article, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of
this article, or if the operation of the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to
public health, or if the holder has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony, as provided in chapter 62 of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/720
Code of Criminal Procedure. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this
section. When a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease.
Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall be
afforded an opportunity for hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or
the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit, license, or certificate is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for
hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10) days. If no written
request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The city may end the suspension at
any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(c) The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the city at a time and place designated by it.
Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision
for sufficient copies of the transcript. The city shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record
and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing
decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the city.
Sec. 11.02.017 Revocation of permit, license, or certificate
(a) The city may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a permit, license, or certificate for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the city in the performance
of duty, or upon conviction of a felony or misdemeanor, as provided in chapter 62 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
(b) Prior to revocation, the city shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the
person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit, license, or certificate is to be revoked and that
the permit, license, or certificate shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice
unless a written request for hearing is filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within
such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit,
license, or certificate becomes final.
Sec. 11.02.018 Application after revocation
Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit,
license, or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license, or certificate.
Sec. 11.02.019 Requirements for mobile vending units
(a) A health permit is required for all mobile vending units.
(b) All mobile vending units will be inspected before permit is issued and one (1) time each six (6) months.
(c) Provide proof of automobile insurance with permit application.
(d) Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. until sunset.
(e) The operation of a mobile vending unit in the following locations is prohibited:
(1) All city parks.
(2) Within one block of a school, one (1) hour before or after school hours.
(3) No vending allowed within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection.
(4) Vendor being stationary at one location for more than fifteen (15) minutes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/720
(f) Ice cream trucks shall have the following equipment:
(1) Sign on front and back of truck that states in three-inch lettering “watch for children.”
(2) Company's name and phone number on the vehicle.
(3) Serving window shall be located on curbside only.
(4) Mirrors shall be provided on the truck with capability to see around the entire truck.
(5) Operable yellow/amber flashing lights on front and rear of truck.
(6) A truck rear bumper cover required to prevent children from jumping on the rear of the vehicle.
(7) Sound equipment must comply with the following:
(A) Sound equipment shall be limited to music or human speech.
(B) Sound shall not be audible more than one hundred (100) yards from the truck. Sound
shall be no louder than 80 dBA.
(C) Sound shall be turned off while the vehicle is stopped for vending.
(8) All drivers of ice cream trucks and vehicles vending products to children shall submit a copy of
their driver's license to the city and obtain the permit described in this article before operating such
vehicle.
(Ordinance 19-13 adopted 10/7/13)
ARTICLE 11.03 UNSANITARY OR UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Stagnant water
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy, or have supervision or control of, any lot,
tract or parcel of land in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water or other unwholesome
condition or any other condition that may produce disease thereon, or permit the same to remain thereon.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy, or have supervision or control of, any lot in
the city to permit or allow holes or places on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or
permit the same to remain thereon.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-35)
Sec. 11.03.002 Rubbish, carrion, etc.
Any person who shall own or occupy, or have supervision or control of, any lot, tract or parcel of land in the city
shall keep the same free from filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter of whatever nature. (1977
Code, sec. 12-36)
Sec. 11.03.003 Weeds, grass and brush
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming or occupying, or having supervision or control of, any
real property within the corporate limits of the city to permit weeds, grass and brush to grow to a greater height
than twelve (12) inches upon any such real property within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. It shall
be the duty of such person to keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline next adjacent to it, if
there be a curbline, and, if not, then within ten (10) feet outside that property line, free and clear of the matter
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/720
referred to above. All vegetation not regularly cultivated and which exceeds twelve (12) inches in height shall be
presumed to be objectionable and unsightly and in violation of this section.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming or occupying, or having supervision or control of, any
real property within the city to cut and remove all weeds, grass and brush as often as may be necessary to
comply with the requirements of subsection (a) above, provided that the cutting and removing of such weeds,
grass and brush at least once in every fifteen (15) days shall be deemed to constitute compliance with this
section.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-37)
Sec. 11.03.004 Notice to remove or remedy condition
Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the city, the mayor,
health officer or city manager shall notify the owner, or any person claiming or occupying, or having supervision
or control, of such lot or premises to remove or remedy the condition within seven (7) days after the date of such
notice. The notice must be given personally to the owner in writing, by letter addressed to the owner at the
owner's post office address, or, if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address if
unknown, by publication, by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to
which the violation relates, or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates if the property contains no buildings. In the notice of violation, the city
may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that, if the owner commits another violation of
the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of
the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess
the expense against the property. In addition, the city may give notice to any person owning, claiming or
occupying or having supervision or control of the property that, should any condition described in this article
exist again on the property within one year from the date of such notice, no additional notice to remove or
remedy the condition will be given, and a citation or citations will be issued to such person or persons as
provided in this code. If a significantly different condition subject to the provisions of this article exists on the
property after the date of such notice, but within one (1) year thereof, a new notice to remove or remedy the
condition will be given as provided in this section. (1977 Code, sec. 12-38; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.005 Correction of conditions by city
In the event the owner of the lot, tract, parcel, or premises does not comply with the requirement within ten (10)
days of a notice of violation, the city may do the work or make the improvements required and pay for the work
done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. The doing of such work and
the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of
any prosecution for a violation of this article. (1977 Code, sec. 12-39)
Sec. 11.03.006 Collection of city's expenses
(a) In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses referred to in section 11.03.005 within thirty
(30) days after notice of such expenses is given by mail by the appropriate city official, the city shall obtain a
lien against the property for such expenses in the manner provided in this section.
(b) To obtain a lien against the property, the code enforcement officer or other designated officer or employee
must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk of Dallas County. The lien statement must state the name
of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien
statement with the county clerk.
(c) The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10)
percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(d) The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/720
(e) The city council may authorize the city attorney to bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to
recover the expenditures and interest due.
(f) The statement of expenses filed or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses
incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
(g) The remedy of the filing of a claim for expenses and lien is cumulative of the remedy available to the city
by prosecution of a violation of this article in municipal court.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-40)
ARTICLE 11.04 DONATION BOXES
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Attended donation box. A donation box where a person is located adjacent to the donation box for the purpose of
receiving the personal property delivered to the donation box.
Donation box. A box, structure, trailer or other container, whether permanently or temporarily affixed to real
property, which may or may not be equipped with skids or wheels such that it is movable, the purpose of which
is to serve as a collection location of new and/or used personal property to be donated to a charitable
organization. The phrase “donation box” included attended donation boxes and unattended donation boxes.
Unattended donation box. A donation box where no person is located to receive personal property from those
delivering said personal property to the donation box.
Sec. 11.04.002 Prohibited
All donation boxes, whether attended or unattended, are prohibited from being placed on property located within
the territorial limits of the city.
Sec. 11.04.003 Transition provisions
A donation box that is located in the city as of the effective date of this article shall be removed by September 1,
2016.
(Ordinance 13-16 adopted 3/7/16)
CHAPTER 12
RESERVED
CHAPTER 13
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/720
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Waste material and dust from cotton gins
(a) Storage of waste material; burning or destruction of waste material.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store on any premises within the corporate
limits of the city more than ten (10) cubic yards of cotton burs, waste matter or rubbish resulting from
the ginning of cotton.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or destroy any of the combustible matter mentioned
in subsection (a)(1) within the corporate limits of the city or within five thousand (5,000) feet of such
corporate limits.
(b) Dust and lint prevention. All cotton gins operating within the corporate limits of the city shall maintain
suitable equipment for preventing dust and lint from being blown into the air and scattered in the neighborhood
of such gins, and shall prevent dust and lint being blown or allowed to escape into the air from such gins.
(1977 Code, secs. 12-1, 12-2)
Sec. 13.01.002 Dialing 9-1-1 when no emergency exists
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person acting within the city to make calls or reports on the
9-1-1 emergency telephone number system that the person knows to be false or misleading or that are
intentionally made for the purpose of disrupting the functioning of the 9-1-1 emergency telephone number
system.
(b) A person is presumed to have dialed a 9-1-1 emergency telephone number if the telephone number from
which the number is dialed is listed in his name with the local telephone company.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-5)
State law reference–Silent or abusive calls to 9-1-1 service, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.061.
Sec. 13.01.003 Discharge of fireworks
(a) The city council hereby declares the use or discharge of fireworks within the city limits and extending five
thousand feet (5,000') outside the city limits a public nuisance. The city manager or designee is hereby
authorized to take appropriate actions to abate such nuisance.
(b) It shall be a public nuisance and unlawful and an offense for any person to use or discharge fireworks
within the city limits and extending five thousand feet (5,000') outside the city limits.
(Ordinance 01-06 adopted 2/2/06)
State law references–State regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2154; authority of city to
prohibit or further regulate fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2154.004.
ARTICLE 13.02 FIREARMS*
Sec. 13.02.001 Discharge
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/720
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot, explode or cause to be fired, shot or exploded any firearm, rifle,
shotgun, pistol, revolver, air rifle, air pistol or any other similar device capable of propelling bullets, shots or
other solid or compact substances whether propelled by powder, fire, compressed air or by a combination of
such forces within the territorial limits of the city.
Sec. 13.02.002 Defenses
The following shall be a defense to prosecution under section 13.02.001:
(1) That a person was a law enforcement peace officer acting in the performance of his/her duties.
(2) That the person was discharging the device in a shooting range or other recognized practice
facility operating in accordance with local ordinances or state law.
(3) That the person was using cartridges for show or theatrical productions or for a signal or
ceremonial purposes in an athletic or sporting event or military organization.
(4) That the person was acting in self defense or justifiable or reasonable protection of their person
or personal property.
(5) That the person was hunting on a tract of land that is ten (10) acres or more and more than 150
feet from a residence or occupied building located on the property, and was operating such firearm in
a manner not reasonably expected to cause the projectile to cross the boundary line of such property.
(6) That the person discharged the device for the purpose of protecting the person's person or
property, which may include but not be limited to shooting at nuisance animals such as feral hogs,
coyotes, raccoons and opossums.
(7) That the person was using a device for which the purpose of firing stud cartridges, explosive
rivets or other similar industrial ammunition in such device was being used for its intended purpose,
by way of example: nail guns, pneumatic fastening tools or other similar devices for construction or
manufacturing purposes.
(Ordinance 07-13 adopted 5/6/13)
Sec. 13.02.003 Heli hunting
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation within the airspace of the corporate limits of the city,
to discharge any firearm or other weapon from an aircraft, as defined by state law, unless such person has
obtained a valid permit issued by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and registered the same with the
city's police department at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any activity.
(b) Registration of the permit with the city shall consist of providing a copy of the state permit and provide the
following information:
(1) Name of permit holder;
(2) Aircraft registration number;
(3) Owner of the property;
(4) Property owner consent form; and
(5) Animal disposal plan
(c) The city council may, by resolution, establish appropriate registration fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/720
(d) Failure to register the permit as provided herein shall constitute a class C misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 18-13 adopted 10/7/13)
ARTICLE 13.03 NOISE*
Sec. 13.03.001 Penalty
An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall
continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate punishable offense. (Ordinance 20-06, sec. 12-137, adopted
10/5/06)
Sec. 13.03.002 Prohibitions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made any unreasonably loud or raucous
noise within the city which may be offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within the area of
audibility.
(b) The following acts are deemed to create an unreasonably loud or raucous noise and shall be deemed a
violation of this article, but such enumerated acts are merely an aid and amplification of the general prohibition
of unreasonably loud or raucous noises in the city and are in no way an exclusive list of the types or sounds of
noises prohibited by this article:
(1) The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making
device or attachment, or vocal shouting or outcry for purposes of selling anything, in a public or
private place, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivity.
(2) The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making
device or attachment on any premises under the ownership, management or control of a person or
business operation, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace or to be unreasonably
offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity or occupants of other premises in
the vicinity.
(3) To create, make, cause or allow to be made any means of any loud and disturbing noise which
may disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity of any public or private place
after 11:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
(4) To be operating or in control of a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the
city while playing any sound amplifier which is a part of, or connected to, the vehicle stereo system
or any other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at
a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source or causes a reasonable person of normal sensitivity to be
aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source.
(5) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or continuing noise shall disturb
the comfort and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility.
(6) Any noise or sound of such a character, intensity and duration which shall disturb the comfort
and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility.
(Ordinance 20-06, sec. 12-135, adopted 10/5/06)
(7) Engine braking prohibited. No person may use an engine-exhaust braking system while
operating a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city. For the purpose of this section, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/720
term engine-exhaust braking system means an engine-exhaust braking system device which converts
diesel-engine power into an air compressor and when engaged operates to slow the vehicle, creating
an unreasonable noise. It shall also include the production of excessive noise produced by engine
retarders due to a truck operating with improperly maintained, defective, or modified muffler systems
or the use of straight exhaust pipes with no mufflers. (Ordinance 12-16 adopted 3/7/16)
Sec. 13.03.003 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sounds produced by or emanating from the following types of
events, acts or activities:
(1) The lawful operation of aircraft, trains or legally registered motor vehicles operating on public
roadways, provided that such vehicles are equipped with all noise-suppression devices required by
state law.
(2) Equipment used exclusively in the maintenance of or repairs of buildings or grounds, provided
that such equipment is rated at not more than fifteen (15) horsepower.
(3) Construction equipment operating between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(4) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or
the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(5) The operation of farm equipment.
(6) Parades, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment, provided that a permit for such activity has
been granted by the city for not more than ten (10) days.
(7) Lawfully operating athletic events on public property or on the grounds of private schools,
religious institutions or similar nonprofit institutions.
(8) Reasonable or ordinary noise of children at play in parks and other public places.
(9) The reasonable use of automobile signals or horns in accordance with state law as set forth in
the Texas Transportation Code and as amended from time to time.
(10) The reasonable ringing of church bells.
(Ordinance 20-06, sec. 12-136, adopted 10/5/06)
ARTICLE 13.04 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 13.04.001 Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority provided by the Texas Transportation Code, chapter 683,
subchapter E, and any successor statutes, to establish procedures for the abatement and removal from private or
public property or public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-1, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.002 Definitions
In this article:
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-2, adopted 4/19/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/720
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled, does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license or
does not display a license plate, and is:
(1) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded;
(2) Substantially disfigured, damaged, or disintegrated;
(3) Ruined, destroyed or demolished; or
(4) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property;
(B) Thirty (30) consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance 03-2018, sec. 1, adopted 2/5/18)
Motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles and who collects,
purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in
order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Motor vehicle demolisher. Any person in the business of converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap
metal, or to otherwise wreck or dismantle motor vehicles.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Storage facility. A garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing,
storing, or parking of motor vehicles.
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-2, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.003 Declaration of nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place
or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of
private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health
and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is
adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are therefore declared to
be a public nuisance. (Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-3, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.004 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 13.04.003 of
this article.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and no/100
dollars ($200.00).
(c) The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction.
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-4, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.005 Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/720
The following vehicles or parts thereof are excepted from the provisions of this article:
(1) A vehicle or vehicle part which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.
(2) A vehicle or vehicle part which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special
interest vehicle or part thereof stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property,
provided that the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any:
(A) Are maintained in an orderly manner;
(B) Do not constitute a health hazard; and
(C) Are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(3) An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle or part thereof stored
by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, provided that the vehicle or part and the
outdoor storage area, if any, are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health
hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-5, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.006 Abatement and removal
The procedure for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof, as a public nuisance, from
private property, public property, or a public right-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) After a determination is made by the director of public works or his designee that a particular
vehicle is a junked vehicle or after an order issued by the municipal court pursuant to section
13.04.004(c), there shall be furnished not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated not later than the 10th
day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed and further that a request
for a hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten-day period, such notice to be personally
delivered or sent by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered
owner of the junked vehicle and all lienholders of record and to the owner or the occupant of the
private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known
registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is
located, personally delivered. If the notice is returned undeliverable by the United States post office,
official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the
date of such return.
(2) There shall be furnished not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the public
nuisance on public property or on public right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated not
later than the 10th day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed and
further that a request for hearing must be made before expiration of said ten (10) [day period], such
notice to be personally delivered or mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the
last known registered owner of the junked vehicle and all lienholders of record and, if on public
right-of-way, to the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon
such public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally
delivered. If the notice is returned undeliverable by the United States post office, official action to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/720
abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of such
return.
(3) After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
(4) There shall be a public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public
nuisance if such hearing is requested by the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle, or by
any lienholder of record, or by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises, or by the
owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which said vehicle is
located, or by the police department. The public hearing shall be held before the city manager, or
designee, not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice to abate the nuisance. At
the hearing, the vehicle which is the subject of the junked vehicle hearing is presumed, unless
demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. Any resolution or order requiring the removal
of a junked vehicle or part thereof must include the vehicle's description, vehicle identification
number, and license plate number if the information is available at the location of the nuisance. A
judge of the municipal court of the city may issue necessary orders to enforce the procedures for the
abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this article.
(5) The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the city,
after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of such junked vehicle has commenced, has no
effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(6) Notice must be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth (5th) day
after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof. Said department shall cancel the
certificate of title issued for the vehicle immediately upon receipt of such notice.
(7) The administration of the procedures herein shall be by the code enforcement department and
police department of the city, and by such other full-time city employees as may from time to time be
granted authority by the city's governing body to enforce this article, except that the removal of the
junked vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any duly authorized person.
(8) A citation may be issued and a complaint may be filed in the municipal court for the violation
of maintaining a public nuisance, if the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not
requested within the ten-day period provided in subsections (1) and (2).
(Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-6, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.007 Disposal
A junked vehicle or part thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or
any suitable site operated by the city, for processing as scrap or salvage pursuant to authority provided in the
Texas Transportation Code, section 683.078, or any successor statute for junked vehicle disposal. (Ordinance 06-
07, sec. 10-07, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.008 Right of entry
Any peace officer, code enforcement officer or other full-time city employee authorized to enforce this article
may enter the public areas of any building or premises, not a private residence or dwelling, structure or
completely enclosed structure on private property, at all reasonable times whenever necessary in the
performance of his duties to inspect and investigate for violations of any law, or to enforce any law. The
authority to inspect shall include but not be limited to the authority to examine vehicles or parts thereof, to
obtain information as to identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof
declared to be a nuisance. If such building or premises be occupied and involved in conducting business, he shall
first present proper credentials and demand entry, unless otherwise permitted by law. If such entry is refused, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/720
if no owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises can be located, he shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-08, adopted 4/19/07)
Sec. 13.04.009 Effect on other laws
Nothing in this article shall affect laws that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or laws that establish procedures for taking possession of abandoned motor
vehicles. (Ordinance 06-07, sec. 10-09, adopted 4/19/07)
ARTICLE 13.05 GRAFFITI*
Sec. 13.05.001 Purpose and intent
(a) The purpose of this article is to help prevent the spread of graffiti on city-owned property and non-cityowned
property within the incorporated area of the city.
(b) The city, as a home-rule city, has the general police power to prohibit the placement of graffiti and other
inscribed materials on private as well as public property. The city council finds and determines that graffiti is
obnoxious and a public nuisance and, unless the city causes it to be removed from city-owned and non-cityowned
property within the incorporated area of the city, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the
target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which
to be, all to the detriment of the city.
(c) It is the purpose of the city council, through the adoption of this article, to provide additional enforcement
tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of
graffiti on walls, natural objects and structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of property
owners as well as the entire community.
(Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-130, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.002 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates that a different meaning is intended:
Aerosol paint container. Any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray
painting or other substance capable of defacing property.
Etching or engraving device. A device that makes a delineation or impression on tangible property, regardless of
the manufacturer's intended use for that device.
Felt tip marker. Any indelible marker or similar paraphernalia with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater
than one-eighth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid which is not water soluble.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked,
etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface of cityowned
property or non-city-owned property within the incorporated areas of the city by or with, but not limited
to, any of the following: felt tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti paraphernalia, to the extent that the
same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof. Nothing contained in this definition shall
be construed to include the marking or painting of roadways, placement of government signs, street construction
or underground placement markings for utilities, or construction by the city or its licensees.
Graffiti paraphernalia. An aerosol paint container, felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching
tool, or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete or wood or any
other surface.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/720
Hate graffiti. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched,
scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface which depicts
prejudice and/or hate propaganda against persons of another race, religion, disability, age, sexual orientation or
gender identity.
Indelible marker. A device that makes a mark with a paint or ink product that is specifically formulated to be
more difficult to erase, wash out, or remove than ordinary paint or ink products.
Institution of higher education. Has the meaning assigned by the Health & Safety Code, section 481.134, as
amended.
Minor. Any person under the age of 17 years of age.
Paint stick or graffiti stick. Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar
substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and, upon application, of leaving a mark at least
one-eighth of an inch in width.
School. A private or public elementary or secondary school.
(Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-131, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.003 Penalty
It is the city's intent that all acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the city shall be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor pursuant to this article and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti cleanup. Each person, firm,
corporation, or partnership shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this article is committed or continued by such person,
firm, corporation, or partnership, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this article. (Ordinance
12-07, sec. 12-140, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.004 Applying graffiti
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any trees or structures, including, but not limited to buildings,
walls, fences, poles, and signs (hereinafter referred to collectively as “structures”), on any city-owned property
or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property within the incorporated
city limits. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-132, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.005 Possession of graffiti paraphernalia by minors
(a) It is unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any graffiti paraphernalia while on any school
property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to these specific locations
upon public property when such facilities are closed to the public or students. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-133,
adopted 8/2/07)
(b) It is unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any graffiti paraphernalia while on private
property without the consent of the property owner. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to the provisions of this article that the possession of felt tip markers [is]
by minors attending or traveling to or from school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor [is] participating
in a class at said school which formally requires the possession of felt tip markers. The burden of proof in any
prosecution for violation of this article shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a felt tip
marker. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-133, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.006 Possession of graffiti paraphernalia in designated public places
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/720
It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti paraphernalia while in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public
building owned or operated by the city or while in or within 100 feet of an underpass, bridge, abutment, storm
drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the city. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-134,
adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.007 Furnishing graffiti paraphernalia to minors
It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent, legal guardian, or person acting in loco parentis, to sell,
exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause to permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise
furnished, any graffiti paraphernalia to any minor without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated
guardian, which consent shall be given in advance in writing. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-135, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.008 Display of aerosol paint containers in retail establishments
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol paint
containers shall display and store or cause such aerosol paint containers to be displayed and stored in areas
which may be viewable by the public but shall not be accessible to the public without employee assistance
pending legal sale or disposition of such aerosol paint container. (Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-136, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.009 Declaration of nuisance
(a) The existence of graffiti on any city-owned property is expressly declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) The city council hereby finds and declares graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the
provisions and procedures herein contained or otherwise permitted by state law.
(c) No person shall post, affix, or attach any handbill, poster, or placard on any city-owned property, or,
without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property, within the incorporated area
of the city. The department of public works, code enforcement, and any other city department head, as
authorized by the city manager, may remove graffiti from city-owned property.
(Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-137, adopted 8/2/07)
Sec. 13.05.010 Removal by property owner
(a) An owner of any tangible property in the city commits an offense if, after the 15th day of receiving notice
from the city as provided by this section, he or she fails to completely paint over or remove all graffiti from the
property that is visible from any public property or right-of-way or from any private property other than the
property on which the graffiti exists, unless the graffiti was created on the property with owner's consent and
does not violate the sign regulations or any other applicable city ordinances or state or federal law.
(b) Prior to submitting notice to an owner to remove graffiti as provided in this section, the city manager or
his/her designee shall make an offer to the owner, in writing, to remove the graffiti from the owner's property
free of charge. If, in writing the owner refuses said offer, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the
authority to give notice to the owner in accordance with this section. The city manager or his/her designee shall
serve written notice to the owner requiring the removal of the graffiti from the property within 15 calendar days
after the date the notice is received. The notice shall contain:
(1) The date and nature of the violation;
(2) The physical location of the violation by street address or lot and block number;
(3) The name of the owner; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/720
(4) A statement that if the graffiti is not completely painted over, or removed within 15 calendar
days after such notice is received, the city or its designee may, without further notice, enter upon the
owner's property, remove the graffiti and charge the costs incurred to the owner. If the city or its
designee removes the graffiti, the cost of removal may be charged to the property owner and a lien
may be filed against the owner's property.
(c) The notice required by this section may be served by:
(1) Personal delivery in writing;
(2) Letter sent by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the owner's
address as shown in the records of the appraisal district where the property is located; or
(3) If service cannot be obtained under subsections (1) or (2), then notice must be served by:
(A) Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;
(B) Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the
notice relates; or
(C) Posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to
which the notice relates.
(d) Notice will be deemed to have been received:
(1) For personal service, as of the date the notice was given personally to the owner;
(2) For mailed notice, three days after it was mailed;
(3) For notice by publication, on the date the notice was published in the newspaper; or
(4) For notice by posting, ten days after the notice was posted.
(e) A citation for violation of subsection (a) may be issued on or after the 15th calendar day after the date the
notice is deemed received.
(f) If the owner does not comply with this article on or before the 15th day after the notice is deemed received,
the city or its designee may enter the property and do the work necessary to abate the graffiti.
(Ordinance 06-14 adopted 8/25/14)
Sec. 13.05.011 Consent form for removal by city
(a) A consent form to be provided by the city shall be available for property owners who desire to have the
city assist in removing graffiti from their property. Such form shall include the address of the property, the name
and signature of the property owner, and the property owner's mailing address and telephone number.
(b) Upon receipt of a completed consent form by the property owner, within forty-eight (48) hours, the
department of public works, code enforcement and/or any other department head authorized by the city manager
may remove graffiti from private property. The city will obtain a color sample and have the color matched as
closely as possible. The city will make every reasonable effort to restore the property where the actual graffiti
damage exists to its condition immediately preceding the application of the graffiti; it will not address collateral
damage of any type.
(c) By signing the consent form, the property owner understands that city employees may be present on their
property only for the purposes provided in said form.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/720
(Ordinance 12-07, sec. 12-139, adopted 8/2/07)
ARTICLE 13.06 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.06.001–13.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 13.06.031 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following
day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday, Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/720
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 13.06.032 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 13.06.033 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 13.06.032 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On a sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor
if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without detour or stop, an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 13.06.032(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 13.06.034 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/720
division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense under section 13.06.033 is present.
Sec. 13.06.035 Penalty; referral of minor to juvenile court
(a) A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of
each day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 13.06.032(a) of this division and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.
(Ordinance 06-2018 adopted 3/5/18)
ARTICLE 13.07 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS*
Sec. 13.07.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, phrases and the derivations thereof shall have the
meanings given herein:
Minor. A person younger than sixteen (16) years of age.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
Premises where minors commonly gather. A library, public park, private or public playground, private or public
school, or day care center as such terms are defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city, or any
public or nonprofit recreational facility as defined in section 481.134 of the Tex. Health and Safety Code. For the
purposes of this article, planted street medians are not public parks.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more
days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where
a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days
in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-126, adopted 8/3/06)
Sec. 13.07.002 Penalty
An offense under this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-131, adopted 8/3/06)
Sec. 13.07.003 Offenses
(a) For each person required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database (the
database) because of a violation involving a victim who was a minor as defined herein, it is unlawful for that
person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where
children commonly gather.
(b) It is unlawful for any person or corporation to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured
home, trailer, or other conveyance with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other
conveyance is located within 1,000 feet, as defined in this article, of any premises where children commonly
gather.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/720
(Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-127, adopted 8/3/06)
Sec. 13.07.004 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears on
the database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor as defined herein.
(b) For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or, in the case of multiple
residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line
of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city police department. The city shall
review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the city police
department.
(Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-128, adopted 8/3/06)
Sec. 13.07.005 Culpable mental state not required
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article. (Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-129, adopted 8/3/06)
Sec. 13.07.006 Defenses
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date
of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the
permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database, were opened
after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender
registration laws of the state.
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to
the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
(6) The person required to register on the database is incarcerated at the Federal Correctional
Institute.
(Ordinance 15-06, sec. 12-130, adopted 8/3/06)
ARTICLE 13.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 13.08.001 Purpose
The purpose of alcoholic beverage regulations is to protect the public health, safety and public welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/720
Sec. 13.08.002 General requirements
(a) The sale of beer in residential areas or within residential zoning districts is prohibited.
(b) Where otherwise allowed, the sale of beer for on-premises consumption shall not occur after 12:00
midnight.
(c) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church,
public or private school, or public hospital. This subsection does not apply to the holder of:
(1) A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering a premises that is
located within 300 feet of a private school; or
(2) A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under
section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, and that is located within 300
feet of a private school.
(d) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in direct line across intersections.
(e) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the
public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(f) Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the
public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a
public or private school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of
the application to officials of the public or private school before filing the application with the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the commission with the application. This
subsection does not apply to a permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering
the premises.
(g) The city council may allow variances to the regulation if it determines that enforcement of the regulation
in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other
resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose,
is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the
public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
Sec. 13.08.003 Day-care centers and child-care facilities
Provisions of section 13.08.002 relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and a child-care
facility as those terms are defined by section 42.002, Human Resources Code for a permit or license holder
under chapters 25, 28, 32, 69, or 74 who does not hold a food or beverage certificate. This subsection does not
apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if:
(1) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on
different stories of a multistory building; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/720
(2) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in
separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility
is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building.
Sec. 13.08.004 Homeless shelter or substance abuse treatment centers
(a) In this section:
Central business district. A compact and contiguous geographical area of a municipality used for commercial
purposes that has historically been the primary location in the municipality where business has been transacted.
Homeless shelter. A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter or other facility that is designed to provide
temporary living accommodations to individuals who lack a fixed regular and adequate residence.
Open container. A container that is no longer sealed.
(b) No person shall possess an open container or consume alcoholic beverages on a public street, public alley,
or public sidewalk within 1,000 feet of the property line of a homeless shelter that is not located in a central
business district or a substance abuse treatment center that is not located in a central business district.
(c) The city council may allow special temporary events for which subsection (b) may be suspended, upon an
establishment of conditions which protect the health, safety and welfare of adjacent property and participants.
Sec. 13.08.005 City facilities
(a) No person shall sell, store, possess or consume an alcoholic beverage in any city facility. The term
“alcoholic beverage,” as that term is used in this article, shall be defined as used in the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
(b) For a city-sponsored special civic event, the city council may grant a special event permit, for a period not
to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, to allow for the consumption, possession, and/or sale of beer and
wine by a vendor duly licensed in accordance with state law. In issuing such permit the city council may
designate an area within the city park or facility for the serving and consumption of beverages under such
permit, and shall establish such hours that the beverages may be dispensed under the permit. The city manager is
further authorized to implement such other appropriate safety and control regulations. A special event permit fee
under this subsection shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 02-10 adopted 3/18/10)
Sec. 13.08.006 Local permit required
(a) No person, corporation, or association shall sell alcoholic beverages within the city without first having
applied for and been granted a valid permit issued by the city to sell alcoholic beverages. Upon the exhibition of
a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant, the city secretary shall, in the name of the city, issue
and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character described in and
authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so issued in the
name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the license or
permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as the license or permit from the state remains in
force.
(b) An applicant for a permit under this section shall pay a fee, if any at the time of submission of the
application. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council issued for premises located within the
city as provided by state law.
(Ordinance 05-10 adopted 6/3/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/720
ARTICLE 13.09 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS
Sec. 13.09.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking
products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits.
Sec. 13.09.002 Definitions
Illegal smoking product. Any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend
thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any
one or more of the following chemicals:
(1) Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-Pentyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
(5) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073).
Ingestion device. Equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Sec. 13.09.003 Sell, offer, gift, display or possession
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/720
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale
any illegal smoking product.
Sec. 13.09.004 Use or possession of ingestion devices
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product.
Sec. 13.09.005 Defense
It shall be a defense to a violation of this article that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act; or, such
product is used as part of a recognized religious ceremony or worship service.
(Ordinance 15-10 adopted 9/16/10)
ARTICLE 13.10 SMOKING*
Sec. 13.10.001 Definitions
Bar. An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises
and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
Business. Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making or
not-for-profit purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional
corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional
services are delivered.
E-cigarette or e-hookah. Any electronic oral device or nicotine delivery device, such as one composed of a
heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substance, and
the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, hookah pen or under
any other product name or description.
Electronic vaping device. Any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and
electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide, a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or
other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user that
he/she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devices
whether they are manufactured or marketed as electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, e-cigars,
electronic pipes, e-pipes, electronic hookahs, e-hookahs or under any other product name or design.
Employee. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages
or profit.
Enclosed area. All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by walls, windows, or other
barrier (exclusive of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
Food establishment. Food product or food service establishments.
Municipal government buildings and vehicles. All of the enclosed area and within twenty-five (25) feet of any
door, operable window/vent or other opening to a such enclosed area, except for areas specifically provided for
and marked as designated smoking areas, that is used by the city and its employees and general public,
including, but not limited to all or any part of the building used for any of the operations of the city, such as the
city hall, police station, municipal court, fire station, library, animal shelter, senior citizens center, the public
works facility and all city-owned motor vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/720
Park. All property in the city that is designated, set aside or operated by the city for public recreational purposes,
whether dedicated or developed as a park or not, or that is located in any street right-of-way and is maintained as
public open space, including all playgrounds, tennis courts, basketball courts, splash pad, pavilions, parking lots,
trails and other areas within a park. Designation of property as a city park pursuant to this subsection is solely
for the purposes of identifying areas governed by this article and shall not be construed to be a dedication of any
property as a park.
Place of employment. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees
normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges
and restrooms, conference rooms and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a
“place of employment” unless it is used as a child-care, adult-day-care or health-care facility.
Playground. Any park or recreational area that is designed in part to be used by children and that has play or
sports equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar
facility located on city property. For the purpose of this article, playgrounds include the football field(s), baseball
field(s), soccer field(s), tennis court(s) and basketball court(s) located in all city parks. For the purpose of this
article, all references to the various fields also include the bleachers/seating area.
Possession. Actual care, custody, control or management.
Private place. Any enclosed area to which the public is not invited or in which the public is not permitted,
including but not limited to, personal or private residences, private social clubs or personal automobiles.
Public place. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but
not limited to: banks; educational facilities; health facilities; laundromats; reception areas; production and
marketing establishments; retail stores; theaters; and waiting rooms.
Retail electronic vaping store. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of electronic vaping devices,
accessories, and/or electronic vaping liquid or any other article or product that is for use in an electronic vaping
device and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
Retail store. An establishment whose purpose is to offer for sale and sell to consumers, not for resale, goods,
wares, merchandise and food, which items are purchased for use and/or consumption off-premises, including but
not limited to, supermarkets, convenience stores, drug stores, and warehouse stores.
Retail tobacco store. A retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which
the sale of other products is merely incidental.
Service line. Any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind,
whether or not such service involves the exchange of money.
Smoking or smoke. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, possessing or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed,
plant or combustible substance in any manner or in any form and/or vaping or the use of any electronic vaping
device.
Sports arena. Sports pavilions, athletic fields, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller
rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in
physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.
Tobacco product. A cigarette; a cigar; an electronic vaping device; smoking tobacco, including granulated, plugcut,
crimp-cut, ready rubbed and any form of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or as a cigarette; chewing
tobacco, including plug, scrap, and any kind of tobacco suitable for chewing, snuff or other preparations of
pulverized tobacco; nicotine product; dissolvable nicotine; electronic vaping liquid; or any other article or
product that is for use in an electronic vaping device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/720
Vaping. Inhaling or exhaling vapors of electronic vaping liquid from an electronic vaping device.
Sec. 13.10.002 Smoking regulations
(a) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas and within twenty-five (25) feet of any door, operable
window/vent or other opening to such enclosed area of the municipal government buildings, except for areas
specifically provided for and marked as designated smoking areas, and on all property designated as a park
within the city, including, but not limited to, the following places:
(1) City of Seagoville City Hall.
(2) Seagoville Public Library.
(3) Seagoville Municipal Court.
(4) Seagoville Police Department.
(5) Seagoville Fire Department.
(6) Seagoville Public Works Facility.
(7) Seagoville Animal Shelter.
(8) Seagoville Senior Citizens Activity and Transportation Center.
(9) Bearden Park - in its entirety.
(10) Casa Grande Park - in its entirety.
(11) C.O. Bruce Central Park - in its entirety.
(12) Heard Park - in its entirety.
(13) Oatman Park - in its entirety.
(14) Petty White Park - in its entirety.
(15) Putnam Park - in its entirety.
(16) Veterans Memorial Park - in its entirety.
(b) Smoking shall be prohibited in all city-owned motor vehicles.
(c) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and enclosed places of employment within the
city, including but not limited to, the following places:
(1) Elevators;
(2) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and any other common-use areas;
(3) Service lines;
(4) Retail stores;
(5) All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses, including
but not limited to, professional offices, banks, and laundromats;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/720
(6) Enclosed facilities within a place of employment;
(7) Food establishments, nightclubs and bars;
(8) Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture,
musical recital or other similar performance except when smoking is a part of a theatrical
performance upon a stage or in the course of a film or television production and smoking is a part of
the performance or production;
(9) Sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling and billiard facilities;
(10) Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under
the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of
the city of any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to
the extent such place is subject to jurisdiction of the city;
(11) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, private and semiprivate rooms of physical and mental health
facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices
and dentists' offices;
(12) Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer
parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities;
(13) Polling places;
(14) Bingo games/parlors;
(15) Hotels and motels, including at least ninety (90) percent of rooms rented to guests;
(16) Within twenty-five (25) feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to an indoor
enclosed area.
Sec. 13.10.003 Places where smoking is not prohibited
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the
smoking restrictions of this article:
(1) Private residences, except when used as child day care, adult day care or household care
facility;
(2) Personal automobiles;
(3) Retail tobacco stores and electronic vaping stores in stand-alone physical facilities;
(4) Outdoor places of employment except within twenty-five (25) feet of any door, operable
window/vent or other opening to an enclosed area;
(5) Not more than ten (10) percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests may be designated as
smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these
rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 13.10.004 Posting of signs
(a) The owner, manager or other person having control of such building or premises where smoking is
prohibited by this article shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating “no smoking” visible at each
public entrance, whether for the public, employees or deliveries, and at restroom entrances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/720
(b) Such “no smoking” signs shall have bold lettering of not less than one (1) inch in height. The international
“no smoking” symbol may also be used (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with red bar across it).
(c) Any owner, manager, or other person having control of any establishment regulated by this article shall be
responsible for posting appropriate signage.
Sec. 13.10.005 Enforcement
(a) Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city's community development director/code
enforcement or other official as designated by the city manager by issuance of a municipal court citation.
(b) Any person may register a complaint under this article to initiate enforcement with the city's community
development director/code enforcement.
(c) It is the duty of the owner, manager, operator or person-in-charge of any establishment regulated by this
article:
(1) To post signs in accordance with section 13.10.004 of this article;
(2) To not provide ashtrays, matches, lighters or other smoking related paraphernalia in a regulated
premises;
(3) To advise a person who violates this article that smoking is not allowed; and
(4) To request a person remove themselves from the location after that person has been advised
that smoking is not allowed and that person willfully continues to smoke.
Sec. 13.10.006 Offenses and penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of
this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any
premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with the following sections and subsections of
this article:
(1) Section 13.10.004; and
(2) Section 13.10.005, subsection (c) below.
(c) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(d) Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be a separate and distinct violation.
(Ordinance 11-16 adopted 3/7/16)
CHAPTER 14
RESERVED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/720
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES
ARTICLE 15.01 LIBRARY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 15.01.001 Unauthorized removal of books or other materials
It shall be unlawful for any person to take from the public library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper,
audiotape, videotape or other property except in accordance with the rules of such library. (1977 Code, sec. 12-
25)
Sec. 15.01.002 Failure to return borrowed materials
Any person who shall take or borrow from the public library any book, pamphlet, periodical, paper or other
property shall be required to return same to the library or pay the replacement cost of the materials within thirty
(30) days of the date that the library has mailed a notice to such person's address as shown on the records of the
library. (1977 Code, sec. 12-26)
Sec. 15.01.003 Fees
(a) Fees for overdue material shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council.
(b) Fees for lost or destroyed library materials: As adopted by resolution of the city council.
(c) Fees for failure to return or pay replacement costs for library materials: Set by the municipal court/judge
up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus the replacement cost of the material.
(1977 Code, sec. 12-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 15.01.004–15.01.040 Reserved
Division 2. Library Advisory Board
Sec. 15.01.041 Created; powers and duties
A library advisory board is hereby created to perform the following duties:
(1) General duties. It shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to
the public library system. It shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and inspection of
the complete library system of the city. It shall advise the city council from time to time as to the
present and future maintenance, operation, planning, development, enlargement, and use policy of the
library system.
(2) Review, study and recommendation of priorities. It shall, prior to the 15th day of April of each
year, review, study and make recommendations to the city manager for priorities of projects or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/720
activities considered to be desirable for the library program. The city council is to be informed of
recommendations and reasons therefor made to the city manager.
(3) Solicitation of donations and grants. It may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, bequests, or
endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject
to the approval and acceptance of the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-56)
Sec. 15.01.042 Composition
The library advisory board shall be composed of six (6) qualified electors of the city appointed by the city
council. The city council will consider for appointment to the board only those persons who have demonstrated
their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in library activities and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the council that members shall, by reason of
diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a board which is broadly representative of the community.
(1977 Code, sec. 2-57)
Sec. 15.01.043 Terms of members
The terms of three (3) of the members of the library advisory board shall expire on the last day of June of each
odd-numbered year and the terms of three (3) of the members shall expire on the last day of June of each evennumbered
year. The members of the board shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through six (6). The oddnumbered
places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall expire in the evennumbered
years. Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms, but no members shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years. Newly appointed
members shall be installed at the first regular board meeting after their appointment. (1977 Code, sec. 2-58)
Sec. 15.01.044 Meetings generally; quorum
(a) The library advisory board shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. A
quorum for the conduct of the business shall consist of four (4) members of the board. The members of the board
shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the board. No members of the board shall abstain from
participation unless they have a conflict of interest as defined by state law or local ordinance.
(b) A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the board. No action can be
taken by the board without four affirmative votes of the board. The chairperson may participate in the discussion
of all matters coming before the board and shall be entitled to vote.
(c) The board shall meet regularly once each month at a time and date to be determined by the board.
(Ordinance 24-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 15.01.045 Compensation of members
The members of the library advisory board shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of
authorized expenditures attendant to the performance of their duties. (1977 Code, sec. 2-60)
Sec. 15.01.046 Organizational meeting; election of officers
The board shall hold an organizational meeting within thirty (30) days following their initial appointment.
Thereafter, the board shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year. The board shall select a chairman
from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The board shall elect a secretary
and such other officers as it deems necessary, either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned
by the city manager to work with the board. (1977 Code, sec. 2-61)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/720
Sec. 15.01.047 Rules of procedure; record of proceedings
The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the
provisions of this division. (1977 Code, sec. 2-62)
ARTICLE 15.02 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 15.02.001–15.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission
Sec. 15.02.031 Created; powers and duties
A parks and recreation advisory commission is hereby created to perform the following duties:
(1) General duties. It shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters
pertaining to parks and recreation, shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and
inspection of the complete park and recreation system of the city, and shall advise the city council
from time to time as to the present and future maintenance, operation, planning, acquisition,
development, enlargement, and use policy of the park and recreation system.
(2) Study of development of park and recreation areas. It shall study and encourage the
development of park and recreation areas and study and encourage the development of wholesome
recreation for all residents of the city.
(3) Advice to city manager. It shall advise the city manager on problems of development of
recreation areas, facilities, programs and improved recreation services.
(4) Review, study and recommendation of priorities. It shall, prior to the fifteenth day of April of
each year, review, study and make recommendations to the city manager for priorities of projects or
activities considered to be desirable for the park and recreation program. The city council is to be
informed of recommendations and reasons therefor made to the city manager.
(5) Recommendations on long-range capital improvement programs, facilities and equipment. It
shall advise the city manager on the development of long-range capital improvement programs and,
when, in its opinion, the need exists for additional park and recreational facilities, grounds or
premises, it shall make appropriate recommendations to the city council. It may also recommend the
acquisition of additional parks, park and recreational equipment and supplies.
(6) Recommendations on park and recreation rules and regulations. It shall recommend to the city
council rules and regulations governing the use of park and recreational facilities.
(7) Other recommendations to council. It shall make any other recommendations to the city council
regarding park and recreation matters that it considers advisable.
(8) Solicitation of donations and grants. It may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, bequests, or
endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject
to the approval and acceptance by the city council.
(9) Recommendation of amendments. It may, from time to time, recommend to the city council
amendments or changes to this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/720
(10) Establishment of park operating hours. It shall, whenever, in its opinion, it is desirable or
necessary, establish operating hours during which buildings, structures, facilities, athletic areas or
other improvements on park areas shall be operated. Such hours shall be posted on the entrance of
such buildings, facilities, etc., and shall be deemed as the official hours of operation.
(1977 Code, sec. 14-1)
Sec. 15.02.032 Composition; appointment and qualifications of members
The commission shall be composed of seven (7) qualified electors of the city appointed by the city council. The
city council will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have demonstrated their
civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in parks and recreation and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the council that members shall, by reason of
diversity of their individual occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly representative of the
community. (1977 Code, sec. 14-2)
Sec. 15.02.033 Terms of members
The terms of the odd place members of the commission shall expire on the last day of June of each oddnumbered
year, and the terms of the even place members shall expire on the last day of June of each evennumbered
year. The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through five (5).
The odd-numbered places shall expire in the odd-numbered years; the even-numbered places shall expire in the
even-numbered years. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled
for unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2) years. Newly appointed
members shall be installed at the first regular commission meeting after their appointment. (1977 Code, sec. 14-
2.1)
Sec. 15.02.034 Compensation of members
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of authorized
expenditures attendant to the performance of their duties. (1977 Code, sec. 14-3)
Sec. 15.02.035 Election of officers
The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year, and shall elect a chairman from
among its members before proceeding to any other matter of business. The commission shall elect a secretary
and such other officers as it deems necessary, either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned
by the city manager to work with the commission. (1977 Code, sec. 14-4)
Sec. 15.02.036 Meetings generally; quorum
(a) The commission shall meet regularly not less than monthly, and shall post notice of its meetings according
to state law. A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the commission. The
members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission. No members
of the commission shall abstain from participation unless they have a conflict of interest as defined by state law
or local ordinance.
(b) No action can be taken by the commission without four affirmative votes of the commission. The
chairperson may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the commission and shall be entitled
to vote.
(Ordinance 24-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 15.02.037 Rules of procedure; record of proceedings
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/720
The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings consistent with the
provisions of this division. (1977 Code, sec. 14-6)
Secs. 15.02.038–15.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Park Rules
Sec. 15.02.071 Prohibited acts
In any park of the city or on any park property it shall be unlawful:
(1) To hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind, provided that
this shall not apply to dogs when led by a cord or chain not more than six (6) feet long, except in
designated areas.
(2) To ride or drive any horse or other animal, except in designated areas.
(3) To ride, drive or go at a rate of speed faster than speed limits as posted on standard traffic signs,
upon any bicycle, motorcycle, automobile or any other vehicle whatsoever, upon any drive or street
in any park of the city, or to ride or drive any such motor vehicle upon any walk in such park, except
in designated areas.
(4) To carry or discharge any firearms, firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, or any other fireworks,
airguns, BB guns or slingshots. Bows and arrows may be used only in designated areas.
(5) To hit golf balls except in designated areas.
(6) To damage, cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen,
monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property; or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or
remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner any
building, monument, fence, bench or other structure.
(7) To cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer without
authorization from the city manager's office.
(8) To swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water in any fountain, pond, lake or stream.
(9) To make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire pits or designated areas provided
for that purpose.
(10) To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided
therefor.
(11) To participate or engage in any activity on any public park areas when such activity will create
a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. The parks and recreation commission
of the city may designate particular locations within park areas for specific activities. Overnight
camping is prohibited on any park property except by special permit issued by the city manager's
office.
(12) To play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with
cards, dice or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or to
maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
(13) To possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/720
(14) To use or speak threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language in any of the public parks,
and no person shall commit, in any such park, any obscene, lewd or indecent act or create any
nuisance.
(15) To disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise, exhibition or other
authorized activity.
(16) To distribute, post, place or erect any advertising, handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper or other
advertising device without prior permission by the city manager's office.
(17) To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services unless such
person or organization has a written agreement with or permit issued by the city manager's office.
(18) To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession or to
circulate any petition of any kind or character without prior approval of the city manager's office.
(19) To remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
of the following day, or remain, stay or loiter in any park in other than open hours if posted as open
other than 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight of the same day, except by special permit issued by the city
manager's office.
(20) For any person over the age of six (6) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated
for the opposite sex.
(21) For any vehicle to be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass or lawn within any park
areas unless signs permit. Parking is to be done in areas set aside for this purpose only. In areas
having no parking set aside, all parking will take place outside of the boundary or curbline, where
existing. Where parking stalls have been designated, all vehicles shall be parked on such lots within
and between the lines designating a single vehicle parking space and not otherwise. Where parking
lots or areas within public parks of the city have been designated for head-in parking to front on a
visible parking line without delineated single vehicle spaces, the front of the vehicle shall be placed
on the parking line and as near as practicable to the side of the last parked vehicle in line. No vehicle
shall be parked or left behind any vehicle in the parking line or back of such parking line in any
manner so as to obstruct, block or hinder ingress or egress from the line. Officers of the city police
department shall issue to violators of this subsection traffic tickets or notices to answer to charges in
the manner prescribed by the applicable ordinances and the same shall proceed in accordance with
such applicable sections. When a vehicle is parked or left in violation of this subsection in such a
manner as to obstruct or block traffic, and the owner or operator of the vehicle so that traffic will not
be impeded [sic]. No variation to the requirements of this subsection shall be allowed except by
special permit issued by the city manager's office.
(22) To wash or repair any automobile within any park boundaries.
(23) To operate any engine-powered model aircraft, model watercraft or model land vehicle except
in designated areas.
(24) To hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, shoot or throw missiles at any animals, reptiles,
fowl or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in possession the young of any wild animals, or the
eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird within the park boundaries.
(25) To ride or travel on a skateboard, roller blades, bicycles, or similar devices on a trail
designated in a public park for “foot traffic” only.
(1977 Code, sec. 14-7)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/720
Sec. 15.02.072 Designation of areas of permitted activities
Areas of permitted activities within the park boundaries will be designated by the city manager's office after
review and recommendation by the parks and recreation commission. All such areas so designated shall have
signs posted stating the allowed activities. (1977 Code, sec. 14-8)
Sec. 15.02.073 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 15.02.073 pertaining to park fees, deposits and reservations, was repealed and deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance 27-15 adopted 12/14/15. Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: 1977 Code, sec. 14-9(a)–(c) and
Ordinance adopting Code.
Sec. 15.02.074 League commissioner
The city manager is authorized to contract with an individual to serve as league commissioner for the annual
baseball/softball season in the city's parks. Compensation for the league commissioner will be fixed by the city
council in the city's annual budget. The commissioner shall manage the baseball/softball activities in the city's
parks in accordance with a complete job description to be established by the city manager. The league
commissioner shall be an independent contractor and shall enter into a separate agreement with the city annually.
The term of the agreement shall be from October 1 to September 30 of the succeeding year. (1977 Code, sec. 14-
9(d))
ARTICLE 15.03 AIRPORTS AND AVIATION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 15.03.001–15.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Helicopters
Sec. 15.03.031 Definitions
The following terms, as used in this division, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
Flying. The vertical or horizontal motion of a helicopter, other than the immediate landing or takeoff from an
established heliport.
Helicopter. Any rotor aircraft which depends principally for its support and motion upon the lift generated by
one or more power-driven rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis.
Heliport. Any area or structural surface which is used or intended to be used for landing and takeoff of
helicopters and any adjacent areas or building used or intended to be used for heliport buildings and heliport
facilities.
(1977 Code, sec. 5-21)
Sec. 15.03.032 Federal airworthiness certificate required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a helicopter within the corporate limits of the city unless there is an
outstanding airworthiness certificate issued by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of
America for such helicopter. (1977 Code, sec. 5-22)
Sec. 15.03.033 Federal airman's certificate required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/720
No person shall fly or operate a helicopter within the city unless he has an outstanding valid airman's certificate
issued by the Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of America. (1977 Code, sec. 5-23)
Sec. 15.03.034 Compliance with federal rules and regulations
No person shall operate or fly a helicopter within the city except in compliance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Civil Aeronautics Board. (1977 Code, sec. 5-24)
Sec. 15.03.035 Use of approved heliport required; exception
It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a helicopter to or from any property within the city other than a heliport
approved by the city council; providing, however, that the landing and takeoff of helicopters at places other than
approved heliports may be authorized by obtaining written permission from the city manager, where no federal
or local safety regulations are violated and where the owner or person in charge of the area to be used gives his
written consent to such use. (1977 Code, sec. 5-25)
Sec. 15.03.036 Fencing and control of landing area at heliports
The landing area for all heliports shall be fenced in such a manner as to keep the public free of the landing area,
and the operator shall be obligated to maintain rigid control of the same so as to prevent persons from coming
upon the landing area during operations. (1977 Code, sec. 5-26)
CHAPTER 16
RESERVED
CHAPTER 17
TRAFFIC
ARTICLE 17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 17.01.001 State traffic act adopted
All of the provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, being article 6701d of Vernon's Texas
Civil Statutes, insofar as they are applicable, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof the same as if copied in
full herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of such act within the city. The
definitions contained in such act shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. (1977 Code,
sec. 21-1)
Editor's note–Since adoption of this provision, the regulations contained in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.S., article 6701d) have been recodified and are now located in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
Sec. 17.01.002 General duties of police
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/720
It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to enforce the traffic regulations and ordinances of the city
and all state laws applicable to traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents
and to perform those duties especially imposed upon them by the provisions of this chapter. (1977 Code, sec. 21-
2)
Sec. 17.01.003 Authority of police officers to direct traffic
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to
direct traffic, by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws and ordinances;
provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter
and other traffic laws and ordinances. (1977 Code, sec. 21-3)
Sec. 17.01.004 Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may assist the police in directing
traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity thereof. (1977 Code, sec. 21-4)
Sec. 17.01.005 Obedience to traffic officers
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or a fire
department official invested by this chapter or other law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-5)
State law reference–Obedience to lawful order or direction of police officer or school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 542.501.
Sec. 17.01.006 Court record of traffic violations
There shall be kept by the municipal court a record of all traffic violations and all violators coming before it, and
what fines are paid. (1977 Code, sec. 21-13)
Sec. 17.01.007 Dangerous railroad crossings
(a) Designated; erection of stop signs.
(1) The city council hereby designates as particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of
railroads the following: the intersections of Bluff Road, Cypress Street, Malloy Bridge Road, Elm
Street, Durham Street and South Farmers Road with the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks, all within
the city.
(2) The city manager or his representative is authorized and directed to erect stop signs or other
standard traffic-control devices at each of the grade crossings designated in subsection (1).
(b) Stop required. When stop signs or other standard traffic-control devices are erected pursuant to subsection
(a) of this section, the driver of any vehicle will stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet,
from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
(1977 Code, secs. 21-7, 21-8)
State law reference–All vehicles to stop at certain railroad grade crossings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.252.
Sec. 17.01.008 Moving of heavy equipment on streets
No heavy motor-driven equipment or machinery, drag line, shovel, tractor with lugs or similar device shall be
operated under its own power over the streets of the city, but shall be transported on a trailer, truck or other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/720
vehicle equipped with rubber tires on the route specified by the chief of police. (1977 Code, sec. 21-11)
State law reference–Restrictions on use and sale of tires, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 547.612.
Sec. 17.01.009 Obstructions of right-of-way and visibility
(a) No person shall place, construct or erect any obstruction within or across any public street or right-of-way.
(b) On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required by the zoning ordinance, no obstruction
greater than one foot in diameter or width shall be permitted vertically between three and one-half (3-1/2) feet
and ten (10) feet above the curb grade in a triangle formed by legs of forty (40) feet extending horizontally in
each direction from the property corner.
(c) No person shall place, construct or erect any pole or structure with a hockey, soccer or basketball goal,
rim, hoop or other device affixed thereto designed or intended to be used for or readily adaptable for athletic or
sporting purposes, or any other obstruction, upon, along or across any public right-of-way or other public
easement in the city.
(Ordinance 05-14 adopted 8/5/14)
ARTICLE 17.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 17.02.001 Generally
The city manager or his duly authorized representative shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over,
along or beside any highway, street or alley signs, signals, and other traffic-control devices to direct or warn
traffic in accord with the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances and laws. All such traffic-control
devices shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
Volumes I and II, and shall be uniform and be located, so far as practicable, according to the directions shown in
such manual, throughout the city. All traffic-control devices which are consistent with such manual and state law
and this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. (1977 Code, sec. 21-6(a))
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 17.02.002 Report of installation
Whenever the city manager has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, signal or sign at any
location in the city or has caused the same to be done under his direction, the manager shall file a report with the
city secretary, in writing and signed officially by the city manager, stating the type of traffic-control device, sign
or signal and when and where the same was erected or installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such
report among the official papers of his office. (1977 Code, sec. 21-6(b))
Sec. 17.02.003 Obedience
It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of any official traffic-control device unless directed
so to do by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-6(c))
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 17.02.004 Evidence of validity
In any prosecution for a violation of this chapter or any traffic ordinance of the city, proof that any traffic-control
device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
same was installed by the city manager pursuant to the authority of this chapter and of the ordinance directing
the installation of such device, sign, signal or marking. (1977 Code, sec. 21-6(d))
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/720
Sec. 17.02.005 Conformance to state manual
All traffic-control devices, including signs, signals and pavement or curb markings, installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Volumes I and II, published by the state department of
transportation. All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so far
as practicable according to the directions shown in said manual throughout the city. All existing traffic-control
devices and those erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law and this chapter
shall be official traffic-control devices. (1977 Code, sec. 21-14)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
ARTICLE 17.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 17.03.001 U-turns
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in
the business section of the city, provided a sign or marker is displayed along such street to indicate a U-turn is
not permitted, and shall not, upon any street, so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and
without interfering with other traffic, and only where the street is crossed or makes intersection with another
street. (1977 Code, sec. 21-9)
Sec. 17.03.002 Unlawful operation of vehicles on parking lots, school property or church property
The following acts, when committed upon public or private parking lots, school grounds and church property by
any person, shall be and are hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful:
(1) The operation of any vehicle in such a manner as to indicate either a willful or wanton
disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(2) The operation of any vehicle which is not equipped with a muffler in good working order and
in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.
(3) The rapid acceleration of any motor vehicle from a stopped position so as to cause the wheels
of the vehicle to spin or to give off a loud screeching noise.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-10)
Secs. 17.03.003–17.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Stop Signs†
Sec. 17.03.051 Duties of driver approaching stop intersection
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall cause such vehicle to come to a complete stop
immediately prior to entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no
crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-51)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/720
State law references–Manner of stopping at stop or yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering stop or
yield intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 17.03.052 Locations
Ordinances designating stop sign locations are on file in the city secretary's office. Such ordinances are
specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of the Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 17.03.053–17.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Speed Limits*
Sec. 17.03.081 Speed limits on state highway system
This division is only intended to include those highways, streets or parts of highways or streets on which the city
council has the authority, by ordinance, to alter and establish a maximum prima facie speed limit, and this
division is not intended to modify or alter a speed limit declared by the state transportation commission on any
part of a designated or marked route of the state highway system. (1977 Code, sec. 21-24)
Sec. 17.03.082 Exemptions
The provisions of this division regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the fire
department or police department of the city, nor to physicians or ambulances responding to emergency calls in
the city. (1977 Code, sec. 21-25)
Sec. 17.03.083 Signs
In accordance with the requirements of state law, the reasonable and safe maximum prima facie speed limit has
been determined for each street named in this division and within the corporate limits of the city, and the city
manager or his or her designee shall post or cause to be posted the maximum prima facie speed limits set forth in
this division by appropriate signs in conspicuous places, so that every driver may be aware of the speed limits
established hereby, including locations for which the maximum prima facie speed limit is twenty-five (25) miles
per hour, as set out in this division.
Sec. 17.03.084 General speed limit
When no special hazards exist that would require a lower speed, having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then and there existing, no person shall operate or drive any motor or other vehicle upon any public
street or highway within the corporate limits of the city at a greater speed than twenty-five (25) miles per hour,
unless otherwise provided in this division, and any speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless
otherwise provided in this division, shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is not reasonable nor prudent
and is unlawful.
(Ordinance 04-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
State law reference–Prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 17.03.085 Speed limits on specific streets
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon the following designated streets at a
greater speed than the speed designated for that street or portion of that street as set forth herein, and any speed
in excess of the limits set forth in this section shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable
nor prudent and is unlawful.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/720
Street Extent Maximum
Speed (mph)
Alto Road From its point of intersection with
Seagoville Road, a/k/a Old Seagoville
Road to its point of intersection with
Wooley Way
20
Ballard Road Entire length 30
Barry Drive Entire length 15
E. Bluff Road From the 100 block of E. Bluff Road to
the 1099 block of E. Bluff Road
30
Bowers Street From Armstrong to the south city limits 40
Combine Road From its point of intersection with E.
Bluff Road to its point of intersection
with the Combine city limits
30
FM 1389 From its point of intersection with U.S.
Highway 175 to its point of intersection
with the Combine city limits
55
Kaufman Street From U.S. Highway 175 to Farmers
Road
35
S. Kaufman Street From its point of intersection with Bluff
Street to its point of intersection with
FM 1389
30
S. Kaufman Street From its point of intersection with Bluff
Street south to its point of intersection
with Georgia Lane
40
S. Kaufman Street From its point of intersection with
Georgia Lane south to its point of
intersection with FM 1389
45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/720
Kleberg Road From Glen to the west city limits 40
Larry Drive Entire length 15
Malloy Bridge Road From the southern city limits to a point
1,320 feet south of Cypress Street
55
Malloy Bridge Road From a point 1,320 feet south of Cypress
Street to Cypress Street
45
Street Extent Maximum
Speed (mph)
Malloy Bridge Road From Cypress Street to North Kaufman
Street
30
Malloy Bridge Road From N. Kaufman Street to one-half
(1/2) mile north of U.S. Hwy. 175
westbound frontage road, being the 1300
block of West Malloy Bridge Road
40
Malloy Bridge Road From the 1300 block of West Malloy
Bridge Road north one and one-half (1-
1/2) miles, 2,500 feet past the East Fork
Trinity
50
Malloy Bridge Road From 2,500 feet past the East Fork
Trinity to the northern city limits
55
Old Seagoville Road From Simonds Road to the city limits 40
Seagoville Road a/k/a/ Old
Seagoville Road
From its point of intersection with the
westbound U.S. Highway 175 Service
Road to its point of intersection with
Myers Street
30
Simonds Road The entire length between Highway 175
and Cloverhill Intersection
30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/720
Travers Trail Entire length 20
U.S. Highway 175 Northbound and southbound from city
limit to city limit
60
U.S. Highway 175 Service Road northbound and
southbound from city limit to city limit
40
Van Street Entire length 15
Vickie Drive Entire length 15
Victor Drive Entire length 15
Vincent Drive Entire length 15
Willis Drive Entire length 15
Wooley Way Entire length 20
Alley west of Hall Between Shadybrook and Oakbrook 10
Alley south of Shadybrook Between Hall and Ross 10
Alley north of Shadybrook Between Hall and Ross 10
Alley east of Hall From Shadybrook to Oakbrook 10
Westbound alley Between Bryan Place and Ross 10
Northbound alley Between Bryan Place and Ross 10
Alley east of Ross Between Catherine and Malloy Brdg. 10
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/720
Alley west of Ross Between Oakbrook and Malloy Brdg. 10
Alley north of Oakbrook From Oakbrook to Ross 10
(1977 Code, sec. 21-28; Ordinance 01-07-A, sec. 1, adopted 4/5/07; Ordinance 04-09 adopted 4/2/09; Ordinance
01-10 adopted 1/21/10; Ordinance 07-12 adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 17.03.086 School zones
(a) No person shall operate a motor or any other vehicle in any school traffic zone at a greater speed than
twenty (20) miles per hour. Any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that
the speed is not reasonable or prudent and it is unlawful. The speed limit designated for school traffic zones shall
be effective only at such times as appropriate signs advising motorists to this effect are placed in conspicuous
places.
(b) The following areas shall be designated as school zones:
Bowers Road, to extend the entire length of the 1600 block of Bowers Road in each direction.
Catherine, from High School to Jack Street.
Fisk, from Highway 175 service road to East Stark Road.
High School, from Shady Lane to Catherine Street.
Jack Street, from Catherine to Shady Lane.
Kaufman Road, from Elm Street to Ard Street.
Seagoville Road a/k/a Old Seagoville Road beginning at a point 450 feet from its point of
intersection with the Westbound U.S. Highway 175 Service Road northbound to its point of
intersection with Myers Street.
Seagoville Road a/k/a Old Seagoville Road from its point of intersection with Myers Street southbound to a
point 450 feet north of the U.S. Highway 175 Westbound Service Road.
Shady Lane, from High School to one hundred ninety-five (195) feet east of Jack Street.
East Stark Road, from the city limits to Lynell.
East Stark Road, from Highway 175 service road to Robinwood.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-29; Ordinance 08-12 adopted 6/4/12)
Secs. 17.03.087–17.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Electronic Messaging While Driving
Sec. 17.03.101 Application
The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons operating a motor vehicle on public roadways within
the incorporated city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/720
Sec. 17.03.102 Definitions
In this division:
Electronic message. A self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be
transmitted between physical devices. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a text-based
communication, a command or request to access an internet site, or other data that uses a commonly recognized
electronic communications protocol.
Hands-free device. A speaker phone capability or telephone attachment or other piece of equipment, regardless
of whether the equipment is permanently installed in the vehicle, that allows the use of a wireless
communication device for oral communication without use of either of the motor vehicle operator's hands.
Stop or stopped. To stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle in a location other than in a lane of traffic on a
roadway.
Wireless communication device. Has the meaning assigned in section 545.425 (use of wireless communication
device; offense) of the Texas Transportation Code.
Sec. 17.03.103 Violations
(a) It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to use a wireless communication device to view,
send or compose an electronic message or manually engage other application software while operating a motor
vehicle upon any roadway in the city, including when stopped.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution in this section if:
(1) An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device to strictly engage in a
telephone conversation or to listen to a voicemail message, including dialing or deactivating a phone
call;
(2) An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device while stopped or
standing at a position parallel to and as close as possible to the righthand edge or curb or a roadway
where parking, standing or stopping in a nonemergency situation is not otherwise prohibited;
(3) An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device solely in a voiceactivated
or other hands-free mode;
(4) An operator of an authorized public safety vehicle and/or government vehicle uses a wireless
communication device to respond to an emergency while acting in an official capacity while
operating an authorized government vehicle; or
(5) An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device to:
(A) Solely operate a global positioning or navigation system; or
(B) Obtain emergency assistance by contacting an emergency response service, including a
rescue, emergency medical, or hazardous material response service; a hospital; a fire
department; a law enforcement agency; a medical doctor's office; or an individual to administer
first-aid treatment.
Sec. 17.03.104 Conflicting regulations
To the extent that any clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this section conflicts with Transportation
Code, section 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communications devices while operating a motor vehicle
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/720
by minors, or Transportation Code, section 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in
school crossing zones, this section does not apply.
(Ordinance 04-14 adopted 7/21/14)
ARTICLE 17.04 PARKING, STOPPING OR STANDING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 17.04.001 Presumption as to owner's responsibility for violations
If a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, alley or other public place in violation of
any provision of this chapter regulating and [sic] stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, the same is hereby
declared a nuisance per se, and the fact that such vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall be
prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully stopped, placed or parked such vehicle. The records of the state
department of transportation or the county highway license department, showing the name of the person to
whom state license plates were issued, shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the person therein
named. (1977 Code, sec. 21-49)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 17.04.002 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
No person shall stand or park a vehicle, and no owner shall permit or suffer any vehicle belonging to him to
stand or be parked, upon any highway for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying it for sale; or
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(Ordinance 04-08, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/08)
Sec. 17.04.003 Parking near postal receptacle
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle, boat or other impediment upon any
public street or alley between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. within ten (10) feet of a postal receptacle or a
grouping of postal receptacles, except a United States Postal Service vehicle, and except on Sundays and federal
holidays. (Ordinance 04-08, sec. 1, adopted 2/7/08)
Sec. 17.04.004 Method of parking
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the driver of a vehicle shall
not park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of
traffic and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the edge of the roadway, except
where streets have been marked for angle parking or head-in parking, or when curbs are sufficiently moved in
upon private property to permit head-in parking. Markings will not be required to permit head-in parking where
such parking is the then-current general practice. (1977 Code, sec. 21-43)
State law references–Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303; authority to permit angle parking,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303(c).
Sec. 17.04.005 Parking for disabled persons
(a) Any vehicle displaying a symbol, tab, or other device authorized by the state department of transportation
attached to the license plate or in which a disabled identification card issued by the state department of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/720
transportation is placed in the lower left-hand side of the front windshield of said vehicle, when operated by or
for the transportation of a disabled person, shall be allowed to park for unlimited periods in any parking space or
parking area designated specifically for the disabled. A vehicle properly displaying the above symbol, tab,
device attached to the license plate or identification card is exempt from the payment of fees or penalties
imposed by any ordinance of the city for parking at a meter or in a space with a limitation on the length of time
for parking, unless the vehicle was not parked at the time by or for the transportation of a disabled person. This
exemption does not apply to fees or penalties imposed by a branch of the United States government. This section
does not permit parking a vehicle at a place or time that parking is prohibited.
(b) No person who is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or
permanently disabled person shall park a vehicle with such special device or displaying a temporarily disabled
person identification card issued by the state department of transportation in the lower left-hand corner of the
front windshield of said vehicle in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled. No
person shall park a vehicle neither displaying the special device nor displaying a temporarily disabled person
identification card issued by the state department of transportation in a parking space or parking area designated
specifically for the disabled. No person shall park a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or
any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. No person shall lend an identification card
issued to him under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chapter 681, as amended, to another person to be used in
violation of this section.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-43.1)
State law reference–Privileged parking for disabled persons, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
Sec. 17.04.006 Obstructing street or alley; blocking driveway
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions
or so as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic or so as to block the driveway entrance to abutting property. (1977 Code, sec. 21-40)
Sec. 17.04.007 Authority to move vehicles that obstruct performance of official duties
Any vehicle standing unattended may be moved by any member of the fire department or the police department
or any city employee working in or on the streets, and any policeman, fireman or such worker may require the
removal of any such vehicle if it obstructs the free movement of any such person in the actual discharge of his
official duties. (1977 Code, sec. 21-50)
State law reference–Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.305.
Sec. 17.04.008 Prohibited parking near schools or at hazardous locations
(a) The city manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating “no parking” upon that side of a street
adjacent to any school property when such parking would create a hazard or interfere with traffic in his opinion.
(b) The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, distances not
exceeding one hundred (100) feet at places where the parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(c) No person shall park any vehicle in violation of any sign erected pursuant to this section.
(d) No person shall leave, stand or park any vehicle at any point on the north service road or the south service
road of U.S. Highway 175 at any point within the corporate limits of the city. The city manager is hereby
directed to erect appropriate signs on said service roads to give motorists notice of the prohibition contained in
this section.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-44)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/720
Sec. 17.04.009 Parking for longer than twenty-four hours
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave standing or parked, in any public street, alley or other public place,
any vehicle unattended for a continuous period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. (1977 Code, sec. 21-
45)
Sec. 17.04.010 Parking on street under repair
In any case where any street in the city is being torn up, repaired or paved, or where any work is being done on
the same, making necessary the regulation of traffic thereon, the city manager is hereby authorized to prevent
parking, either altogether or to any extent deemed necessary by him, for any period of time that may be
necessary, or to close the street to traffic for such period of time. (1977 Code, sec. 21-46)
Sec. 17.04.011 Loading zones
(a) The city manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight loading zones
within the city and to maintain appropriate signs indicating the same.
(b) The city manager is hereby authorized to issue to the owner of any business establishment a special
permit, renewable annually, to designate a curb space, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in width, as a loading and
unloading zone, if the extension of such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of the owner's business
and will not interfere with traffic. The permit issued shall state the terms and conditions thereof, and payment
therefor shall be made to the city in the amount adopted by resolution of the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-47; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 17.04.012 Backing to curb for loading or unloading
When any six-wheeled articulated vehicle is backed to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading, the front
or tractor portion shall, insofar as physically possible, be turned parallel to the curb and headed in the direction
of traffic. (1977 Code, sec. 21-48)
Sec. 17.04.013 Parking of commercial vehicles on streets or public property
It shall be unlawful for person or any owner to leave, park or stand any truck-tractor, road-tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, bus or any commercial motor vehicle upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or property
owned or controlled by any unit of government; provided that this section shall not apply to street construction,
maintenance and repair equipment, trucks, rollers and implements or to trucks, equipment, trailers and vehicles
used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public services utilities or to motor
buses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops or any other vehicles designated
herein when actually parked at a designated loading zone in those areas of limited parking where loading zones
are designated or where it is now lawful to park any commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of then accepting
from the immediate shipper or then delivering to the consignee or addressee any transportable thing; provided
further that this section shall not apply to any vehicle defined or designated therein developing a mechanical
defect after such vehicle has commenced the run, en route, making it unsafe to proceed further, and in this event
it shall [not] be unlawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-41)
Sec. 17.04.014 Parking of commercial vehicles in certain zoning districts
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner to leave, park or stand any truck-tractor, semitrailer, bus,
truck or trailer, or any other commercial motor vehicle, with a rated carrying capacity of two (2) tons or more
according to the manufacturer's classification, upon property within any area zoned as residential, and districts
zoned office, general retail, and those districts zoned planned development for uses other than industrial. This
section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such zoned area for the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/720
purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, but not otherwise; and
further provided that it shall be an affirmative defense to this section that parking of commercial vehicles is at a
lawfully zoned business establishment, wherein such vehicles are utilized as an integral part of said lawfully
zoned business.
(b) Any person having obtained a permit from the city, as provided herein, may lawfully park such vehicles
under such circumstances as may be provided in the terms of the permit.
(c) “Integral part of a lawfully zoned business” for the purposes of this section shall mean the operation of
such vehicle to deliver merchandise or transport tools, equipment and supplies necessary to the operation of said
business, and other uses of said vehicles without which the operation of such business would be substantially
hindered. Remote and incidental uses of such vehicles in connection with said business, such as advertising and
name exposure, shall not be deemed use as an integral part of such business.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-42)
Secs. 17.04.015–17.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Parking Regulations for Specific Streets
Sec. 17.04.051 McClung Street
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on the east side of McClung Street, from the point of its intersection with Kaufman
Street southward a distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
(b) It shall be the duty of the city manager or his duly authorized representative to erect appropriate signs or
marked curbs giving notice of the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, and no such provisions shall be effective
unless such signs or markings are in place at the time of an alleged offense.
(c) There shall be excepted from the provisions of this section public utility vehicles while in the performance
of the installation, maintenance or service of such public utility.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-61)
Sec. 17.04.052 High School Drive
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or impediment between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days on the west side of High School Drive from the point of its
intersection with Catherine Drive southward to the point of its intersection with Shady Lane, and on the east side
of High School Drive from the point of its intersection with Catherine Drive southward a distance of two
hundred seventy (270) feet.
(b) It shall be the duty of the city manager or his duly authorized representative to erect appropriate signs or
marked curbs giving notice of the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, and such provisions shall not be effective
unless such signs or markings are in place at the time of an alleged offense.
(c) There shall be excepted from the provisions of this section public utility vehicles while in the performance
of the installation, maintenance or service of such public utility.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-62)
Sec. 17.04.053 Malloy Bridge Road
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/720
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the east side of Malloy Bridge Road from the point of its intersection with Kaufman Street
northward a distance of three hundred (300) feet. (1977 Code, sec. 21-63)
Sec. 17.04.054 Shady Lane
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the south side of Shady Lane from the point of its intersection with Hall Street eastward a distance
of one hundred (100) feet. (1977 Code, sec. 21-64)
Sec. 17.04.055 Simonds Road
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the east side of Simonds Road from the point of its intersection with U.S. 175 South Frontage Road
southward a distance of one hundred (100) feet. (1977 Code, sec. 21-65)
Sec. 17.04.056 May Road
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the east side of May Road, the entire distance fronting Bearden Park. (1977 Code, sec. 21-66)
Sec. 17.04.057 Kaufman Road
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the south side of Kaufman Road from the point of its intersection with Farmers Road eastward to its
intersection with Jett Street. (1977 Code, sec. 21-67)
Sec. 17.04.058 Cain Street
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on either the north or south side of Cain Street, the entire distance from Highway 175 Frontage Road to
Simonds Road. (1977 Code, sec. 21-68)
Sec. 17.04.059 North Kaufman Street
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on either side of North Kaufman Street from the point of its intersection with Ard Street
southward a distance of one thousand seventy-two feet (1,072') to its point of intersection with Elm Street.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on either side of North Kaufman Street from the point of its intersection with Elm Street
northward a distance of one thousand seventy-two feet (1,072') to its point of intersection with Ard Street.
(Ordinance 01-10 adopted 1/21/10)
Sec. 17.04.060 Seagoville Road a/k/a Old Seagoville Road
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on Seagoville Road, a/k/a Old Seagoville Road, from the point of its intersection with
the U.S. Highway 175 Westbound Service Road northward to its point of intersection with Myers Street.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on Seagoville Road, a/k/a Old Seagoville Road, from the point of its intersection with
Myers Street southward to its point of intersection with the U.S. Highway 175 Westbound Service Road.
(Ordinance 06-12 adopted 6/4/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/720
Sec. 17.04.061 Casa Grande Drive
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the southeast side of Casa Grande Drive from the point of its intersection with LaFonda Drive to its
point of intersection with LaFonda Circle. (Ordinance 15-15 adopted 8/3/15)
Sec. 17.04.062 Elizabeth Lane
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle weighing more than one (1) ton at
any time the entire distance of Elizabeth Lane between Simonds Road and Tunnell Street. (Ordinance 28-16
adopted 8/29/16)
Sec. 17.04.063 Tunnell Street
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle weighing more than one (1) ton at
any time on Tunnell Street, for the entire distance between U.S. Highway 175 and the dead end. (Ordinance 29-
16 adopted 8/29/16)
Sec. 17.04.064 U.S. Highway 175 Eastbound and Westbound Service Roads
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the north and south sides of the eastbound Highway 175 Service Road beginning at the Kaufman
County line, and on the north and south sides of the westbound U.S. Highway 175 Service Road, ending at the
Dallas County line for a distance of approximately 3.4 miles or approximately 17,952 feet, to include the
connecting turnaround at the eastern most point. (Ordinance 08-2017 adopted 4/3/17)
Sec. 17.04.065 Environmental Way
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or impediment at
any time on the either side of the entire distance of Environmental Way, beginning at its point of intersection
with U.S. Highway 175 Service Road/North Kaufman Street southwesterly to its point of intersection with
Bowers Road. (Ordinance 01-2018 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 17.04.066 U.S. Highway 175 Service Road
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on the U.S. Highway 175 Service Road beginning at its point of intersection with the
Dallas City Limits on the south side, southeast to its point of intersection with Simonds Road.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle or
impediment at any time on the U.S. Highway 175 Service Road on the north side, northwest to its point of
intersection with the Dallas City Limits.
(Ordinance 19-2018 adopted 10/1/18)
Secs. 17.04.067–17.04.090 Reserved
Division 3. Boats, Trailers, Recreational Vehicles and Campers*
Sec. 17.04.091 Definitions
For purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply:
Approved surface. A minimum of four (4) inches of concrete pavement constructed by removal of excess dirt
and reshaping of the existing surface, and shall use cushion sand as required. The parking facility shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/720
formed and placed with three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch concrete, using number
three (3) rebar placed on eighteen-inch centers, both ways, broom finished, with control joints to be placed on
fifteen-foot centers.
Boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, and camper. Shall be given the meaning, if any, provided by state law or, if
not defined by state law, by their common usage.
Public nuisances. Those uses of property visible from a public place or public right-of-way that are detrimental
to the safety and welfare of the general public, that tend to reduce the value of private property, that invite
vandalism, that create fire hazards, that constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and
safety of minors, or that are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is
adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city.
Standard driveway approach. The approved surface between the street or alley and the garage, carport or
required space on a lot, and which shall be no wider than the width of the garage, carport or parking space which
it serves, or a paved circular driveway which is intended to facilitate easier access to the main entrance of the
premises and a minimum of eight (8) continuous feet in width.
Vehicle. A vehicle that is subject to registration under chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code and must be
in accordance with chapter 683 of the Texas Transportation Code.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-71.1)
Sec. 17.04.092 Parking on residential property; parking facilities for nonresidential uses
(a) It shall be unlawful and it shall be an offense for the owner, occupant or person in charge of property
zoned for residential, duplex, or multifamily uses to permit vehicles, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles or
campers within the front yard of the premises between the front building line and the front property line or in the
side yard of corner lots between the side building line and the side property line where the property abuts a street
or public right-of-way, except on a standard driveway approach or approved surface. It shall be unlawful and
illegal for the parking, standing, or the maneuvering of vehicles, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and
campers behind the building line that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way [sic].
(b) The off-street parking facilities required for standard authorized uses shall be provided on the same lot or
parcel of land as the main structure they are intended to serve. All off-street parking and loading structures shall
be subject to the standards of the comprehensive zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the city.
(c) Off-street parking facilities provided for nonresidential uses on property shall be for customer and/or
employee vehicles only or for necessary loading and unloading of supplies; provided that in no event shall any
such parking facilities be used for the sale of vehicles, repair work, storage, dismantling or servicing of vehicles
or said equipment, storage or display of other goods, materials or products.
(1) All surfaces shall be maintained in good condition, generally free of potholes, cracks or broken
pavement and allowing access to all parking spaces or drives.
(2) Wheel stops are required in nonresidential parking spaces[;] where the space faces towards a
property line or a building, a wheel stop and/or a curb shall be provided which prevents a vehicle
from extending across the property line or hitting the building.
(3) Any and all parking for buildings constructed shall have continuous curbing between the
designated entrances and exits.
(4) Surface parking facilities may extend to the front property line, except for required screening
and landscaping (if required).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/720
(5) Parking facilities shall have an all-weather surface and shall be connected by an all-weather
surfaced driveway to an abutting public street or alley. Parking facilities and driveways shall be
designed by a qualified engineer or shall meet the following minimum standards: Concrete, asphalt or
any other approved all-weather surface is permissible from the front building line facing the right-ofway
to the rear of the property. (All-weather surface is defined as rock, crushed concrete or gravel.)
(6) All fire lanes shall be in compliance with the fire code.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-71.2)
Sec. 17.04.093 Abandoned or junked vehicles declared public nuisance
It shall be a public nuisance and unlawful and an offense for any owner, occupant or person in charge of any
premises in the city to permit the parking, standing or storing of a house trailer, mobile home, boat, recreational
vehicle, camper, farm machinery or similar equipment on such property if such item is abandoned, junked,
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded, or, if applicable, does not have lawfully affixed to it both
an unexpired license plate and state-issued certificate. (1977 Code, sec. 21-71.3)
Sec. 17.04.094 Removal of abandoned or junked vehicles
The police department or code enforcement officer of the city is authorized to take into custody any such item
found on public or private property, either with city personnel or by contract, and to preserve and store such
items as it takes into custody. A public hearing shall be conducted by the municipal court of the city before the
removal of any such item as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be held if requested by the owner, occupant or
person in charge of the premises within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. For any or all
of such public nuisances on private property, the police department or code enforcement officer shall give not
less than ten (10) days' written notice stating the nature of the public nuisance, that it must be removed and
abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day
period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail with a five-day return requested to the last known registered
owner of the item, if subject to registration under state law, to the owner of the premises, and to any lienholder
of record. If no request for hearing is received, the matter shall be considered by the municipal court and an
appropriate order of abatement issued if necessary. (1977 Code, sec. 21-71.4)
Sec. 17.04.095 Applicability
The provisions of this division shall not apply to an item that is completely enclosed within a building in a
lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property or where it is screened
from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-71.5)
Sec. 17.04.096 Time limit for reclamation of impounded item; sale at public auction
If an item taken into custody as provided in section 17.04.094 is not reclaimed with ten (10) days of its
impoundment, the police department or code enforcement officer may sell the item at a public auction. Notice of
the public auction shall be given by publication at least twice in the city's official newspaper. The owner and
lienholder shall have priority to recover the item and the item shall be returned upon payment of the expenses of
the towing, preserving, and storing of the items and the auction, including notice and publication costs, if
applicable. Any proceeds of the sale above such costs shall be held for the owner or lienholder for ninety (90)
days and then shall be deposited in a special fund that shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing,
preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs that result from placing another item in custody. (1977
Code, sec. 21-71.6)
ARTICLE 17.05 TRUCK ROUTES; COMMERCIAL VEHICLES*
Sec. 17.05.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/720
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall for the purpose of this article have the
meanings respectively prescribed for them in this section as follows:
Commercial motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the transportation
of property, including every vehicle used for delivery purposes.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self-propelled.
Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the
towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and
ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads, such as poles, pipes, or structural members
capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connection.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some
part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its
own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck-tractor. Every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed
as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
Vehicle. Every mechanical device in, upon, or about [by] which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trailers,
and semitrailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-72)
Sec. 17.05.002 Truck routes designated
The following streets and parts of streets are designated truck routes:
(1) U.S. Highway 175, for its entire length within the city.
(2) Malloy Bridge Road, for its entire length within the city.
(3) Simonds Road, from the point of its intersection with Cloverhill to the point of its intersection
with U.S. Highway 175.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-73)
Sec. 17.05.003 Truck route signs; alternate routes
The city manager or his duly authorized representative shall erect signs or markings to designate the truck routes
designated in this article. Whenever any street designated as a truck route is being repaired or is otherwise
temporarily obstructed, the city manager or his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized to designate
alternate truck routes for such period as may be necessary. The enforcement of section 17.05.002 shall not be
effective unless such signs or markings are in place at the time of an alleged offense. (1977 Code, sec. 21-74)
Sec. 17.05.004 Use of truck routes
(a) Generally. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor,
trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or any combination thereof through the city, in intercity travel, having a gross
weight with load in excess of two (2) tons, without a local destination or point of origin, except upon such streets
as are designated as truck routes by this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/720
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this article, however, shall not apply to any such vehicles having to wit [as
follows]:
(1) To a vehicle traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a
service, or place of loading or unloading over the shortest practicable route to or from a point on a
truck route. Any such vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such point not on a truck route
to another such point without returning to a truck route, if to so return would unreasonably increase
the distance to be travelled between such points. The operator of any such vehicle shall carry
evidence of the location of its last stop and of its immediate designation in order for this exception to
apply.
(2) To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call.
(3) To vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of
inspecting the facilities of the public utility and/or providing maintenance service to the facilities.
(4) To vehicles operated for public service, garbage pickups, street repair, and water service and
maintenance.
(1977 Code, sec. 21-75)
ARTICLE 17.06 PARADES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 17.06.001–17.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 17.06.031 Definition
For the purposes of this division, the term “parade” shall mean and include any parade or procession, other than
a funeral procession, containing or consisting of fifty (50) or more persons or ten (10) or more vehicles,
excepting the armed forces of the United States and the military forces of the state. (1977 Code, sec. 21-86)
Sec. 17.06.032 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, cause to be organized or participate in a parade on any street
without a permit from the city authorizing such parade. (1977 Code, sec. 21-87)
Sec. 17.06.033 Application
Any person, group or organization desiring to hold a parade shall make written application to the police
department for a permit so to do. The applicant shall sign such application and, in case of an application by an
entity other than an individual, shall indicate his position and authority to make such application. Unless waived
by the city manager, application must be made at least twenty (20) days prior to the day of the parade. (1977
Code, sec. 21-88)
Sec. 17.06.034 Issuance
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this division, the chief of police shall review the same, taking
into consideration the route, date, time of day, traffic flow and such other facts as may affect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and the public. He shall note his recommendations as to approval, disapproval or
such changes as he may deem advisable and forward the application to the city manager. Upon approval of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/720
application by the city manager, the permit shall be issued by the police department, with such restrictions as
may be applicable. (1977 Code, sec. 21-89)
Sec. 17.06.035 Appeals
Any applicant who is denied a permit under this division may appeal to the city council, upon written notice to
the city secretary three (3) full days prior to a regular meeting. The council's action on such application shall be
final. (1977 Code, sec. 21-90)
Sec. 17.06.036 Contents
A permit issued under this division shall prescribe the time and route of the parade and such limitations and
regulations as may be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the participants and the public, and
any violation of same shall be unlawful. (1977 Code, sec. 21-91)
Sec. 17.06.037 Arrangements to pay expenses incurred by city
The city manager or, in case of appeal, the city council may, as a condition to granting a permit under this
division, require that prior arrangements, satisfactory to the city manager, be made for paying any expense
connected with the holding of the parade, such as cleanup, barricades, special officers, damage to streets or other
expenses, to the end that the city shall be protected from expenditure of funds. (1977 Code, sec. 21-92)
CHAPTER 18
RESERVED
CHAPTER 19
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 19.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 19.02 SOLID WASTE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 19.02.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/720
Contractor or collection [collector]. Any duly authorized individual or company contracted by the city to act as
an agent of the city to remove garbage, rubbish, and trash from the city.
Dumpster. A container not less than two (2) cubic yards or more than eight (8) cubic yards in capacity and which
is suitable for mechanical lifting and dumping.
Garbage. Rubbish, trash, kitchen and household waste, ashes, paper and food containers.
Large brush (chipping), six- through eight-foot lengths. The large end shall not exceed six (6) inches in diameter,
feeder branches shall not exceed four (4) feet in overall width, large ends shall be stacked neatly facing the
street, and no foreign objects shall be mixed in stacked brush.
Rubbish. Tin cans, bottles, glass and scraps of iron, tin, wire or other metals.
Small brush. Tree trimmings, weeds, large hedge trimmings and trees not exceeding three (3) inches in diameter
and cut into lengths not exceeding four (4) feet.
Trash. Paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, old rubber, pieces of wood, boxes, barrels, crates
and feathers.
Yard waste. Brush, grass clippings, or other organic material produced as a result of landscape maintenance.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-1)
Sec. 19.02.002 Collection restricted to authorized collectors
The collection of garbage, trash, and rubbish or any kind of junk within the city by any person other than
employees or agents of the city is prohibited. (1977 Code, sec. 9-2)
Sec. 19.02.003 Standards for bags and containers
(a) Each owner, agent, occupant, tenant and lessee of any house, building or apartment in the city where
persons reside, board, lodge or carry on any business or other activity, or where animal or vegetable food is
prepared or served, shall cause to be provided, for each such house, building or apartment, disposable refuse
bags or garbage containers meeting the requirements of this section.
(b) Refuse bags provided under this section shall be of a type and quality approved by the city. Only such
refuse bags as are manufactured for use as garbage container bags shall be approved by the city. All bags shall
be sealed or tied securely.
(c) Garbage containers provided under this section shall be watertight, of a solid and durable grade of metal or
plastic, and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) gallons in capacity. The combined weight of the garbage and the
container shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Each container shall be provided with a suitable lifting handle or
handles on the outside and a close-fitting cover equipped with a handle. The container must not have any inside
structures, such as inside bands and reinforcing angles, or anything within the container to prevent the free
discharge of its contents.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-3)
Sec. 19.02.004 Deteriorated or damaged containers
Garbage containers that have deteriorated or that have been damaged to the extent of having jagged or sharp
edges capable of causing injury to persons whose duty it is to handle the containers, or to such an extent that the
covers will not fit securely, will be condemned by the city, and, if such containers are not replaced after notice to
the owner or user of their defective condition, they shall be confiscated. (1977 Code, sec. 9-4)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/720
Sec. 19.02.005 Storage of waste; unlawful deposit of waste in dumpster
(a) All residential customers, and commercial customers who generate less than two (2) cubic yards of
garbage, trash and rubbish per week, must store their garbage, trash and rubbish in bags or cans which meet the
city standards contained in section 19.02.003. Commercial customers who generate more than two (2) cubic
yards of garbage, trash and rubbish per week must use dumpsters provided by the authorized contract collector
for the storage of solid waste.
(b) Customers using dumpsters are required to maintain the area around the dumpsters and to insure adequate
storage space for the amount of waste normally generated by the establishment using the dumpsters by providing
an adequate number and/or size, and/or collection rate, of the dumpsters made available. It shall be unlawful for
any commercial customer or establishment using dumpsters to place, or cause to be placed, refuse at the side of
the dumpsters for the purpose of its disposal.
(c) Those business establishments, their agents and representatives which use a dumpster shall be deemed the
sole users of said dumpster. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of depositing brush, trash, garbage
and/or rubbish into a dumpster without the permission of the sole user of said dumpster shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the fines and penalties authorized by the Code of Ordinances.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-5)
Sec. 19.02.006 Frequency of collection
(a) The frequency of collection of all garbage, rubbish or trash by the city or an authorized contract collector
shall be determined and/or changed by resolution of the city council.
(b) A minimum of once-a-week collection is required for all commercial customers. A minimum of twice-aweek
collection is required of all restaurants, supermarkets, mobile home parks and apartment complexes using
dumpsters for the storage of tenants' solid waste, and for any other business, commercial or industrial
establishment which disposes excessive garbage or trash which could promote odors, flies, the breeding or
accumulation of rats and rodents, or any other health hazard or nuisance. Any commercial customer can request
up to six (6) collections or pickups per week. (1977 Code, sec. 9-6)
Sec. 19.02.007 Placement for collection
(a) Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a dwelling or public building used for residential, business or
commercial purposes shall be required to maintain or cause to be maintained constant supervision and
surveillance over the garbage receptacles and small brush on his premises. In areas where garbage or small brush
are collected from the street, the garbage receptacles shall be placed at the curbline no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of
the date preceding that on which it is to be collected and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and
shall be removed from the curbline no later than 8:00 p.m. on the day on which it is collected. (Ordinance 15-16
adopted 3/7/16)
(b) Large/bulky items may be placed at the curbline no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on Saturday immediately
preceding bulk collection week.
(c) Large brush shall be stacked loose with the large end facing the street in piles no taller than five (5) feet
high and free of any foreign objects. Large brush may be placed at the curbline no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the
tenth (10th) day preceding bulk collection week.
(Ordinance 09-2018 adopted 6/4/18)
Sec. 19.02.008 Charges for collection
(a) Residential curbside service. The minimum rate for residential customers obtaining curbside service from
the city or its authorized collector will be eighteen dollars and twenty cents ($18.20) per month. An extra
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/720
residential trash cart will be seven dollars and forty-five cents ($7.45) per month. This service will include one
(1) household garbage pickup per week, one (1) recyclable pickup biweekly and large brush and large bulk item
pickup on a once a-month basis.
(b) Commercial curbside service. The minimum rate for commercial customers obtaining curbside collection
service from the city or its authorized collector collecting less than two (2) cubic yards of garbage per week will
be twenty-five dollars and sixty-five cents ($25.65) per month. An extra commercial trash cart will be twentyfive
dollars and twenty-nine cents ($25.29) per month.
(c) Commercial dumpster service. The rate charged for commercial dumpster service shall entail a ten-percent
city franchise fee. The rate charged for commercial dumpster service shall be assessed and collected from all
commercial customers using such services as follows:
(1) Commercial pricing.
Container
Sizes
1x/wk 2x/wk 3x/wk 4x/wk 5x/wk 6x/wk Extra
Pickups
2 $58.35 $103.35 $166.73 $218.20 $332.05 - $64.89
3 $70.01 $136.71 $185.08 $266.76 $342.49 - $82.35
4 $80.01 $168.39 $260.08 $338.44 $420.14 - $94.12
6 $120.03 $241.74 $324.02 $416.79 $526.31 - $141.19
8 $145.27 $263.30 $416.79 $550.18 $708.56 $839.14 $170.88
(2) Additional charges.
(A) Containers with casters: $2.28 per month.
(B) Containers with locks or gates: $1.13 per pickup.
(C) Delivery, relocate and removal: $75.00 per collection.
(D) Extra yardage: $41.00 per yard.
(E) Container exchange/burned: $200.00 per collection.
(F) Obstruction/return: $25.00 per collection.
(3) Industrial containers.
(A) Roll-off containers.
(i) 20 cubic yard per haul: $453.05 per haul.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/720
(ii) 30 cubic yard per haul: $523.88 per haul.
(iii) 40 cubic yard per haul: $585.02 per haul.
(iv) Delivery and exchange daily: $105.75.
(v) Container rental: $5.91.
(B) Compactors.
(i) 6 cubic yard compactor charge: *See below.
(ii) 8 cubic yard compactor charge: *See below.
(iii) 30 cubic yard compactor charge: $236.63 per haul plus disposal.
(iv) 35 cubic yard compactor charge: $236.63 per haul plus disposal.
(v) 42 cubic yard compactor charge: $236.63 per haul plus disposal.
(vi) Dry run and relocate: $105.75 per collection.
* Due to variations in equipment configurations, price will be negotiated with customer.
(d) Discount for persons over sixty-five (65), disabled, or blind: Two dollars ($2.00) per month.
(Ordinance 01-2017 adopted 2/6/17)
Sec. 19.02.009 Removal from places of wholesale accumulation
Places of wholesale accumulation, such as killing and dressing plants for fowl, wholesale fruit and vegetable
houses, storage and other places, where the daily accumulation of garbage, trash and rubbish is more than the
ordinary quantities, are not included in the collection service furnished by the city, and the owners or operators
of such places shall remove their garbage, trash and rubbish, at their own expense, in the manner and by the
method directed by the city manager. (1977 Code, sec. 9-8)
Sec. 19.02.010 Disposal of dead animals
Heavy dead animals, such as cows, horses and mules, shall be disposed of by the owner or person having charge
of the same, in the manner and by the method directed by the city manager. (1977 Code, sec. 9-9)
Sec. 19.02.011 Disposal of heavy accumulations and construction material
Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes, clinkers, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel,
automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky, heavy material, shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner
or person controlling the same, under the direction of the city manager. (1977 Code, sec. 9-10)
Sec. 19.02.012 Disposal of manure and hazardous waste oils
Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards and pigeon lofts and hazardous waste oils from private
residences and garages or filling stations shall be disposed of at the expense of the party responsible for the
same, under the direction of the city manager. (1977 Code, sec. 9-11)
Sec. 19.02.013 Littering generally
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, sweep or otherwise deposit any garbage, trash, rubbish
or refuse of any kind on or in any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter or other public place within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/720
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind on
any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or
person in control of the property may deposit such matter in bags or containers meeting the requirements of this
article in such a manner that such matter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any street or sidewalk or any public place or upon any private property within the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse of any kind
upon any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-12)
State law references–Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365; illegal dumping, V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code, sec. 365.012.
Sec. 19.02.014 Littering in parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind in any
park within the city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the same will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or any public place.
Where public receptacles are not provided, all such matter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of. (1977 Code, sec. 9-13)
State law reference–Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Sec. 19.02.015 Unlawful accumulations
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any private property to cause, suffer, or permit
any such property to accumulate garbage, trash, rubbish and refuse of any kind. This section shall not prohibit
the temporary storage of such matter for collection in bags or containers.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any property that abuts or joins any paved street in
the city to allow or permit any garbage, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind or description whatsoever to
accumulate or remain on any part of the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by
such person. All persons owning or occupying such property shall keep such sidewalk free of all garbage,
rubbish, trash and other refuse.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-14)
Secs. 19.02.016–19.02.060 Reserved
Division 2. Franchise for Collection and Disposal
Sec. 19.02.061 Application; fee; issuance
(a) For and in consideration of compliance by each grantee with the covenants and conditions set forth in this
article, together with the other ordinances and regulations of the city governing the collecting and disposing of
commercial garbage by roll-off, front-end load, side load, stationary compactor and/or any other type of trash
container disposal service within the boundaries of the city, upon application and approval as provided herein,
the city hereby grants to each grantee a franchise to use the public streets, alleys and thoroughfares within the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of engaging in the business of collecting and disposing of garbage
and solid waste generated within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Each person, firm or corporation desiring a franchise shall make application to the city manager or his
designee to be considered for a franchise under the provisions of this section. The franchise, if granted, shall be
issued upon payment of a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and shall remain in effect until
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/720
October 1st of the succeeding year, provided that such fee will be prorated for the first year as determined by the
date the permit is issued. Each franchise shall be renewable for an additional one-year period on payment of the
annual fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
(c) The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the trade name under which the
applicant does or proposes to do business, the number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate, the standard
operating procedures of the applicant, the type of service the applicant proposes to render and the experience the
applicant has in rendering such service.
(d) The city manager or his designee shall be authorized to make an investigation of the applicant to determine
whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any law, whether or not the applicant has a
claim or judgment against him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a vehicle, and the financial
responsibility and ability of the applicant, including proof of automobile and public liability insurance in
amounts not less than those established as maximum recovery limits under the Texas Civil Practice and
Remedies Code and worker's compensation insurance covering all employees of such franchisee engaged in any
operation covered by this section. If the city manager determines, after investigation, that the applicant has been
convicted of a violation of law in connection with commercial garbage and trash hauling or has a claim or
judgment against him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of a vehicle engaged in commercial
garbage or trash hauling or cannot provide evidence of insurance as required above, the city manager shall
recommend denial of the permit application. If a recommendation is made for denial, such recommendation shall
be considered by the city council after notice and hearing to the applicant. Should there be no such grounds for
denial, the city manager shall issue the permit as provided in this section.
(1977 Code, sec. 9-15)
Sec. 19.02.062 Transfer; revocation
All permits granted by the city manager or the city council for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage,
trash and rubbish shall be nontransferable. Should a franchisee violate any of the provisions of this article or be
found to have misrepresented any of the facts and statements contained in the permit application, the city
manager shall have the authority to recommend the revocation of the franchise. Such recommendation shall be
forwarded to the city council for notice and hearing before such action is taken. All permits granted by the city
manager or the city council shall be in the possession of the person rendering such service and shall be subject to
inspection at all times. (1977 Code, sec. 9-16)
Sec. 19.02.063 Franchise exclusive
The city's contractor shall have the sole and exclusive franchise, license and privilege to provide residential,
commercial and industrial refuse, construction debris, and all municipal solid waste collection and removal
throughout the city, with exception of federal facilities and the DISD (refer to section 19.02.061). (1977 Code,
sec. 9-17)
ARTICLE 19.03 WATER AND SEWERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 19.03.001 Definitions
Wherever used in this article, the term “department” shall mean the city's water and sewer department and the
term “superintendent” shall mean the water and sewer superintendent, unless otherwise indicated to the contrary.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-1)
Sec. 19.03.002 Water and sewer department; water and sewer superintendent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/720
(a) There is hereby created a water and sewer department, the head of which shall be the water and sewer
superintendent, who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall be the administrative officer of the
department and the water and sewer systems, including all engine houses, engines, pumps, reservoirs,
standpipes, tanks, pipelines, hydrants, meters, wrenches, stopcocks, gate valves, fireplugs, testing equipment,
and all other property and machinery used in connection with the water and sewer systems.
(b) The water and sewer superintendent shall have general supervision over all employees of the water and
sewer systems, and shall make frequent trips of inspection over all pipelines and other property used in
connection with the systems.
(c) The superintendent shall report all violations of this article to the city manager and shall forthwith proceed
to have prosecuted all offenders against the provisions of this article.
(d) In the performance of his duties, the superintendent shall be subject at all times to the city ordinances,
rules and regulations.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-2)
Sec. 19.03.003 Mandatory connection; installation of connection
(a) Connections to water system to be made by city. No person, other than a duly authorized employee of the
city, shall, either directly or indirectly, make any tap or connection to any water main, lateral or extension of the
water system of the city, whether within or without the city limits. All taps or connections to the city water
system will be made by the city, upon application and payment of the fee prescribed by resolution of the city
council and not otherwise.
(b) Connections to sewer system to be made by city. No person, other than a duly authorized employee of the
city, shall make any connection or tap, either directly or indirectly, to any sewer main, lateral or extension,
whether within or without the city limits, if the sewage therefrom is finally emptied into the city sewer system.
All connections of the city sewer system will be made by the city, upon application and payment of the fee
prescribed by resolution of the city council and not otherwise.
(c) Service connections and line. The city shall provide service connections in the alley or street adjacent to
the nearest point of the property to be served, provided the city's water and sewer service systems have been
extended so as to be immediately available for such service connections. The owner's or tenant's service lines
shall be installed at his own expense and in accordance with the plumbing code and regulations of the city. No
service connection shall be made to any property where the owner's or tenant's service lines have not been
inspected and approved by the city's inspector.
(d) Water connection required. All owners of buildings required to have water service, situated within two
hundred (200) feet of a standard size water main, are hereby required to construct, or cause to be constructed,
suitable water service lines on their property and to connect the same with the city water system under the
direction and supervision of the city.
(e) Use of private water system. It shall be unlawful to build, construct, dig, maintain and use any private
water system or well as potable water within the city [except] when connection to a standard-size city water
main is impossible or impractical. The construction, maintenance and use of a well constructed in conformity
with state law and approved by the city inspector may be permitted until such time as connection to the city
system may be made. When connection to a standard-sized city water main is made, it shall be unlawful for any
person to connect or allow to be connected or to continue to be connected, in any manner, any well or private
water system to the city water system. Dual systems may be allowed.
(f) Sewer connection required. All owners of buildings required to have sewer facilities, situated within two
hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer, are hereby required to construct, or cause to be constructed, suitable
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/720
water closets on their property and to connect the same with the city sanitary sewer system and to keep and
maintain the connection to the sewer system in satisfactory operating condition and free from obstruction.
(g) Use of private sewage disposal system. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, dig,
maintain or use any dry toilet, surface privy, cesspool or septic tank within the city; provided, however, that
when connection to the sanitary sewer system is impossible or impractical at any time, the construction,
maintenance and use of a septic tank constructed in conformity with state law and approved by the city inspector
may be permitted until such time as connection to the sewer system may be made.
(h) Connection requirements not retroactive. All owners of buildings not connected to the city water and/or
sewer facilities as of the effective date of subsections (d) through (g) will be allowed to maintain their current
service facilities.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-3)
Sec. 19.03.004 Separate water connection required for each user; exceptions
(a) A separate water connection must be made and maintained, and a separate meter must be installed, for
each house and each place of business supplied with city water; provided, however, in the case of a residence or
business house or location to which it is impracticable to extend water service direct from the city's water main
or pipe, taking into consideration excessive cost or other reason satisfactory to the city manager, arrangements
may be made, at the city's option, to supply water to any such residence, place of business or location through
and by means of the connection and pipes of another water user.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), no consumer of city water shall supply water to any other
person or allow any other person to take water or pipe the same to his premises and two (2) or more consumers
shall not be permitted to be supplied with water from one service pipe.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-4)
Sec. 19.03.005 Water meters
(a) All water furnished by the city to its customers shall be measured by meters. The city shall own, control
and install all meters, which shall include all meters up to and including meters of two (2) inches in size.
Customers requiring meters larger than two (2) inches in size shall make application to the city in writing for
such meters, and, if such permission is granted, the city will install the meters and the customer shall pay the
actual cost of the meter and installation.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any water meter that has been placed by the city or to in any
way change, interfere with or tamper with any water meter. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-5)
Sec. 19.03.006 Permit required for turning on water
No plumber or other person shall turn on water from the street stopcocks without a written permit from the city.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-6)
Sec. 19.03.007 Right of entry to inspect water pipes and fixtures
Every customer of the services rendered by the water and sewer department shall at all reasonable times permit
an official of the city to enter his premises or building to examine the water pipes and fixtures and the manner in
which the water is used, and any customer refusing the same shall be refused water and sewer service from the
city until such permission shall be granted. (1977 Code, sec. 22-7)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/720
Sec. 19.03.008 Right to shut off water in mains
(a) The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs
in same, making connections and extensions of same, cleaning same and repairing the machinery, reservoirs or
any part of the city's water and sewer systems.
(b) The superintendent shall notify the community, unless emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity of so
shutting off the water, should he know beforehand the necessity to shut off the water from any line or lines of the
system.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-8)
Sec. 19.03.009 City not liable for damages caused by leaks or breakage of water pipes; repair of service
lines
The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by leaks or breakage of water pipes in or on the customer's
premises. The city, in its discretion, may notify the customer of needed repairs in the service lines, and the city
reserves the right to make all such repairs to the service lines and charge the customer the cost of such repairs.
The cost of such repairs shall be added to the water bill and the same rules applying to amounts due on water
bills shall apply to the repair bill. (1977 Code, sec. 22-9)
Sec. 19.03.010 Conservation of water in emergencies
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to proclaim an emergency and to order the rationing of water, so as
to conserve water and its uses within the city limits, at any time such proclamation and rationing shall be made
necessary by reason of the same or similar proclamation and declaration by the City of Dallas and notification to
the mayor by the City of Dallas of the need for similar action, or at such time as the demands upon the city water
supply and distribution system shall exceed the amount that may be efficiently made available by the city's
supply and distribution system, or at such time as the reserve supplies of water in storage within the city limits
shall be less than that required for protection against fire, or at such other time as the city council may by
resolution direct. Unless overruled by a majority vote of the city council, such proclamation and rationing order
of the mayor shall be final, binding and conclusive, and violation thereof shall be sufficient cause for the
curtailing of water service to any person in violation thereof, and the same may be curtailed upon written order
of the mayor, under the terms and conditions as therein contained. (1977 Code, sec. 22-10)
Sec. 19.03.011 Duty of city employees to report of leaks or waste of water
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force, to report to
the superintendent any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention. (1977 Code, sec.
22-11)
Sec. 19.03.012 Obtaining water by fraud
It shall be unlawful for any person to resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring
water for himself or others from a private connection on premises contrary to the city regulations or ordinances.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-12)
Sec. 19.03.013 Climbing on water tanks
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on an elevated water storage or
standpipe of the water system of the city, except by permission of the superintendent. (1977 Code, sec. 22-13)
Secs. 19.03.014–19.03.060 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/720
Sec. 19.03.061 Water rates
The monthly water rates charged by the city to all residential and commercial customers within the city limits,
shall be, for the first two thousand (2,000) gallons or any portion thereof depending on the size of the customer's
water meter, as shown in the charts below:
(1) Apartments and manufactured homes (per unit).
Water Meter Size (inches) Rate
3/4 or less $25.37
1" $25.37
1.5" $25.37
2" $25.37
4" $25.37
6" $25.37
8" $25.37
(2) All others.
Water Meter Size (inches) Rate
3/4 or less $25.37
1" $38.06
1.5" $63.43
2" $63.43
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/720
3" $164.93
4" $241.05
6" $844.95
8" or larger $1,268.70
(b) Water usage in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons charged and collected at the following table rate per
one thousand (1,000) gallons:
Water Usage in Gallons Rate
2,001–5,000 gallons $2.68
5,001–10,000 gallons $3.35
10,001–15,000 gallons $5.16
15,001–20,000 gallons $5.83
20,001–25,000 gallons $6.48
Over 25,000 gallons $7.17
(c) The above rates shall also apply to all water for resale or to water districts.
(Ordinance 16-2017 adopted 8/28/17)
Sec. 19.03.062 Sewer rates
(a) The monthly sewer rates charged by the city to all sewer utility customers within the city limits shall be
seventeen dollars and sixty-one cents ($17.61) minimum bill, up to two thousand (2,000) gallons of water usage,
plus eight dollars and forty-seven cents ($8.47) per one thousand (1,000) for consumption above 2,000 gallons
of water usage.
(b) Each residential customer's average water usage for the months of December, January, February, and
March will be computed, using the three (3) months with the least usage to average and determine that
customer's billing volume for the twelve-month period beginning in April of each year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/720
(c) Charges for new customers will be based on the city average of 4,500 gallons until an average is
established during December, January, February, and March.
(d) For commercial customers, the billing volumes are based on actual water usage.
(Ordinance 27-16 adopted 8/29/16)
Sec. 19.03.063 Charges when multiple units are supplied by same connection
(a) Water service. When more than one user is supplied water through the same connection or meter under the
provisions of section 19.03.004(a), such as apartments, mobile home parks, etc., the minimum monthly charge
for units shall be made for each unit, mobile home space, etc., on such connection, whether such unit is actually
taking water service each month or not. That monthly minimum bill, together with all charges for water used in
excess of the minimum, shall be charged to and collected from the customer in whose name the meter is
installed.
(b) Sewer service. Similarly, when more than one user is supplied sewer service through the same connection,
the minimum monthly charge as explained above shall be made for each unit, as explained above, by means of
such single connection, and that monthly minimum bill, together with sewer service charged in excess of the
minimum, shall be charged to and collected from the customer in whose name the meter is installed.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-29)
Sec. 19.03.064 Customers outside city limits
(a) Unless specifically authorized by city council resolution, no water or sewer service shall be extended to
new areas outside the city limits; provided, however, that any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying
property currently on an existing water or sewer line outside the city limits shall be entitled to request and
receive service in the manner provided by this code.
(b) Water and sewer rates for customers outside city limits: One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the rates
for customers within the city limits.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-30)
Sec. 19.03.065 Discount on sewer charges for persons age 65 and over
Residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or older may apply to the city for a discount on their sewer
charges in the amount of ten percent. This discount will apply to all persons who were previously given a
discount, without need for further application. (1977 Code, sec. 22-31)
Sec. 19.03.066 Deposit
(a) Residential property. Upon application for any utility service provided by the city to residential property,
the applicant shall pay a deposit of sixty dollars ($60.00) for home buyers and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
renters.
(b) Commercial property. Upon application for any utility service provided by the city to commercial
property, the applicant shall pay a deposit of:
(1) One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a three-fourths-inch meter.
(2) Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a one-inch meter.
(3) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a one-and-one-half-inch meter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/720
(4) Four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a two-inch meter and above.
(c) Only one (1) deposit shall be made by the applicant, and it shall be for both water and sewer service.
(d) When the depositor requests the termination of all utility service, the balance of the deposit, if any
remains, after all city charges have been paid, shall be returned to the depositor.
(e) Multi-units shall be charged the residential rate times the number of units.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-32)
Sec. 19.03.067 Water charge when meter fails to register
Should any meter fail to register the amount of water used by a consumer since the previous reading, the right
shall exist on the part of the city to average the amount used and charge for water used on the basis of any
previous three (3) months in the past year. (1977 Code, sec. 22-33)
Sec. 19.03.068 Charge for turning on water service
The charge for turn-on of service during normal city work hours and after normal city working hours, weekends
and holidays shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance 24-15 adopted 12/14/15)
Sec. 19.03.069 Billing; payment; delinquent penalty
The meter for each water customer shall be read monthly and the customer shall be billed for the water used
since the last previous meter reading. There shall be a period of at least ten (10) days from the date within which
time the customer may pay the actual (net) amount of his bill. Any bill which is not paid on or before the due
date specified shall be considered delinquent and a penalty of ten (10) percent of the total charges shall be added
thereto and the gross amount shall then be due and payable. (1977 Code, sec. 22-35)
Sec. 19.03.070 Reconnection of service after termination for failure to pay charges
Reconnection is the resumption of service to a customer whose service was subject to termination for failure to
pay amounts due, who had received notice of a disconnect date and had not paid the balance due in full on or
before such date. The fee for a reconnection during normal city work hours and after normal city working hours,
weekends and holidays shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance 24-15 adopted
12/14/15)
Sec. 19.03.071 Miscellaneous charges
(a) Reread of meter. There will be a charge as adopted by resolution of the city council for all rereads of a
water meter requested by a customer, if no reader error is discovered. No reread charge shall be assessed if a
reader error is discovered. (1977 Code, sec. 22-37; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Meter check. There shall be a charge established by resolution of the city council for a meter check
requested by a customer, if the meter is found to be accurate.
(c) Meter tampering and reset fee. If a water meter is turned off, locked or plugged by an authorized city
employee and the water meter is then found to be operative without being reconnected by an authorized person,
a fee established by resolution of the city council shall be levied against the customer. Meters pulled due to
tampering will have a reset charge established by resolution of the city council in addition to the tampering fee.
(Ordinance 24-15 adopted 12/14/15)
Sec. 19.03.072 Collection of unpaid charges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/720
(a) Any person, firm or corporation to whom water service may have been discontinued under the terms of
this article shall not be entitled to water or sewer services, or have water or sewer service or connections with the
water or sewer mains of this city made, until all outstanding charges and penalties have been paid.
(b) In the event payment of charges for water and/or sewer services furnished by the city is not made by the
due date specified in the final notice of delinquency to be sent to the customer not less than ten (10) days prior to
such due date, service shall be discontinued. Service shall not be reconnected except as provided in this article.
(c) To secure payment of such delinquent charges, the city may impose a lien against the customer's real
property to which the service was delivered, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution. The
lien shall not apply to bills for service connected in a tenant's name after notice by the property owner to the city
that the property is rental property. The lien shall not apply to bills for service connected in a tenant's name prior
to the effective date of this section. The lien shall be perfected by recording, in the real property records of
Dallas County, a notice of lien containing a legal description of the property and the account number for the
delinquent utility charges. The lien shall include all penalties, interest, and collection costs as established by this
article and to which the city may be entitled at law.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-38)
Sec. 19.03.073 Additional deposit for delinquent accounts
An additional deposit equal to the last three (3) months' billing shall be charged should an account become two
(2) months' delinquent and one (1) month current. (1977 Code, sec. 22-39)
Sec. 19.03.074 Capital recovery fee
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the capital recovery fee shall be to assist in providing for continued expansion
and rehabilitation of the water and sewer systems for the city and to reduce future need for bond indebtedness.
(b) Fees established.
(1) Retail, commercial, industrial, per service: $150.00.
(2) These fees shall be assessed for each water and each sewer service.
(c) Due date. Fees on subdivisions shall be due prior to release of the final plat for filing at Dallas County;
fees on development where subdivision is not required shall be due prior to issuance of the building permit.
(d) Use of fees. All fees generated by this section shall be deposited in a separate fund for water and sewer
capital improvements for rehabilitation and expansion of the utility system.
(e) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the penalty of fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1000.00) for each offense. Each and every
day such offense continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-40; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Financing capital improvements required by new development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 395.
ARTICLE 19.04 SEPTIC TANKS*
Sec. 19.04.001 Standards and specifications
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations regulating the
construction, installation and maintenance of septic tanks, the County of Dallas Health Department Standards
and Specifications, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein the same as if fully set out at
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/720
length, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction, installation and maintenance of all
septic tanks within the corporate limits of the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of such standards
and specifications for septic tanks shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1977 Code, sec. 22-14)
Sec. 19.04.002 Inspection reports
(a) An inspection report on each and every septic tank installed and used within the corporate limits of the
city, such report to be based on an inspection made by a representative of the county health department, shall be
delivered to the building official of the city.
(b) The city shall not maintain a supply of water on a permanent basis to any premises in any case where the
owner or occupant of the premises fails or refuses to deliver the inspection report referred to in subsection (a).
For the convenience of builders during the course of construction, the city will authorize a supply of water on a
temporary basis to premises on which the installation of a septic tank is contemplated, such temporary usage to
be authorized upon presentation to the building official of a written certification, executed by the builder or his
authorized agent, that the inspection report required by this section will be delivered as aforesaid upon
completion of a septic tank on the premises. The authorization for a temporary supply of water to premises
governed by this section will be withdrawn in case the builder, his authorized agent, or the owner of the
premises fails or refuses to deliver the inspection report as aforesaid.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-15)
ARTICLE 19.05 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Sec. 19.05.001 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms and phrases used in this article
shall be as follows:
Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Public Law No. 92-500, also known as the Clean Water Act
(CWA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
Administrator. The EPA Region VI Regional Administrator.
Approval authority. The director in a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) delegated state
with an approved state pretreatment program, i.e., the executive director of the state commission on
environmental quality (TCEQ) or its successor agencies.
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing
more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25)
million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official
appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/720
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative
if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
Bimonthly. Once every other month.
Biweekly. Once every other week.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed as
a concentration in mg/l. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth
in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, which
begins three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the sewer lateral at the property line or other lawful
place of disposal (also called house lateral or house connection).
Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) which
apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-
471.
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas, the city council, the city manager, and/or any other person authorized by the
city council to represent the city.
COD (chemical oxygen demand). The measure of oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter
present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as a concentration in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed
from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter
and thus does not necessarily correlate with BOD.
Composite sample. A sample composed of two or more discrete samples. The aggregate sample will reflect the
average water quality covering the compositing or sample period.
Control authority. The North Texas Municipal Water District (NTMWD) and the city pursuant to a pretreatment
program that has been approved by the approval authority.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer point before the building sewer discharges into
the public sewer.
Daily discharge. The discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any twenty-four-hour period
that reasonably represents a calendar day for purposes of sampling.
Daily maximum. The highest allowable “daily discharge” during a calendar month.
Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semisolid
waste (i.e., grease trap waste, grit trap wastes, and/or septage) into or on any land or water so that such waste or
any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water,
including, but not limited to, groundwaters.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/720
Domestic sewage. The waterborne wastes normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free of stormwater and
industrial wastes.
Environmental officer. The director of public works of the city or his/her duly authorized representative, which
may be any entity with which the city has contracted for operation of the POTW or a treatment plant and/or with
which the city has entered into a multijurisdictional, or interjurisdictional, agreement providing for wastewater
service and/or a pretreatment program, or a particular officer or employee thereof.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the
term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized officials of the EPA.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317).
Facility or activity. An NPDES “point source” or any other facility or activity (including land or appurtenances
thereto) that is subject to regulation under the NPDES program.
Flow-proportioned composite sample. A sample collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals
proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while
maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from
handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
Grab sample. An individual sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the
wastestream and collected over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
Grease trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy,
fatty liquid, semiliquid, and/or solid wastes into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or
indirectly connected.
Grease trap waste. Any greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid, and/or solid wastes removed by a grease trap.
Grit/sand trap. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of sand,
grit and other heavy solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
Grit trap waste. Any sand, grit and/or other heavy solids removed from a grit trap.
Hazardous waste. Any substance which, if disposed of otherwise than by discharge into the POTW, would be
identified as a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261.
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic
tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317).
Industrial user (or user). Any source of indirect discharge.
Industrial user wastewater discharge permit (or permit). A permit required of an industrial user to discharge
waste into any sewer system under the jurisdiction of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/720
Industrial user wastewater surcharge. The additional charge made on those persons or industries who discharge
industrial wastes into the sewer system which are amenable to treatment by the POTW treatment processes, but
which exceed either the BOD or TSS concentrations of normal domestic sewage.
Industrial waste. The waterborne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to
flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the
development of any natural resources, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage, as distinct from
normal domestic sewage.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which, either alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Is the cause of a violation of any requirement of the applicable TPDES permit issued for
operation of the POTW (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1345); the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including
title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and
including state requirements contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap,
chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tanks and described as grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes,
sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). A weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34
is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Monthly average. The highest allowable average of “daily discharge(s)” over a calendar month, calculated as the
sum of all “daily discharge(s)” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharge(s)”
measured during that month.
National pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard, or standard. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act,
which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40
C.F.R. section 403.5.
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317), which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/720
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent factors, [criteria] such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(A) or (B) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to the
existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Normal domestic sewage. The “normal” sewage for the city, for which the average concentration of TSS is not
more than 250 mg/l and BOD is no more than 250 mg/l. Industrial wastes and stormwater are excluded from this
term.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered or
design capacity.
Owner. Any person who owns a facility or any portion of a facility.
Pass-through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentration
which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the applicable TPDES permit issued for the operation of the POTW (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
POTW (publicly owned treatment works). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by a state or municipality (i.e., the city or other governmental entity
such as NTMWD). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes lift stations, sewers,
pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means
the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/720
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works (i.e., the city or other governmental entity such as
NTMWD). For the purpose of this article, the term shall also include sewers that convey wastewaters to the
POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with NTMWD, users of NTMWD's
POTW.
POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling
and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. The logarithm (base 10) of
the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
and cellar dirt; industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste; and the characteristics of wastewater (such as pH,
temperature, suspended solids, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).
ppm (parts per million). A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall
be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Pretreatment (or treatment). The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of pollutants (as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(d)), unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard. Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization
tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization
facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the
equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. section
403.6(e).
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an
industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Priority pollutant. A pollutant found in table II or table III of 40 C.F.R. part 122, appendix D.
Prohibited discharge standards (or prohibited discharges). Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in section 19.05.005 of this article.
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been
shredded to such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (0.5) inch in any dimension.
Responsible corporate officer.
(1) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for
the corporation; or
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more
than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25) million
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/720
dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and
into which storm, surface, and ground waters and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally passed.
Septage or septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, portable toilets, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, or septic tanks.
Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably
be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused
by delays in production.
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
Sewage service charge. The charge made on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
Shall and may. The term “shall” describes mandatory actions, and the term “may” describes permissive (i.e.,
discretionary) actions.
SIC (Standard Industrial Classification). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, or the latest
edition.
Significant industrial user (SIU).
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2), the term shall mean:
(A) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(B) Any other industrial user that:
(i) Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(ii) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or
(iii) Is designated as such by the environmental officer on the basis that the industrial
user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirements (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. section
403.8(f)(6)).
(2) Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(B) has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirements, the environmental officer may at any time, on his/her own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. section 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
Slug discharge or slug load. Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an
accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, and/or a discharge which violates any prohibited discharge
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/720
standard in section 19.05.005 of this article, and/or could significantly disrupt the POTW and/or threaten human
health and safety, and/or could potentially result in violations of the applicable TPDES permit issued for the
operation of the POTW or sludge requirements.
Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of any waste or raw material.
State commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). The state commission on environmental quality, or an agent
thereof, or, where appropriate, the executive director of TCEQ, or other duly authorized official of said agency,
or its successor agencies.
Storm sewer (or storm drain). A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including snowmelt.
Surcharge. The charge in addition to the sewage service charge which is made on those persons whose wastes
are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage.
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other
liquids, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of total suspended
solids or TSS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
Time composite sample. A sample composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in a single reservoir at
constant time intervals irrespective of flow.
Toxic pollutant (or toxic substance). Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to
the POTW in sufficient concentrations, as determined by the environmental officer, may be hazardous to sewer
maintenance and personnel, or tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute a hazard
to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life, or to create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters
of the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant; or any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of the Clean Water Act section 307(a) (33 U.S.C.
section 1317) or other acts.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove oil, grease, sand, flammable wastes or other
harmful substances.
Treatment plant (or wastewater treatment plant or WWTP). That portion, or those portions, of the POTW which
are designed to provide treatment of domestic sewage and industrial waste.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized, or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural, or industrial activities.
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and/or manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-43, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.002 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/720
C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations.
COD - Chemical oxygen demand.
CWA - Clean Water Act.
EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd - Gallons per day.
mg/l - Milligrams per liter.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NTMWD - North Texas Municipal Water District.
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works.
ppm - Parts per million.
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
SIU - Significant industrial user.
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act.
TAC - Texas Administrative Code.
TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
TSS - Total suspended solids.
U.S.C. - United States Code.
WWTP - Wastewater treatment plant.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-44, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.003 Purpose and policy
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the POTW for the city and enables the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.)
and the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing Sources of Pollution (40 C.F.R. part 403). The objectives
of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
(3) To protect both the POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the
course of their employment and the general public;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/720
(4) To promote the reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of cost of operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the POTW; and
(6) To enable the city and NTMWD to comply with the applicable TPDES permit issued for the
operation of the POTW, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to
which the POTW is subject.
(b) This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. This article authorizes the issuance of industrial user
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-45, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.004 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the environmental officer shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the environmental officer may be
delegated by the environmental officer to his/her duly authorized representative, which may be any entity with
which the city has contracted for operation of the POTW or a treatment plant and/or with which the city has
entered into a multijurisdictional or interjurisdictional agreement providing for wastewater service, or a
particular officer or employee thereof. (Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-46, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.005 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person may introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant(s) or wastewater which
may cause pass-through or interference. Also prohibited are any substances that have an adverse effect on the
environment, may endanger life, health or property, or constitute a public nuisance. These general prohibitions
apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Substances specifically prohibited from being discharged into the POTW are as follows:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases, including but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or any other substances
which are a fire or other hazard to the system, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may
be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fires or explosions or be
injurious in any other way to the facilities or operation of the POTW.
(2) Any substance which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited
to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty
degrees Centigrade (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. section 261.21.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than five point zero (5.0) standard units (SU) or greater than
ten point five (10.5) SU, or any wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage, including structural damage, or hazard to the POTW, equipment, or any person.
(4) Any wastewater containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and/or safety problems.
(5) Any liquid or vapor, including wastewater, having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) or sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65°C); or exhibiting heat in amounts which will
inhibit biological activity in a POTW causing an interference; or, in any case, exhibiting heat in such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/720
quantities that the temperature at the introduction into the POTW exceeds 40 degrees Centigrade
(40°C) or 104 degrees Fahrenheit (104°F).
(6) Any pollutant(s), including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) and total dissolved
solids, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, will cause pass-through or interference at the POTW or which will
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with any federal or state sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines, or regulations.
(7) Any free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or oils containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (32°–150°F) (0°–65°C); or any combination of free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or
oils, if, in the opinion of the environmental officer, it appears probable that such wastes:
(A) Can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewers in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(B) Can overload skimming and grease-handling equipment;
(C) Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass through to the receiving
water without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; or
(D) Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(8) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass-through.
(9) Solid, liquid, or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction to the flow in
sanitary sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment facilities,
such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues,
slops, chemical residues, paint residues, bulk solids or waste paper.
(10) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater, which either singly or
by interaction with other substances are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sanitary sewers for maintenance or repair.
(11) Wastewater containing COD in concentrations which are not amenable to treatment, or any
other substance which is determined by the environmental officer to not be amenable to treatment by
the POTW.
(12) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, including hauled wastewater, except at discharge points
designated by the environmental officer and at such times as are established by the environmental
officer.
(13) Pollutant(s) which cause:
(A) High hydrogen sulfide content; or
(B) Unusual taste- or odor-producing substances.
(14) Wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
POTW's effluent thereby violating the applicable TPDES permit issued for the operation of the
POTW.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/720
(15) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, or subsurface
drainage, unless specifically authorized by the environmental officer.
(16) Sludges, screening, or other residues from industrial activities.
(17) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the environmental officer in an industrial
user wastewater discharge permit.
(18) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW's effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
(19) Any garbage that has not been properly ground or shredded by suitable garbage grinders to
such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers.
(c) In cases where, in the opinion of the environmental officer, the character of the sewage from any
manufacturer or industrial plant building or other premises is such that it will damage the system, or cannot be
treated satisfactorily in the system, the environmental officer shall have the right to require such user to dispose
of such waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the POTW.
(d) Unusual flow and concentration of any of the above shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the
city, if such wastes can:
(1) Cause damage to the POTW;
(2) Impair processes;
(3) Incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage;
(4) Render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use;
(5) Create a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-47, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.006 Local limits
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge into the POTW any metals, chemicals or toxic substances in excess of the
following concentration limits:
(1) The following heavy metals and toxic materials in the form of compounds or elements in
solution or suspension in concentrations exceeding these limits:
Pollutant Daily Maximum Local
Limit (mg/l)
Arsenic (total) 4.81
Cadmium (total) 1.41
Chromium (total) 8.70
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/720
Copper (total) 9.74
Lead (total) 3.35
Mercury (total) 0.002
Nickel (total) 13.39
Selenium (total) 0.89
Silver (total) 0.58
Zinc (total) 4.14
Cyanide (total) 1.12
(2) The city may set limits on a permit-by-permit basis for any other parameter that would pose a
threat to water quality, health and safety, or the POTW, or the discharge of which would otherwise
result in violation of section 19.05.005 of this article, including but not limited to priority pollutants
found in the POTW influent at a concentration at or above 0.1 mg/l or numerical aquatic life criteria
as defined by TCEQ.
(3) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes without prior written permission from the environmental
officer.
(b) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. The environmental
officer may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
(c) Dilution is prohibited as a substitute for treatment. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water,
or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The environmental officer may impose mass
limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-48, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.007 Federal categorical pretreatment standards
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471, are hereby
incorporated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/720
(1) Upon the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial
category or subcategory, the categorical pretreatment standard, if more stringent than specific local
limits imposed under this article for industrial users subject to that categorical standard, shall
supersede the local limits imposed under this article.
(2) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the environmental officer may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(c).
(3) Where industrial users combine wastestreams prior to treatment, compliance with an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard will be determined either prior to combining the wastestreams or
following treatment of the combined wastestream (by applying the combined wastestream formula
found in 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(e)).
(4) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user can
prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. section 403.13, that factors
relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(5) An industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. section 403.15.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-49, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.008 City's right of revision
The environmental officer reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial user wastewater discharge
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-50,
adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.009 Discharges requiring traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include any nonresidential establishment discharging:
(1) Grease, or water containing grease;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; or
(5) Other harmful substances.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at their own expense and as required by the
environmental officer:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the environmental officer.
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and
inspection.
(3) Maintain the trap in effective and operating condition.
(4) Maintain all records related to the maintenance and operation of the trap.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/720
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-51, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.010 Compliance with other authorities
(a) Compliance with federal authority. Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with
all federal general pretreatment regulations and with those categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
as specified in 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
(b) Compliance with state authority. Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with
applicable sections of chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-52, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.011 Discharge permit requirements
(a) Notification of nature and characteristics of waste. All nondomestic users shall notify the environmental
officer of the nature and characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their discharge. The
environmental officer is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose. All nondomestic users must complete the
industrial user wastewater discharge permit application, the industrial waste survey, and/or other forms as
identified by the environmental officer. If a nondomestic user fails to complete any form identified as required
by the environmental officer, the nondomestic user will be in violation of this article. The environmental officer
may periodically require industrial users to update this information.
(b) Significant industrial users. It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater,
whether directly or indirectly, into the POTW without first obtaining an industrial user wastewater discharge
permit from the city. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial user wastewater discharge permit
shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in sections 19.05.021, 19.05.037, and 19.05.038 of this article. Obtaining an industrial user wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain any other permits required by federal,
state, or local law.
(c) Other industrial users; liquid waste haulers. The environmental officer may require that other industrial
users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain industrial user wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this article. The environmental officer also may prohibit the disposal of hauled pollutants,
including hauled wastewater. The discharge of hauled pollutants, including hauled wastewater, is subject to all
other requirements of this article.
(1) Industrial waste haulers, including haulers of wastewater, may discharge loads only at locations
designed by the environmental officer.
(2) No load may be discharged without prior consent of the environmental officer.
(3) The environmental officer may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with
applicable standards.
(4) The environmental officer may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.
(5) Industrial waste haulers, including haulers of wastewater, must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(d) Time limit. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain
an industrial user wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/720
this article. The application must be submitted to the environmental officer within ninety (90) days after the
effective date of this article.
(e) New connections. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
nondomestic wastes into the POTW must obtain an industrial user wastewater discharge permit prior to
beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application form must be filed by the SIU at least ninety (90)
days prior to commencement of discharge. Categorical SIUs must provide an application form and a
supplemental baseline monitoring report, the two of which are to contain the information required by 40 C.F.R.
section 403.12, as set out in section 19.05.012.
(f) Denial of permit; imposition of conditions. The environmental officer may deny or condition new or
increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users
where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
contributions would cause the POTW to violate its TPDES permit.
(g) Reapplication. Once permitted, the industrial user has the duty to reapply if the permittee wishes to
continue an activity regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the industrial user wastewater discharge
permit. The industrial user must submit an application for a new permit at least ninety (90) days before the
expiration of the permit. The application form may be obtained from the environmental officer.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-53, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.012 Application for discharge permit; baseline monitoring report
(a) All significant industrial users required to obtain an industrial user wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the environmental officer an application upon a form provided by the city. The city may
charge a permit application fee, which, if charged, shall accompany the application.
(b) The environmental officer shall issue an industrial user wastewater discharge permit if he/she determines
that pretreatment facilities are adequate for efficient treatment and that discharged wastes will comply with all
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including those imposed by this article. Incomplete or
inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
(c) Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one
hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination under 40
C.F.R. section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment
standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the
environmental officer an industrial user wastewater discharge permit application and a baseline monitoring
report, the two of which shall contain the information identified in subsections (1) through (6) below. At least
ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become subject to
categorical standards subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
environmental officer a report which contains the information listed in subsections (1) through (5) below. New
sources shall also be required to include [in] this report information on the method of pretreatment the source
intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. New sources shall give estimates as to the information
requested in subsections (4) and (5).
(1) Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including
the name of the operators and owners.
(2) Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
(3) Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate
of production, and the standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such
industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/720
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. The user shall submit a list of all chemicals
utilized in its processes and appropriate material safety data sheets (MSDS).
(4) Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
(A) Regulated process streams; and
(B) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40
C.F.R. section 403.6(e).
The environmental officer may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
(B) In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the categorical pretreatment standards or
by the environmental officer) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations.
(C) A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). For all other pollutants, twenty-fourhour
composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques where feasible. The environmental officer may waive flow-proportional composite
sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible.
In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling
techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
(D) The user shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to compile that data
necessary to comply with the requirements of this section.
(E) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such
exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula of 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall
be submitted to the environmental officer.
(F) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in
40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines
that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or
any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures suggested by the environmental officer
or other parties, approved by the EPA.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/720
(G) The environmental officer may require the user to submit a pollutant scan of the
wastewater discharge.
(H) The environmental officer may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to
determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
(I) The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and
methods of analysis, and the industrial user shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as
specified in section 19.05.018), and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 19.05.013
of this article.
(8) Modified limits. Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been
modified by a removal allowance (40 C.F.R. section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40
C.F.R. section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 C.F.R. section 403.13)
at the time the user submits the report required by this section, the information required by
subsections (6) and (7) shall pertain to the modified limits.
(9) Amendments. If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40
C.F.R. section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 C.F.R. section 403.6(e)), and/or a
fundamentally different factors variance (40 C.F.R. section 403.13) after the user submits the report
required by this section, any necessary amendments to the information requested by subsections (6)
and (7) of this section shall be submitted by the user to the environmental officer within sixty (60)
days after the modified limit is approved.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-54, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.013 Compliance schedule progress reports
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by section 19.05.012(c)(7):
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(2) No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine (9) months.
(3) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the compliance schedule and the final
date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the environmental officer
including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such
date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/720
delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the
environmental officer.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-55, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.014 Ninety-day compliance report
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, or, in the case of a new source, following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
environmental officer a report containing the information described in section 19.05.012(c)(4), (c)(5), and (c)(6).
For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the environmental officer in
accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of
the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19.05.018 of this article. (Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-56,
adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.015 Periodic reports on continued compliance
(a) Any significant industrial users subject to a categorical pretreatment standard after the compliance date of
such categorical standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW,
shall submit to the environmental officer, during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently in the categorical standard or by the environmental officer, TCEQ, or EPA, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such categorical pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in section 19.05.012(c)(4), except that the
environmental officer may require more detailed reporting of flows. At the discretion of the environmental
officer and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
environmental officer may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are submitted. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19.05.018 of this article.
(b) Where the environmental officer has imposed mass limitations on an industrial user as provided for by 40
C.F.R. section 403.6(d), the report required by subsection (a) above shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standards in the discharge for the industrial user.
(c) For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the environmental
officer in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. section 403.6(c), the report required by subsection (a)
above shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), the report required by subsection (a) above shall include the user's
actual average production rate for the reporting period.
(d) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(e) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement of this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the environmental officer, using the procedures prescribed in section 19.05.016(a) of
this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in this report.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-57, adopted 8/16/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/720
Sec. 19.05.016 Reporting requirements for significant noncategorical industrial users
(a) Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the environmental officer at least once every six
months (on dates specified by the environmental officer) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of
the pollutants required to be reported by the environmental officer. These reports shall be based on sampling and
analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques
described in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by
using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the environmental officer or other persons, approved by the EPA. This sampling and
analysis may be performed by the environmental officer in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user.
Where the environmental officer collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical
significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
(b) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19.05.018 of this
article.
(c) All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring
and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(d) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement of this section monitors any pollutant more
frequently that required by the environmental officer, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (a) of this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in this report.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-58, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.017 Discharge permit conditions
(a) Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and
all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city. Industrial user wastewater
discharge permits shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the environmental officer
to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW. Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall contain, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
(2) Statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, thirty-day prior notification to the
environmental officer and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or
operator;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 C.F.R. part 403,
categorical pretreatment standards, prohibited discharge standards, local limits, and state and local
law;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including
an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, prohibited discharge standards, local limits, and state and local law;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/720
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the
compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
(b) Industrial user wastewater discharge permits may contain other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
environmental officer to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
Such other conditions could include:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction
of appropriate devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works.
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special
conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges.
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater
discharged to the POTW.
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment.
(7) A statement that compliance with the industrial user wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the industrial user
wastewater discharge permit.
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the environmental officer to ensure compliance
with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-59, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.018 Signatory requirements for reports
(a) The reports required under sections 19.05.012, 19.05.014, 19.05.015, and 19.05.016 shall include the
certification statement below:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
and shall be signed as follows:
(1) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/720
(2) By a general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a partnership
or sole proprietorship, respectively.
(3) By the principal executive officer or environmental manager having responsibility for the
overall operation of the discharging facility, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a federal,
state, or local governmental entity, or their agents.
(4) By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1), (2), or (3) of
this subsection if:
(A) The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (1), (2), or
(3);
(B) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, or wellfield superintendent, or a position of
equivalent responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
(C) The written authorization is submitted to the environmental officer.
If an authorization under subsection (4) is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying
the requirements of subsection (4) must be submitted to the environmental officer prior to
or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(b) The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this article shall be subject
to:
(1) The provisions of 18 U.S.C. section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;
(2) The provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, governing false
statements, representations or certification; and
(3) The provisions of section 309(c)(6) regarding responsible corporate officers.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-60, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.019 Issuance of discharge permit; duration; modification; transfer; termination
(a) Duration. Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified period, not to exceed
five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the environmental
officer.
(b) Appeals. Any interested person, including the industrial user, may petition to appeal the terms of a permit,
or the denial of a permit, to the environmental appeals committee (as established by section 19.05.022 of this
article), within thirty (30) days of the final permit decision.
(1) Failure to submit to a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons
for these objections, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. Any
reasons advanced against a permit denial shall be fully explained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/720
(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the committee,
unless the environmental officer expressly so states. If, after considering the petition and any
arguments put forth by the environmental officer, the committee determines that reconsideration is
proper, it shall remand the permit, or permit application, back to the environmental officer for
reconsideration. Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the environmental officer on remand
shall be stayed pending reissuance, unless the committee expressly states to the contrary.
(4) An environmental appeals committee decision not to reconsider a final permit, or the denial of
a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(5) If the environmental appeals committee fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
(6) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the state district court.
(c) Permit action and modification. The environmental officer has the power to deny or condition new or
increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by an industrial user
where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
contributions would cause the POTW to violate the applicable TPDES permit issued for the operation of the
POTW. The environmental officer may modify the industrial user wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(2) To address material or substantial alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation,
processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective
permit.
(3) A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW
personnel, or the receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in
any required reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. section
403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
(9) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner or operator.
(10) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or other laws, rules, or regulations. The filing of a
request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a
notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition.
(d) Transfer. Industrial user wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner
and/or operator with prior approval of the environmental officer, provided:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/720
(1) The permittee must give at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the environmental officer.
(2) The permittee must provide a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator.
(3) The notice must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(A) States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
(B) Identifies that the permittee has provided a copy of the existing permit to the new owner
or operator;
(C) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(D) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.
(4) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the industrial user wastewater discharge
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(e) Termination.
(1) Industrial user wastewater discharge permits may be terminated for good cause, including but
not limited to the following reasons:
(A) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(B) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(C) Refusing to allow proper inspecting authorities timely access to the facility premises and
records.
(D) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(E) Failure to pay fines.
(F) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(G) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(H) Failure to notify the environmental officer of significant changes to the wastewater prior
to the changed discharge.
(I) Failure to provide prior notification to the environmental officer of changed conditions
pursuant to section 19.05.028(c) of this article.
(J) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial user
wastewater discharge permit application.
(K) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the industrial user wastewater discharge
permit application.
(L) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted
facility.
(M) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the industrial user
wastewater discharge permit or this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/720
(2) A user will be notified of any proposed permit termination and offered an opportunity to show
cause under section 19.05.021(h) of this article why the proposed termination should not occur.
(3) Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All industrial user wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular
user are void upon the issuance of a new permit to that user.
(f) Reissuance. The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete industrial user wastewater
discharge permit application form a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit.
(g) Continuation of expired permits. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the
permit is reissued if:
(1) The industrial user has submitted a complete industrial user wastewater discharge permit
application form at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user's permit.
(2) The failure to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous permit is not due to any act
or failure to act on the part of the industrial user.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-61, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.020 General reporting and recordkeeping requirements
(a) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the environmental
officer within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling
and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the environmental officer within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation.
(b) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of section 19.05.015 or section 19.05.016
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by this article or by the environmental officer, using the
procedures as prescribed in 40 C.F.R. section 403.12(g)(4), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(c) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this article or the industrial user
wastewater discharge permit shall retain for a minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities
and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article or the industrial user
wastewater discharge permit) and shall make [such records] available for inspection and copying by the EPA, the
TCEQ, or the environmental officer. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the city, when requested by the state or the federal
government, or when specifically notified of a longer retention period by the environmental officer. For all
samples, such records shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The date, exact location, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons
taking the samples;
(2) The date analyses were performed;
(3) Who performed the analyses;
(4) The analytical techniques/methods used;
(5) The results of such analyses.
(6) The outfall number(s) for which samples were taken;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/720
(7) The sampler's name, affiliation, and signature;
(8) Type of sample(s) collected;
(9) Number of parts or sample intervals of the sample(s);
(10) How the sample(s) were collected (i.e., automatic sampler, in person, etc.);
(11) Sample container - size and material;
(12) Field data - who measured it, date, and time;
(13) Sampling date and time - beginning date, ending date, beginning time, and ending time;
(14) Chain of custody information (including affiliation of each individual in chain of custody);
(15) Certification statement as set out in the city's industrial waste ordinance (this article);
(16) Authorized signature as required by city's industrial waste ordinance (this article).
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-62, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.021 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Telephone call or e-mail communication. After discovery of an industrial user violation, the environmental
officer may inform the noncompliant user by telephone or by e-mail communication concerning the violation
committed by the user. If by telephone, the environmental officer will speak to the authorized user contact and
explain the violation along with the possible enforcement action against the user if the violation continues to
occur. The environmental officer will gather the following information:
(1) Why the violation occurred;
(2) Whether the problem has been corrected;
(3) Whether the violation could occur again; and
(4) When the problem has been or will be corrected.
The information received from the contact concerning the violation will be documented along with the time and
date of the call in the violation summary file. Such telephone call may be utilized to provide verbal notification
of minor violations. If communication is by e-mail and the industrial user does not provide the above
information in a timely manner, the environmental officer will follow up via telephone. Use of the telephone call
or e-mail communication does not limit the environmental officer's ability to take any other action authorized by
this plan.
(b) Notification of violation. When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may serve upon that user a written
notice of violation. Within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the user to the environmental officer. If the user denies that any violation occurred and/or contends
that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be
submitted to the environmental officer within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an
explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt
of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the environmental officer to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/720
(c) Consent orders. The environmental officer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance.
Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
(d) Show cause hearing. The environmental officer may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the environmental officer and show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(e) Compliance order. When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time limit. If the user does not
come into compliance within the specified time limit, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance
order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
(f) Cease and desist order. When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
environmental officer may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(g) Emergency suspension of discharge. The environmental officer may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after any reasonable notice to the user that is practical under the circumstances, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The environmental officer may
also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the environmental officer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The environmental officer may allow the user to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/720
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the environmental
officer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection
(h) of this section are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the environmental officer
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (d) or (h) of this section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(h) Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in section 19.05.019(e) of this article, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of industrial user wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling; or
(5) Violation of pretreatment standards.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under subsection (d) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the environmental officer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(i) Administrative fines.
(1) When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may fine such user in an
amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation.
(2) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an
additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a
rate of ten percent (10%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
(3) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
(j) Appeals. Any industrial user subject to any order issued, any administrative fine imposed, or any
enforcement action taken by the environmental officer pursuant to his/her authority in this section may appeal
the order, action, or fine by filing a written notice of appeal with the environmental officer. (The environmental
officer may provide forms for this purpose.) Such notice of appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of
notice of the order, action, or fine.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-63, adopted 8/16/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/720
Sec. 19.05.022 Environmental appeals committee
(a) An environmental appeals committee is hereby established, and authorized to hear and decide appeals
from any decision, fine, or order issued or any other enforcement action taken by the environmental officer
pursuant to this article. The committee shall be composed of the city manager, or assistant city manager, the
mayor, and the city attorney, or any of their designated representatives.
(b) The committee may call and hold hearings, administer oaths, receive evidence at the hearing, issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers and documents related to the
hearing, and make findings of fact and decisions with respect to administering its powers herein.
(c) Upon the hearing of an appeal from an order issued, enforcement action taken, or fine imposed by the
environmental officer, the committee shall determine if there is a preponderance of evidence to support the
environmental officer's determination, fine, action, and/or order. The decision of the committee shall be in
writing and contain findings of fact. If the committee determines that there is a preponderance of evidence to
support the determination, fine, action, and/or order of the environmental officer, the committee shall, in
addition to its decision, issue an order:
(1) Requiring discontinuance of the violation or condition;
(2) Requiring compliance with any requirement to correct or prevent any condition or violation;
(3) Suspending or revoking any industrial user wastewater discharge permit issued under this
article; and/or
(4) Imposing the proper fine.
In any decision issued by the committee, the order shall specify the time in which the compliance with the order
must be taken. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the appellant or person to whom the order is directed in
person or sent to him/her by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested).
(d) Upon the hearing of an appeal from a permit issuance, modification, or denial by the environmental
officer, the committee shall determine if there is a preponderance of evidence to support the environmental
officer's permitting decision. The decision of the committee shall be in writing. If the committee determines that
there is a preponderance of evidence to support the permitting decision of the environmental officer, the
committee shall affirm his/her decision. If the committee determines that there is not a preponderance of
evidence to support the permitting decision of the environmental officer, the committee shall remand the permit,
or permit application, back to the environmental officer for reconsideration. A copy of the decision of the
committee upon the permitting appeal shall be delivered to the appellant in person or sent to him/her by
registered or certified mail. An environmental appeals committee decision not to reconsider a final permit, or
denial of a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-64, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.023 Determination of character and concentration of wastewater
(a) The wastewater discharged or deposited into the POTW shall be subject to periodic inspection and
sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the environmental officer. Sampling shall be conducted
according to 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA.
(b) The examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be:
(1) Performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(h) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1314) and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto or with
any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/720
techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the environmental officer or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control
points authorized by the environmental officer provided at the expense of the industry.
(c) The environmental officer may select an independent firm or laboratory to perform sampling and
laboratory analyses.
(d) The determination of the character and concentration of industrial wastewater shall be made by the
environmental officer at such times and on such schedules as he/she may establish.
(e) The environmental officer may require any industrial user to compensate NTMWD and/or the city, as
appropriate, for the costs of sampling, analyses of the discharges, and any additional administrative fees
provided in section 19.05.024.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-65, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.024 User fees
(a) Each significant industrial user for which the city has reporting requirements under the applicable TPDES
permit issued for the operation of the POTW shall, if the environmental officer so demands, compensate
NTMWD and/or the city, as appropriate, for the cost of sampling, laboratory analyses and administration
required to monitor wastewater discharges. The environmental officer shall determine the number of samples
and frequency of sampling necessary to maintain surveillance of discharges.
(b) Each industrial user for which the environmental officer takes samples and/or runs laboratory analyses to
monitor wastewater discharges shall compensate NTMWD and/or the city, as appropriate, if the environmental
officer so demands, for the cost of such sampling and laboratory analyses.
(c) NTMWD and/or the city may adopt other reasonable fees for reimbursement of its costs of setting up and
operating the pretreatment program, which may include:
(1) Fees for industrial user wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of
processing such applications;
(2) Other fees to recoup costs of monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the
cost of collecting and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by
industrial users;
(3) Fees to recoup the costs of responding to discharges by users in violation of this article and/or
to recoup monetary fines and/or penalties imposed on the city for violations of the applicable TPDES
permit issued for the operation of the POTW attributable to pass-through or interference caused by an
industrial user;
(4) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(5) Fees for reviewing appeals; and
(6) Other fees as NTMWD and/or the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of
this article. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all
other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/720
(d) All fees required under this article shall be invoiced, upon the environmental officer's request, to the
contributing industry or commercial firm by NTMWD and/or the city and shall be payable as indicated on the
invoice.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-66, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.025 Industrial wastewater surcharge
(a) A surcharge may be applied in addition to the monthly sewer service charge for the discharge of
wastewater with concentrations of either BOD or TSS concentrations exceeding that of “normal domestic
sewage,” to cover the additional costs of treating such wastewater. Such a charge is collected by the city.
(b) The surcharge shall be calculated as follows:
C = (B (Bu - 250) + S (Su - 250)) x F x V
Where:
C = Surcharge to the user in dollars.
B = Unit cost factor for treating one unit of BOD (per 1,000 gallons).
Bu = The tested BOD of the discharge.
S = Unit cost factor for treating one unit of TSS (per 1,000 gallons).
Su = The tested TSS of the discharge.
F = A factor of 8.34 to convert mg/l to pounds/gallon.
V = Monthly billing volume (discharge) in thousand gallons.
250 = Average domestic BOD and TSS (250 mg/l).
(c) If the concentration of BOD or TSS in the discharge is less than the normal strength for that category
above specified, there shall be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit given to the total
surcharge if the concentration of either BOD or TSS is less than the normal concentration.
(d) All BOD and TSS values used in determining the surcharge shall be reevaluated and adjusted to reflect any
changes in wastewater characteristics as sampling results indicate necessary.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-67, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.026 Inspection and sampling
(a) The environmental officer, as well as other authorized representatives of the city, the EPA, TCEQ, and the
state department of health, or any successor agencies bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter the premises of any industrial user at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, examination and copying of records, and sampling and testing of any
wastewater discharged into the POTW, as well as of any wastewater prior to treatment or discharge, and
inspection of any pretreatment facilities.
(b) The environmental officer shall carry out all inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/720
(c) The environmental officer shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the industrial user's
operations.
(d) The environmental officer may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary.
The user's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(e) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the established rules and regulations concerning safety,
internal security, and fire protection.
(f) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the environmental
officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(g) Any denial of access or unreasonable delay in allowing the environmental officer access to a user's
premises shall be a violation of this article.
(h) Search warrants. If the environmental officer has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of
the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any industrial user wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
environmental officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-68, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.027 Control manhole
(a) When necessary to monitor wastewater discharged into the POTW, the environmental officer may require
an industrial user to provide and install, at its own expense, a suitable control manhole in an easily accessible
location on the premises from which the waste is discharged in order to adequately sample and measure such
wastewater. Installation of meters, equipment and accessories as deemed necessary by the environmental officer
may also be required.
(b) A required control manhole shall be:
(1) Near the outlet of each building lateral, sewer, drain, pipe, or channel which connects with the
wastewater system;
(2) Designed and constructed to prevent infiltration by ground or surface water;
(3) Located to provide ample room in or near the facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analyses; and
(4) Maintained by the user at all times in safe and proper operating condition.
(c) Before beginning construction of a control manhole, the user shall submit plans to the environmental
officer for review and approval to insure compliance with this section. Plans must include any meters or other
equipment required to be installed.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-69, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.028 Pretreatment required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/720
(a) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with all pretreatment
standards and requirements, including categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in sections 19.05.005 and 19.05.006 of this article, within the time limitations specified by the EPA, TCEQ,
or the environmental officer, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. The environmental
officer may require the development of a compliance schedule by each industrial user for the installation of
technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(b) Before beginning construction of pretreatment facilities, the user shall submit detailed plans and operating
procedures for the facility to the environmental officer for review and approval. The review and approval of such
plans and procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the environmental officer and city under the provisions of this
article.
(c) All industrial users shall promptly notify the environmental officer in advance of any change in the volume
or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 C.F.R. section 403.12(p). The environmental officer
may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of an industrial user wastewater discharge permit application form.
(d) All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements shall be made available to
the environmental officer and to other authorized officials of the city, TCEQ, or EPA upon request.
(e) The determination of the character and concentration of industrial wastewater shall be made by the
environmental officer at such times and on such schedules as he/she may establish.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-70, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.029 Publication of list of users in significant noncompliance
(a) The environmental officer shall publish annually a list of industrial users in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements during the previous twelve (12)
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same
period. Said list shall be published in the largest daily newspaper published in the city.
(b) For purpose of this section, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation(s) meets one
or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six
percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those which thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average)
that the control authority (i.e., the environmental officer) determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of
POTW personnel or the general public);
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare
or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/720
prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority (i.e., the environmental
officer) determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-71, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.030 Bypass
(a) Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and
(c) below.
(b) Notice.
(1) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to
the environmental officer, if possible at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass.
(2) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass to the environmental
officer within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The environmental officer may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(c) Prohibition.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the environmental officer may take enforcement action against an
industrial user for a bypass, unless:
(A) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property
damage;
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
(C) The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/720
(2) The environmental officer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse
effects, if the environmental officer determines that it will meet the three conditions in subsection (c)
(1) of this section.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-72, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.031 Slug control plan
Each industrial user shall provide protection from slug discharges, as defined in section 19.05.001 of this article.
The environmental officer may require the industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying NTMWD and the city of accidental or slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 C.F.R. section 403.5, with
procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days;
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-73, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.032 Notice of potential problems
(a) All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall immediately notify the environmental officer of all
discharges, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or slug loadings as defined in 40 C.F.R. section 403.5(b), that could cause
problems to the POTW by the industrial user. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective taken by the user.
(b) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the
environmental officer, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures
to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW or natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
industrial user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-74, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.033 Affirmative defenses
(a) Generally. If a person can establish that an event, which would otherwise be a violation of this article, an
industrial user wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article, or other federal, state, or local law,
was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation.
(b) Conditions necessary for a demonstration of affirmative defense. An industrial user who wishes to
establish an affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operation logs or
other relevant evidence, that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/720
(1) The event that resulted in a violation occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s)
of the violation as being solely an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
(3) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the environmental officer within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation (if this information is provided orally a
written submission must be provided within five (5) days):
(A) A description of the event that resulted in a violation and the cause of noncompliance;
(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
(C) Steps being taken and/or plans to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
Any verbal notice must include all of the information set out in subsections (A) through
(C) above.
(c) Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish an affirmative
defense shall have the burden of proof.
(d) Reviewability of agency consideration. In the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, the environmental
officer will review any claims of an affirmative defense. No determinations made in the course of his/her review
shall constitute final action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of an affirmative defense only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
(e) User responsibility. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in
the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-75, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.034 Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes
(a) If the permittee knows in advance of the need to discharge a hazardous waste, the permittee shall submit
prior written notice, at least ten days before the date of the discharge of a hazardous waste, to NTMWD and the
city. If the permittee does not know in advance of the discharge of a hazardous waste, the permittee shall
immediately notify NTMWD and the city and submit a written notice to NTMWD within five (5) days of the
discharge. The notification shall identify the hazardous waste discharged and the amount of the hazardous waste
discharged.
(b) In addition to the reporting requirements set out in subsection (a) above, industrial users shall notify the
environmental officer, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste
authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be
a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch,
or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information
is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/720
the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve (12) months. Industrial users shall provide the notification no later than
180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste commences. Any notification under
this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed discharges must be submitted under 40 C.F.R. section 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 C.F.R. section
403.12(b), (d) and (e).
(c) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (b) above during a calendar month in which
they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. section 261.30(d) and section 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. sections 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional information.
(d) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
environmental officer, the EPA regional waste management division director and the state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
(e) In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program
in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the extent determined to be
economically practical.
(f) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged
by this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, or any applicable state or federal
law.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-76, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.035 Confidential information
(a) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
environmental officer that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user under applicable state law. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. Any information requested to be held confidential
shall be stamped “confidential business information,” “confidential,” or “privileged” on each page containing
such information by the user at the time the information is submitted.
(b) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the applicable TPDES permit
issued for the operation of the POTW, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions
of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceeding involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent data as defined in 40 C.F.R. section 2.302 will
not be considered confidential and will be available to the public without restriction.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-76, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.036 Miscellaneous offenses relating to sewer system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/720
No person, other than a regular employee or officer of the city charged with such duties, shall do or aid in doing
any of the following acts:
(1) Opening, closing, lifting or removing the cover of any sanitary sewer manhole or cleanout plug
of the city sanitary sewers.
(2) Interfering with, destroying, impairing, injuring or defacing any property which is a part of or
essential to the proper functioning of the POTW.
(3) Covering or concealing from view any sanitary sewer manhole.
(4) Tapping and/or otherwise connecting into an existing sanitary sewer which is a part of the
POTW.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-77, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.037 Judicial enforcement remedies; penalties
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW, the city may petition the state
district court or the county court at law, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief
specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section or the civil penalties specified in subsection (a)(3) of this
section, or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(2) The city may obtain against the violating user a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to the
discharge of a pollutant into the POTW; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with
any provision of this article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW.
(3) The city may recover a civil penalty of up to but not more than $5,000.00 per day for each
violation of any provision of this article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW, if
the city proves that:
(A) The defendant was actually notified of the provision of this article; and
(B) After the defendant received notice of the provision of this article, the defendant
committed an act or acts in violation of the provision or failed to take action necessary for
compliance with the provision.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person who has violated any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater
discharge permit or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be strictly liable for such violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to but
not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge permit, or any order issued hereunder, or who
has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/720
required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to but not more than
$2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent,
negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any
provision of section 26.121 of the Texas Water Code, or any rule, permit, or order of the state commission on
environmental quality, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the TCEQ, may have a suit instituted in a state
district court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized in subsection
(a) of section 26.123 of the Texas Water Code, against the person who committed or is committing or
threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to section 26.124 of the Texas Water Code.
In any suit brought by the city under this subsection (c), the TCEQ is a necessary and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-78, adopted 8/16/07)
Sec. 19.05.038 Supplemental enforcement action
(a) Performance bonds. The environmental officer may decline to issue or reissue an industrial user
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous
industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the environmental officer to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(b) Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article,
an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after
it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(c) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, an industrial user wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the environmental officer. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(d) Responsibility for acts of agents. In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the
intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by
an agent acting on behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his/her office or employment.
(e) Liability for civil or criminal penalties imposed on city. Any user that, in violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, including any provision of this article, causes pass-through or interference, or otherwise
causes the city to violate the terms of the applicable TPDES permit issued for the operation of the POTW, and as
a consequence to incur any civil or criminal penalty, shall be liable to the city for the amount of any such civil or
criminal penalty, as well as any costs of compliance with any order issued by the EPA, TCEQ, or any state or
federal court and, additionally, any costs and/or attorney's fees incurred by the city in defense of or compliance
with such judicial or administrative action.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/720
(f) Liability for costs incurred by city. Any user that violates any pretreatment standard or requirement,
including any provision of this article, shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, cleanup cost, damages,
and/or waste disposal cost incurred by the city because of such violations. Additionally, an administrative fee of
up to one-half (1/2) of assessed cleanup costs may be levied by the city against the responsible violator.
(Ordinance 13-07, sec. 22-79, adopted 8/16/07)
ARTICLE 19.06 WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS AND PRO RATA CHARGES
Sec. 19.06.001 Definitions
Consumer. The actual user of water from a city water connection.
Property owner. The record title holder of premises served with water from a connection by the city.
Pro rata. A charge made against the consumer or property owner to pay for installation of water and sanitary
sewer mains as provided in this article.
Standard size water main. A water main six (6) inches or greater in diameter.
Substandard size water main. A water main less than six (6) inches in diameter.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-81)
Sec. 19.06.002 Applicability of pro rata charges
(a) Existing mains exempt. All existing subdivisions which have existing internal water mains larger than four
(4) inches in diameter, and all customers connected to the water system at the time of passage of this article
[August 16, 1977], shall be exempt from the water portion of the pro rata charges specified in this article. In
unsubdivided areas with an existing water connection, the area to be exempt from the water pro rata portion of
this article shall be actual frontage, or one hundred fifty (150) feet, whichever is less.
(b) Existing mains adjacent to property other than subdivisions.
(1) Where an area, lot or tract of land abuts any existing water or sanitary sewer main and when
said water or sanitary sewer main spans the complete frontage of the area, lot or tract of land and
when an existing pro rata contract is in effect, then the following charges, known as “pro rata,” shall
be made against the owner of the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to the water or
sanitary sewer main:
(A) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to
an existing water main.
(B) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot for the area, lot or tract of land seeking a connection to
an existing sanitary sewer.
(2) All single-family residential lots, areas or tracts of land located at a standard right-angle street
intersection shall only be charged a pro rata on the shortest street frontage, regardless of the location
of the water main or sanitary sewer.
(3) Where lots or tracts are intended to be used for apartments, business, commercial or industrial
purposes or have a depth greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front street line, then the
pro rata herein provided shall be paid on the frontage for all streets which the property may abut
minus one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage for each corner of the property abutting a street
intersection. Should said property be resubdivided, whereby water or sewer main extensions are
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/720
required to serve the same, the terms of this article shall apply and additional pro rata charges shall be
made based on such additional street frontage.
(4) On lots, areas or tracts of land which extend through from one street to another, with frontage
on both streets, and when the average distance of the property lines is two hundred fifty-five (255)
feet or more, then a pro rata shall be charged on both frontages when the owner seeks a connection to
an existing water main or sanitary sewer.
(5) Where lots, areas or tracts of land are irregular in size or shape, then the pro rata charges shall
be based upon the equivalent rectangular lots or tracts using one front foot for each one hundred
twenty (120) square feet of area, or the pro rata charges provided by this section on the average
frontage of such tracts. whichever is least.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-82)
Sec. 19.06.003 Extensions for individual property owners
(a) Single-family residential property.
(1) Upon request of the owner, or his agent, also referred to in this section as the “applicant,” of a
given lot or tract of land, the city shall extend, lay or construct all necessary water mains and sanitary
sewers and their appurtenances, a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet, plus the distance
across the frontage necessary to provide the service for which the application is made, providing the
necessary funds are available. The property owner to be served shall be required to pay the charges
provided for in section 19.06.002(b)(1) at such time as his property is connected to such mains.
Where an applicant for service secures an extension and service under this particular option for main
extension, he shall pay the pro rata charges on all property owned by him and which is served by the
extension requested. In applying the one-hundred-foot rule, the required extension of main shall be
figured in such manner as to leave out of the calculations that portion of any main adjacent to
property already having other than a temporary water service, and for which the pro rata charges
thereon have been paid, credited or exempt under the terms of this section.
(2) In the event that the property seeking a water or sewer connection is outside the limits of the
one-hundred-foot rule, then the applicant shall extend the water main or sanitary sewer from the
nearest standard size existing water main or sanitary sewer as determined by the city. The extension,
less the cost of one hundred (100) feet per applicant as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section,
shall be constructed by the city at the owner's expense and shall be extended across the complete
frontage of said area, lot, or tract of land seeking the connection when said main extension is located
in a street right-of-way, alley or existing easement. If an additional easement is necessary to extend
the water main or sanitary sewer across said lot, area, or tract of land, then the owner of the property
seeking a connection shall provide the city with an easement, as required by the utility department.
The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extension shall be required to pay
the pro rata charges as established in section 19.06.002(b)(1) at such time as their property is
connected to such main, and the pro rata charges collected by the city in accordance with this section
shall be refunded to the original investor, up to a period of ten (10) years from the date of the total
cost of the installation.
(b) Business, industrial, commercial, apartment and other property other than single-family residential.
(1) When the owner of an area, lot, or tract of land zoned other than single-family residential seeks
a water or sewer connection and no standard size water mains or sanitary sewers are adjacent to,
upon, or span the complete frontage or distance required across the front of said area, lot, or tract of
land, the owner shall extend the water main, as determined by the utility department. The extension
shall be constructed either by the city or by the owner's contractor at the owner's expense and shall be
extended across the complete frontage of said area, lot, or tract of land when said main extension is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/720
located in a street right-of-way, an alley, or an existing easement. If an additional easement is
necessary to extend the water main or sanitary sewer across said lot, area, or tract of land, then the
owner of the property seeking a connection shall provide the city with an easement as required by the
utility department.
(2) The utility department shall determine the size of the required main extension in accordance
with the city's master water and sewer plan, and shall also determine the location of all necessary
appurtenances such as fire hydrants, valves, manholes, cleanouts, and other items which may be
necessary for proper operation and use of said water or sewer installation.
(3) All proposed water and sanitary sewer installations to be installed by the applicant's contractor
shall be designed by a registered professional engineer in the state, and the engineer shall submit to
the city three (3) copies of the complete engineering plans for said water or sewer improvements. The
city shall review the plans and specifications, and, if approved, shall mark them approved and return
one set to the applicant's engineer. If not approved, two (2) sets of the engineering plans shall be
marked with the objections noted and returned to the applicant's engineer for correction. The same
procedure shall be followed until the engineering plans are approved. After approval of the
engineering plans and specifications, the applicant shall cause his contractor to install the water or
sewer facilities in accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications and these
regulations. The applicant shall require his engineer to design, stake, and supervise the construction
of such improvements and shall require his contractor to construct the improvements in accordance
with these regulations and obtain the city inspection of the installation of the improvements. When
found to be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications, and after the improvements
have been completed and upon receipt by the city of a one-year maintenance bond in the amount of
ten (10) percent of the contract price, along with three (3) sets of “as-built” plans and one set of “asbuilt”
sepias, and upon receipt of a letter of the contractor's compliance with these regulations, then
the utility department shall receive and approve for the city the title, use, and normal maintenance of
the improvements.
(4) When said main installations have been accepted by the city in accordance with the
aforementioned criteria, the city will agree to refund to the applicant any pro rata collection from
other parties, firms, or corporations seeking a connection to the water main or sanitary sewer installed
by said applicant. The pro rata shall be collected at the rates established in section 19.06.002(b)(1) of
this article and the city will only be responsible for refunding the collected pro rata funds for a period
not to exceed ten (10) years from the date of acceptance of the water and sewer installation. All
refunds shall be made on a semiannual basis on the last day of June and December.
(5) Where extension is requested by an industry or commercial concern using large quantities of
water, such extensions may be made at the discretion of the city council and at city expense, provided
forty (40) percent of the estimated annual revenue for such customer will support interest and
principal payments for the total cost of such extension.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-83)
Sec. 19.06.004 Extensions for developers and subdivisions
(a) On-site extensions totally within property to be developed. A developer shall defray the entire cost of
water and sewer mains and all appurtenances that lie totally within a subdivision, except that the city will refund
the oversize cost as established in section 19.06.007 of any main larger than eight (8) inches in diameter, unless
such larger size is necessary to serve the developer's property in question. Size of mains necessary for adequate
service shall be determined by the city in accordance with the city's master water and sewer plan. Refunds for
oversize cost will be made upon final acceptance of the system by the city providing the funds are available.
(b) Along-site mains lying along one or more sides of a subdivided tract and serving property other than the
subdivision for which the extensions are made.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/720
(1) For all water and sanitary sewer mains, the developer will be refunded any collected pro rata in
accordance with section 19.06.002(b)(1) of this article as adjacent property develops, and said
refunds shall only be made for a period not to exceed ten (10) years from the date of acceptance of
the water and sewer installation.
(2) For water and sanitary sewer mains larger than eight (8) inches in diameter the developer will
be refunded the oversize cost as established in section 19.06.007, and as adjacent property develops
the developer will be refunded any collected pro rata as established in section 19.06.002(b)(1) of this
article.
(3) Where along-site mains exist, the developer shall pay to the city a pro rata in the amount as
established in section 19.06.002(b)(1) of this article, and said pro rata payments shall be paid before
any building permits are issued for any lot, area or parcel of land situated inside the boundaries of
said subdivision.
(c) Off-site extensions totally outside of property to be developed.
(1) Where water and/or sanitary sewer facilities are not available to a tract to be developed, mains
may be extended by the city to the nearest subdivision property line at the expense of the developer
requiring such extension or the developer shall cause his contractor to install said water or sewer
facilities in accordance with section 19.06.003(b) of this article.
(2) Pro rata collections and refunds shall be made in the following manner:
(A) For tracts of five (5) acres or more and tracts of three (3) to five (5) acres with at least
one (1) acre for every two hundred (200) feet of frontage as defined herein:
(i) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per acre of land to which water service is provided.
(ii) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per acre of land to which sewer service is
provided.
(B) For tracts less than three (3) acres in area and tracts of three (3) to five (5) acres with less
than one (1) acre for every two hundred (200) feet of frontage as defined herein:
(i) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which water service is
provided.
(ii) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which sewer service
is provided.
(C) Refunds shall not exceed the actual cost of said water main or sewer main installation,
and said refunds shall only be made for a period of ten (10) years from the date of city's
acceptance of said water or sewer main installation.
(D) In the event a single sewer line or water line has been developed and constructed in more
than one section, and where more than one developer or investor is involved, then all acreage
pro rata collected from the property within the natural drainage area not adjacent to said sewer
or water line shall be refunded to the developer or investor who caused the initial section of said
water or sewer line to be installed. At such time when the initial installation has been retired,
then all collected pro rata shall be refunded to the developer or investor who caused the
installation of said second section. This same procedure shall be followed with any number of
developers or investors who cause a water or sewer line to be installed.
(d) Mains in place within property to be developed. Should an existing water main or sanitary sewer line lie in
a street, alley or easement within a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale, before extensions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/720
from or connections to such line shall be made by a developer, he shall pay to the city the following pro rata:
(1) For tracts of five (5) acres or more and tracts of three (3) to five (5) acres with at least one (1)
acre for every two hundred (200) feet of frontage as defined herein:
(A) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per acre of land to which water service is provided.
(B) Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per acre of land to which sewer service is provided.
(2) For tracts less than three (3) acres in area and tracts of three (3) to five (5) acres with less than
one (1) acre for every two hundred (200) feet of frontage as defined herein:
(A) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which sewer [water]
service is provided.
(B) Five dollars ($5.00) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which sewer service is
provided.
(e) Methods by which mains can be extended for subdivisions or developments.
(1) On-site facilities. On-site water and sewer facilities shall be constructed by private contract at
the developer's expense in accordance with the city subdivision regulations and all construction
standards and specifications adopted by the city council.
(2) Off-site facilities.
(A) Private contract. Off-site water and sewer facilities shall be constructed by private
contract at the developer's expense in accordance with the city subdivision regulations and all
construction standards and specifications adopted by the city council.
(B) City contract. A developer of a subdivision may deposit with the city the total estimated
cost of such extensions required to serve his property, including the cost of approach and offsite
mains fronting property not owned by the developer. Upon receipt of the required amount
of money, the city will construct such mains, and upon the determination of final completion
cost will refund any excess amount deposited or require from developer additional funds to
defray the entire cost of the project. Refundable amounts for off-site costs or oversize costs will
be determined by the utility department as established in subsection (c) of this section and
section 19.06.007 of this article.
(f) Temporary lines. When temporary lines are constructed as an expediency to develop a particular area, such
as across easements within a subdivision of which no frontage can be connected, or where lines are constructed
which are not required by the final plan of development, the developer will bear the total cost without refund.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-84)
Sec. 19.06.005 Refunds of pro rata charges
(a) All refunds provided for in this article shall be made at six-month intervals (June 30th and December 31st)
of each year, and shall include funds then accrued to the credit of any developer and others. A refund contract
entered into by any property owner and the city under the provisions of this article shall be effective only for a
period of ten (10) years after the date of said contract. No refunds will be made by the city to any applicant or
contracting party after this ten-year period has expired, nor shall the city ever be liable for payment of interest on
any deposits or refunds provided for herein.
(b) This article shall not affect or change any agreement or contract for providing water and sewer services
which was entered into by the city on or before the effective date of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/720
(c) No property owner shall be eligible for any pro rata refund unless a contract stating the conditions of the
utility installation and refund procedures has been approved by resolution of the city council. Any contract
providing for pro rata refunds shall be entered in the proper records at the Dallas County courthouse after
approval by the city council.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-85)
Sec. 19.06.006 Taps
(a) Water service.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the city to furnish the water meter, meter tail, meter gaskets, and
meter box and tap the existing water main. Water taps larger than two (2) inches shall be the
responsibility of the builder, developer, or owner. These charges shall be established by resolution of
the city council.
(Ordinance 24-15 adopted 12/14/15)
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or builder to make the water service
extension to the desired property line location, which includes furnishing all material, equipment, and
labor necessary to convey the water from the tap (installed by the city), to the desired property line
where the meter box is to be located. This work will include excavations needed to expose the water
main for tapping, arrangements for boring and/or street cuts, if necessary, and returning the work area
to an acceptable standard of appearance as required by the city. Work occurring on predeveloped
areas must be restored to original condition, including sodding if required.
(3) If the city agrees to make the water service extension to the desired property line location,
including furnishing all materials, equipment and labor necessary to convey the water from the tap to
the desired property line where the meter box is located, then the charge for such service shall be a
negotiated amount based on cost over and above the normal water connection charge.
(4) Each living unit that is to be sold independently in fee simple shall have a separate water
service.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-86; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Sanitary sewer service.
(1) The charge for all sewer connections shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ordinance 24-15 adopted 12/14/15)
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the city to perform all tapping procedures on existing sewer
mains.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or builder to make all arrangements for
material, equipment, labor and/or special service required to make the extension from the tap on the
sewer main for tapping by the city. Work occurring on predeveloped areas must be restored to
original condition, including sodding if required.
(4) If the city agrees to make the sewer service connection from the tap on the sewer main to the
desired property line location, then the charge for such service shall be a negotiated amount based on
cost over and above the normal sewer connection charge.
(5) Each living unit that is to be sold independently in fee simple shall have a separate sewer
service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/720
(c) All construction on public rights-of-way performed by the property owner, builder, and/or contractor shall
be subject to inspection during construction by the proper authorities of the city and shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard specifications approved by the city council.
(d) Water and/or sewer connections shall be subject to additional installation charges arising from extenuating
installation circumstances.
(1977 Code, sec. 22-86; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 19.06.007 Determination of oversize cost and cost of off-site facilities
Evaluated prices for determination of oversize cost and the cost of off-site facilities for water mains and
appurtenances and sewer mains and appurtenances shall be based on current prices as determined from time to
time by council resolution. (1977 Code, sec. 22-87)
Sec. 19.06.008 Intent of front-foot rule
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections
as a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property in the
city on a front-foot basis. In case the property or tract of land is so situated or shaped that the front-foot rule
creates an inequitable basis as between it and other tracts of land in the city, then, in that event, the city council
shall determine the proper charge in accordance with the intent and purpose of this article. (1977 Code, sec. 22-
88)
Sec. 19.06.009 Method of enforcing payment
Nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of enforcing the payment of the pro rata
charges against the consumer and property owners, [or] shall be deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the
city's right to validly assess the property owners and/or consumers concerned for cost of the installation of
standard size water and sewer mains, and to fix and enforce liens against said property; the method of enforcing
payment of charges imposed by this article shall be in the manner prescribed by law. (1977 Code, sec. 22-89)
Sec. 19.06.010 Disposition of money collected
Any and all sums of money collected as a pro rata and/or service connection charge, as established by this
article, shall be credited to the water and sewer system funds of the city. (1977 Code, sec. 22-90)
Sec. 19.06.011 City not required to install extensions if funds not available
In no event may the city be required to install water or sewer main extensions under the provisions of this article
if there are no funds available for that purpose. (1977 Code, sec. 22-91)
Sec. 19.06.012 Sewage lift stations and other special installations
In the event a lift station or other special installations are required, the same shall be installed under separate
agreements between the city and the developer. (1977 Code, sec. 22-92)
Sec. 19.06.013 Exemptions from pro rata charges
(a) Existing residences served as of the date of the passage and approval of this article (August 16, 1977) will
be exempt from the payment of the pro rata charges for the actual width of the lot or tract of land up to a
maximum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
(b) For all building permits issued after the passage of this article (August 16, 1977) for individual residences
not in a subdivision or for commercial buildings, a pro rata will be collected only if connection is to be made to a
water or sanitary sewer line on which there is an existing pro rata contract in effect.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/720
(1977 Code, sec. 22-93)
ARTICLE 19.07 DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 19.07.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas.
City manager. The chief executive officer of the city under the home rule charter or his designee.
Common property. Real property including but not limited to: parks, lakes, open space, trails and/or floodplain
management areas. Common property is either owned in fee, controlled as an easement or is property leased by
a homeowners association or commercial property owners association for the common use, enjoyment and
benefit of the members of the homeowners association or commercial property owners association. All common
property shall be maintained by the members of the homeowners association or commercial property owners
association, not the city.
Handwatering. Watering or applying water to a lawn, garden, or landscaping while holding the discharge end of
a water hose.
Homeowners association or commercial property owners association (HOA's/POA's). A formal nonprofit
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
(1) Each lot and/or homeowner in a specific area is automatically a member;
(2) Each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the
expense for the organization's activities, such as the maintenance of common property; and
(3) The charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying member's property.
Irrigation. Watering or applying water to a lawn, garden, or landscaping through the use of underground systems
with pop-up heads, sprinklers attached to water hoses, unattended water hoses or any other means of applying
water to a lawn, garden, or landscaping which does not fit the definition of a nonspray irrigation system.
Nonresidential. Includes all districts not defined as residential districts by the comprehensive zoning ordinance
and all common property maintained by a homeowners association or commercial property owners association.
Nonspray irrigation system. Use of soaker hoses, drip or bubble irrigation systems, or other means of applying
water to an area without spraying the water into the air.
Residential. Includes the following districts: R-1 through R-5, D, A, TH, MH, PD residential, and the downtown
form based zoning district (residential).
School. The Dallas Independent School District.
Watering. Watering or applying water on the lawn, trees, landscaping, flower beds, fields, playground areas,
gardens, common property, city-maintained property. School-maintained property or other nonpermeable
surfaces in any zoning district by handwatering, nonspray irrigation systems, irrigation systems or any other
means.
Sec. 19.07.002 Provisions to inform the public for public input
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the drought contingency plan was provided by
the city by means of regularly scheduled city council meetings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/720
Sec. 19.07.003 Public education
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the drought contingency plan, including
information about the conditions under which each stage of the drought contingency plan is to be initiated or
terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be
provided by one or more of the following methods: press releases, utility billing inserts, and/or postings on the
city website.
Sec. 19.07.004 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the region C regional water planning area, and the city will provide
a copy of each plan as updated to the region C regional water planning group.
Sec. 19.07.005 Drought response stages
(a) The city manager or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis
and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. Depending on
the availability of water and the city's ability to supply essential water demands and fire protection. The city
manager, upon notification to the city council, is authorized to move from stage to stage within the plan when
requirements for initiation or rescinding are met. The city manager may also make minor changes to the plan
that are not detrimental to the effectiveness of the overall plan.
(b) (1) The following procedures are required to initiate or rescind each stage of the plan:
(A) Notification must be made by public announcement.
(B) The order becomes effective immediately upon public announcement.
(C) Notification will be provided for publication in the city's official newspaper after public
announcement. The newspaper is published on Thursday of each week. Additional notification
will be provided by information posted on the city's webpage.
(2) The initiation conditions described herein for each response stage are based on historical
analysis and recognized vulnerability of the water supply source and water distribution system during
high water use demands and drought conditions.
(A) Stage 1 - water awareness stage.
(i) Initiation conditions. Stage 1 of the plan shall be implemented when one or more of
the following conditions occur:
a. Annually, beginning on May 15th through September 15th.
b. Short-term deficiencies in the city's distribution system limit supply
capabilities.
(ii) Goals. Achieve a voluntary reduction in water use.
(iii) Demand management measures.
a. No outside watering between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., with the
exception of the use of nonautomatic spray irrigation systems and handwatering
which will be allowed all days, at all times. The use of nonspray irrigation systems
and handwatering will be allowed at all times in stage 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/720
b. City will encourage water conservation by increasing awareness of water
conservation techniques though the use of various available means including but not
limited to: webpage, direct mail-outs, water bill inserts, press releases or other
means available to advise the public of the requirements of this article.
(iv) Rescinding conditions. Stage 1 of the plan shall be automatically rescinded on
September 15th of each year, unless there is still a short-term deficiency in the city's
distribution system or unless a different stage has been enacted and is still in force.
(B) Stage 2 - water watch stage.
(i) Initiation conditions. Stage 2 of the plan shall be implemented when one or more of
the following conditions occur:
a. Notification is received from DWU requiring implementation of like
procedures by wholesale customers.
b. Water demands exceed ninety percent (90%) of the current maximum flow rate
contracted with DWU for five (5) consecutive days.
c. Ground storage reservoir levels do not recover for two (2) consecutive days.
d. Short-term deficiencies affect the city's distribution system limit supply
capabilities.
(ii) Goals. Reduce the average daily water demand below 90% of the current maximum
flow rate contracted from DWU.
(iii) Demand management measures.
a. Odd-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Monday's,
Wednesday's and Friday's.
b. Even-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Tuesday's,
Thursday's and Saturday's.
c. No watering will be allowed on Sunday's.
d. The city must conduct all watering of center medians of streets, street rights-ofway,
parks, city facilities and other areas maintained by the city on Monday's,
Wednesday's and Friday's.
e. Homeowners associations or commercial property owners association must
conduct all watering of common property on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
f. Nursery (garden and landscape) businesses are not restricted when watering
business inventory; however, they must comply with watering requirements for the
landscaping associated with the building.
g. No outside watering will be allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. with the exception of the use of nonautomatic spray irrigation systems and
handwatering which will be allowed all days, at all times. Use of nonspray irrigation
systems and handwatering will be allowed all days.
(iv) Rescinding conditions. Stage 2 of the plan shall be rescinded when all of the
initiating conditions have ceased to exist for a period of five (5) consecutive days or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/720
determined by the city manager. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 - water awareness
stage, becomes operative unless also rescinded.
(C) Stage 3 - water warning stage.
(i) Initiation conditions. Stage 3 of the plan shall be implemented when one or more of
the following conditions occur:
a. Notification is received from DWU requiring water demand reductions in
accordance with contract obligations for wholesale customers.
b. Water demands exceed ninety-five percent (95%) of the current maximum flow
rate contracted with DWU for five (5) consecutive days.
c. Short-term deficiencies in the city's distribution system, such as system outage
due to the failure or damage of major water system components, limit supply
capabilities.
d. Ground storage reservoir levels do not recover for three (3) consecutive days.
(ii) Goals. Reduce the average daily water demand below 95% of the current maximum
flow rate contracted from DWU.
(iii) Demand management measures.
a. Odd-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Monday's and
Friday's.
b. Even-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Tuesday's and
Saturday's.
c. No watering will be allowed on Wednesday's, Thursday's and Sunday's.
d. The city must conduct all watering of center medians of streets, street rights-ofway,
parks, city facilities and other areas maintained by the city on Mondays and
Fridays.
e. Homeowners associations or commercial property owners associations must
conduct all watering of common property on Mondays and Fridays.
f. Nursery (garden and landscape) businesses are not restricted when watering
business inventory; however, they must comply with watering requirements for the
landscaping associated with the building.
g. In a stage 3 - water warning stage, persons should contact the city public works
office prior to installing new landscaping to determine if a variance will be
considered. As a general rule, no variance will be allowed during a stage 3 - water
warning state. The public works director or designee, in a stage 3 - water warning
state may revoke approved variances if deemed necessary to preserve the city's
ability to supply essential water demands and fire protection.
h. No outside watering will be allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. with the exception of the use of nonautomatic spray irrigation systems which
will be allowed all days, at all times. Handwatering will be restricted to the above
allowed days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/720
(iv) Rescinding conditions. Stage 3 of the plan shall be rescinded when all of the
initiation conditions have ceased to exist for a period of five (5) consecutive days. Upon
termination of stage 3, stage 2 - water watch stage, becomes operative unless also
rescinded.
(D) Stage 4 - water emergency stage.
(i) Initiation conditions. Stage 4 of the plan shall be implemented when one or more of
the following conditions occur:
a. Notification is received from DWU requiring water demand reductions in
accordance with contract obligations for wholesale customers.
b. Water demands exceed 100 percent (100%) of the current maximum flow rate
contracted with DWU for two (2) consecutive days.
c. Short-term deficiencies in the city's distribution system, such as system outage
due to the failure or damage of major water system components, limit supply
capabilities.
d. Ground storage reservoir levels do not recover for four (4) consecutive days.
(ii) Goals. Reduce the average daily water demand below 95% of the current maximum
flow rate contracted from DWU.
(iii) Demand management measures.
a. Odd-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Monday's only.
b. Even-numbered water customers must conduct all watering on Tuesday's only.
c. No watering will be allowed from Wednesday through Sunday.
d. The city must conduct all watering of center medians of streets, street rights-ofway,
parks, city facilities and other areas maintained by the city on Monday's.
e. Homeowners associations or commercial property owners associations must
conduct all watering of common property on Tuesday's.
f. No outside watering will be allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. with the exception of the use of nonautomatic spray irrigation systems which
will be allowed all days, at all times. Handwatering is restricted to the one allowed
day.
g. Nursery (garden and landscape) businesses are not restricted when watering
business inventory; however, they must comply with watering requirements for the
landscaping associated with the building.
h. In a stage 4 - water emergency stage, persons should refrain from installing
new landscaping. No variance for watering more than one day per week will be
allowed during a stage 4 - water emergency stage. The public works director or
designee, in a stage 4 - water emergency stage, will revoke any variances approved
during the stage 3 - water warning stage.
(iv) Rescinding conditions. Stage 4 of the plan shall be rescinded when all of the
initiation conditions have ceased to exist for a period of five (5) consecutive days. Upon
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/720
termination of stage 4, stage 3 - water warning stage, becomes operative unless also
rescinded.
(E) Stage 5 - emergency water shortage stage.
(i) Initiation conditions. Stage 5 of the plan shall be implemented when the city
manager determines that a water supply emergency exists based on one or more of the
following conditions:
a. Any major water system component failure that causes the unprecedented loss
of capability to provide water service.
b. Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source(s).
(ii) Goals. Restrict all watering to allow the water system to recover from the
emergency condition.
(iii) Demand management measures.
a. No outdoor watering will be allowed.
b. Door hangers and/or street signs will be placed in the affected area providing
information about the situation.
(iv) Rescinding conditions. Stage 5 of the plan shall be rescinded when all of the
initiation conditions have ceased to exist. The city manager will then determine what
stage of the plan should be implemented and the specific water use restrictions required to
preserve the city's ability to meet essential water demand and fire protection.
(F) Pro-rata water allocation. In the event of an identified water shortage declaration, the city
will distribute water to wholesale customers according to the Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(G) Wholesale contract provisions. The city will include a provision in every wholesale water
contract entered into or renewed after adoption of the plan, including contract extensions, that
in case of a shortage of water resulting from drought, the water to be distributed shall be
divided in accordance with Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
Sec. 19.07.006 Variances
(a) The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant variances for water uses to establish new
lawns or landscaping otherwise prohibited under this plan under stage 1 or 2, as provided herein. Persons
requesting a variance from the provisions of this plan shall file a request with the city to be reviewed by the city
manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use (only consideration will be for new lawns or landscaping).
(3) Detailed statement as to how the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm
will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article.
(4) Period of time which the variance is sought.
(5) Other pertinent information.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/720
(b) Variance may be granted to persons under conditions criteria established herein while on vacation in the
event that power failures or other acts beyond their control cause irrigation systems to malfunction and water on
the wrong day. A vacation variance shall meet the following:
(1) A maximum two-week period.
(2) Request considered only during stage 1, 2 or 3.
(c) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the
city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances will only be considered if the city is in stage 1 or 2 (or stage 3 for a vacation
variance).
(3) All variance forms shall be prominently displayed near the front door of the requestor.
(4) Any variance may be revoked if conditions worsen.
(5) Variances shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect.
(6) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to
the issuance of the variance.
Sec. 19.07.007 Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by
the city manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) A person who violates this plan is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during
which the violation continues.
(Ordinance 29-14 adopted 10/20/14)
ARTICLE 19.08 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 19.09 MUNICIPAL STORMWATER UTILITY SYSTEM
Sec. 19.09.001 Adoption of act
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, chapter 552, subchapter C, Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, (“act”) is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the act and by the city
council; and the drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the act.
Sec. 19.09.002 Drainage service provided
The city will provide stormwater drainage for all real property within its boundaries upon payment of the
determined drainage charges, as defined in the act, and excluding certain exempted real property, and that the
fees, assessments, and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms.
Sec. 19.09.003 Billing for service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/720
The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the act and
through the establishment of the municipal stormwater utility system. The stormwater utility fee shall be
separately identified from other public utility billings.
Sec. 19.09.004 Authority to levy charges
The city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in
the act and this article.
Sec. 19.09.005 Exemption authorized
The city is authorized to exempt certain entities or persons from all ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the
city may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the act and the establishment of its
municipal stormwater utility system.
Sec. 19.09.006 Fees
(a) The city will establish a drainage utility fee to be set by resolution of the city council which will be
collected through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the act and other applicable law.
(b) The fees which will be established will apply to the accounts maintained by the city for utility services.
(c) All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to these fees shall be subject to the
provisions of the act and other applicable law.
Sec. 19.09.007 Appeals
(a) Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues shall be subject to appeals procedures used by the
city for other utility billing disputes.
(b) Appeals for the following reasons shall be directed to the public works director or his designee for
evaluation and determination:
(1) Exempt property has been assessed a stormwater utility fee;
(2) Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the
property's contribution to the stormwater system, as established in the municipal stormwater utility
fee schedule;
(3) Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is assessed on more than one utility account;
or
(4) Stormwater utility fee is assessed to individual property outside the city's jurisdictional area.
(c) The public works director or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within thirty (30)
days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner.
(d) Any landowner who disagrees with the decision of the public works director or his designee may appeal
such decision to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
Sec. 19.09.008 Penalties
(a) Failure to pay the stormwater utility fee promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of
any utility services provided by the city, in accordance with all applicable laws.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/720
(b) The city shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow from
benefited property into the city's drainage utility system. All real property of the city will be provided with
drainage service on payment of drainage charges.
(Ordinance 07-16, sec. 2, adopted 3/7/16)
ARTICLE 19.10 STORMWATER PROTECTION
Sec. 19.10.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning, and any words not herein defined shall be construed in context used and by
ordinary interpretation and not as a word of art:
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands,
and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but no discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations
as defined in 40 C.F.R. section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as
defined in 40 C.F.R. section 122.24.
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
structural controls, local ordinances, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control runoff, spills or
leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas.
Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment for the City of Seagoville, Texas.
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, with walls and a roof, designed to shelter a person,
animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas, or its agents.
Clean water act (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92-500, as amended Pub. L. 95-217, Pub. L. 95-576, Pub. L. 96-483, and Pub. L.
97-117, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq., as it exists and as it may be amended.
Code enforcement official. A city employee or person or entity acting under a contract with the city, authorized
to enforce the provisions of this article and city ordinances, including, but not limited to the building official,
inspector, code enforcement officer, code compliance officer, or his/her designee.
Construction activity. Includes soil disturbance, including clearing, grading, and excavating; and does not
include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the
routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities).
(1) Large construction activity. Construction activity that results in land disturbance of equal to or
greater than five (5) acres of land. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less
than five (5) acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the
larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than five acres of land.
(2) Small construction activity. Construction activity that results in land disturbances equal to or
greater than one (1) acre and less than five (5) acres of land. Small construction activity also includes
the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of
development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one (1)
and less than five (5) acres of land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/720
Construction site notice. A signed and certified submission to the operator of the MS4 (i.e., the city) from an
operator of a small construction activity identifying coverage pursuant to the construction general permit.
Contaminated. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Contamination. The presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4, surface water in the state,
or waters of the United States of any substance which may be deleterious to the public health and/or the quality
of the water, as determined by, or pursuant to, federal or state law.
Conveyance. Curbs, gutters, manmade channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features
designed or used for flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff.
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the
MS4, surface water in the state, or waters of the United States.
Discharger. Any person, who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge including,
without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
Environmental protection agency (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof,
any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly
authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a
pollutant.
Fertilizer. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form
available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or
stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term
does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of
essential plant nutrients is made.
Fire code. Article 9.03, the International Fire Code, of this code.
Fire department. The Seagoville Fire Department or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other
than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
Garbage. For the purpose of this article, solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste
materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials
from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products.
Groundwater infiltration. For the purposes of this article, groundwater that enters a municipal separate storm
sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) through such means as defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes.
Harmful quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of surface water in the state or waters
of the United States, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive aquatic
monitoring organisms, upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into surface water in the state, waters of
the United States, or the MS4, as determined by, or pursuant to, federal or state law.
Hazardous materials. Any item or agent (biological, chemical, physical) that has the potential to cause harm to
humans, animals, or the environment, either by itself or through interaction with other factors.
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/720
Household hazardous waste. Waste from materials utilized for residential or housekeeping purposes containing
regulated substances which either singularly or by their interaction with other wastes or by their accumulation in
the MS4 becomes injurious or potentially injurious to human, plant, or animal life, or property. For purposes of
this article, household hazardous wastes include but are not limited to paint, paint thinners, paint solvents,
bleaches, and drain cleaners.
Illicit connection. Any manmade conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate
storm sewer.
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of stormwater.
Industrial activity. Any activity subject to the multi-sector general permit.
Land disturbance activity. Any activity which changes the volume or discharge rate of stormwater runoff from
the land surface. This includes grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or
involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse.
Maintenance agreement. A formal contract between a local government and a property owner to guarantee longterm
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the United
States, a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or
pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes,
including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or similar entity, or an
Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, that discharges to surface water in the state.
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES). The federal program under which the administrator
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency can authorize discharges of waste to waters of the United States
according to section 402 of the Clean Water Control Act, and may also delegate this permitting authority to the
state.
No exposure certification (NEC). A written submission to the executive director of the TCEQ from an applicant
for the multi-sector general permit notifying the applicant's intent to obtain a conditional exclusion from permit
requirements by certifying that there is no exposure of industrial material or activities to precipitation or runoff.
Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Notice of change (NOC). Written notification from a permittee pursuant to the multi-sector general permit or the
construction general permit to the executive director of TCEQ providing changes to information that was
previously provided to TCEQ in a notice of intent (NOI) or no exposure certification (NEC) form.
Notice of intent (NOI). A written submission to the executive director of TCEQ from an applicant requesting
coverage under the multi-sector general permit or the construction general permit.
Notice of termination (NOT). A written submission to the executive director of TCEQ from a permittee
authorized under the multi-sector general permit or the construction general permit requesting termination of
coverage.
NPDES permit. A permit issued by EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make
modifications in specifications); and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/720
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to
ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation, or other entity.
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as those terms
are defined in section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code).
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter backwash,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into any surface water in the
state. The term “pollutant” does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from
cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland, and farmland. For the purpose of this article, the term
“pollutant” includes sediment.
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any
surface water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life,
vegetation, or property or to public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment
of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Property. All privately owned, occupied, or unoccupied property, including vacant land, and/or a building
designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, or religious purposes. The term shall also
include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps, or other structure appurtenant to the property or
otherwise known as curtilage.
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act,
owned by the city or other public entity, including any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any sewers, pipes, and
other conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Regulated construction activity. A large construction activity or a small construction activity, as those terms are
defined herein.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into the (MS4), surface water in the state, or waters of the United States.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste
materials. Combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, brush,
or similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, and similar
materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees
Fahrenheit).
Small municipal separate storm sewer system (small MS4).
(1) Refers to a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
(A) Owned or operated by the United States, a state, city, town, borough, county, district,
association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over
disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/720
under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and
approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA;
(B) Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
(C) Which is not a combined sewer;
(D) Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 C.F.R.
section 122.2; and
(E) Which was not previously authorized under an NPDES or a TPDES individual permit as
a medium or large municipal separate storm sewer system, as defined at 40 C.F.R. section
122.26(b)(4) and (b)(7).
(2) This term includes systems similar to separate storm sewer systems at military bases, large
hospitals or prison complexes, and highways and other thoroughfares. This term does not include
separate storm sewers in very discrete areas, such as individual buildings. A very discrete system also
includes storm drains associated with certain municipal offices and education facilities serving a
nonresidential population, where those storm drains do not function as a system, and where the
buildings are not physically interconnected to an MS4 that is also operated by that public entity.
Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or containing
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
Stormwater and stormwater runoff. Rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction general permit or the
multi-sector general permit which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to
reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the
facility.
Surface water in the state. Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries,
wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state (from the mean high
water mark (MHWM) out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial,
inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses
and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction
of the state; except that waters in treatment systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or
permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES). The state program for issuing, amending, terminating,
monitoring, and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Clean Water
Act sections 307, 318, 402, and 405, the Texas Water Code, and Texas Administrative Code regulation.
TPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges associated with construction activity (or the construction
general permit) (CGP). The construction general permit issued by TCEQ on February 15, 2008, TPDES General
Permit No. TXR150000, as it exists and as it may be renewed and/or amended.
TPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges associated with industrial activity (or the multi-sector
general permit) (MSGP). The multi-sector general permit issued by TCEQ on August 14, 2006, TPDES General
Permit No. TXR050000, as it exists and as it may be renewed and/or amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/720
TPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (or the
small MS4 general permit). The small MS4 general permit issued by TCEQ on December 13, 2013, TPDES
General Permit No. TXR040000, as it exists and as it may be renewed and/or amended.
TPDES permit. A permit issued by TCEQ that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to surface water in the state
and/or waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance, as determined by, or pursuant to, federal
or state law.
Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil that, as a result of use,
storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original
properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law.
Waters of the United States (or waters of the U.S.).
(1) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(2) All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
(3) All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams),
mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds
that the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign
commerce including any such waters:
(A) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other
purposes;
(B) From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign
commerce; or
(C) Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate
commerce;
(4) All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this
definition;
(5) Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition;
(6) The territorial sea; and
(7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in
subsections (1) through (6) of this definition.
Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of
the CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 C.F.R. section 423.11(m) which also meet the
criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to manmade
bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal
areas in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the
United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's
status as prior converted cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the CWA, the final
authority regarding CWA jurisdiction remains with EPA.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/720
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscape maintenance
and land-clearing operations.
Sec. 19.10.002 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulation.
CGP - Construction General Permit, TPDES General Permit TXR150000.
CWA - Clean Water Act.
EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
MS4 - Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MSGP - Multi-sector general permit, TPDES General Permit No. TXR050000.
NEC - No exposure certification.
NOC - Notice of change.
NOI - Notice of intent.
NOT - Notice of termination.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works.
SWMP - Stormwater management program.
SWPPP - Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
TPDES - Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
Sec. 19.10.003 Applicability
This article, including any amendments or revisions thereto, shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the city.
Sec. 19.10.004 Intent and purpose
This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) of the city in order to comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To regulate pollutants from stormwater discharges into and from the MS4;
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;
(3) To control the discharge of spills and prohibit dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater into the small MS4;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/720
(4) To enforce compliance with the permittee's ordinances, permits, contracts, or orders;
(5) To require installation, implementation, and maintenance of control measures;
(6) To receive and collect information, such as stormwater plans, inspection reports, and other
information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this permit, from operators of construction
sites, new or redeveloped land, and industrial and commercial facilities;
(7) To establish legal authority to implement inspection and enforcement procedures to ensure
compliance with this article;
(8) To respond to noncompliance with best management practices (BMPs) required by the small
MS4 consistent with its ordinances or other regulatory mechanism(s);
(9) To assess penalties, including monetary, civil, or criminal penalties; and
(10) To enter into interagency or interlocal agreements or other maintenance agreements, as
necessary.
Sec. 19.10.005 Administration
(a) The code enforcement official shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the code enforcement official may be delegated by the code enforcement
official to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
(b) The city manager, or the city manager's designee, is hereby granted and shall have the authority to enforce
the provisions of this article and conduct all proceedings in the manner provided herein.
Sec. 19.10.006 Regulatory consistency
This article shall be construed to assure consistency with the Clean Water Act and the Texas Water Code, and
amendments thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations.
Sec. 19.10.007 Ultimate responsibility of discharger
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this
article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into surface water in the state or waters of the United States
caused by said person. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee
thereof, for any damages that result from the discharger's reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made there under.
Sec. 19.10.008 General prohibition
(a) No person shall, and it shall be an offense to, introduce or caused to be introduced into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the
discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit or an NPDES permit
(other than the TPDES permit authorizing discharges from the MS4);
(2) A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line
disinfection by super chlorination or other means unless it contains no harmful quantity of total
residual chlorine (“TRC”) or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/720
(3) A discharge or flow from runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and
other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources;
(4) A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substances or
material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container;
(5) A discharge or flow from a diverted stream;
(6) A discharge or flow from rising groundwaters and springs;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined by 40 C.F.R. section 35.2005(20)) to the
MS4;
(8) A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(9) An uncontaminated discharge or flow from foundation and footing drains;
(10) An uncontaminated discharge or flow of water from crawl space pumps;
(11) A discharge or flow from individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) A discharge or flow from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(13) A discharge or flow from firefighting activities by the fire department (firefighting activities
do not include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire
suppression systems, and similar activities);
(14) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances
or materials that the fire code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, in which case
treatment adequate to remove harmful quantities of pollutants must have occurred prior to discharge;
(15) Agricultural stormwater runoff; and
(16) A discharge or flow from other similar occasional incidental nonstormwater discharges, as
determined by the city manager.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if:
(1) The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the code enforcement official to be a
source of a pollutant(s) or pollution to surface water in the state, waters of the United States, or the
MS4;
(2) Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger; and
(3) The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the
discharge. The correctness of the code enforcement official's determination that a discharge is a
source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement
proceeding in accordance with city ordinances and state law, as may be applicable.
Sec. 19.10.009 Specific prohibitions and requirements
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited
by the general prohibition in section 19.10.008.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful
quantity of any substance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/720
(c) A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any
discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard or the city's
authorization pursuant to the small MS4 general permit for discharges from its MS4.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person dumps, spills, leaks, pumps, pours, emits, empties, discharges,
leaches, disposes, or otherwise introduces or causes to be introduced, allows, or permits to be introduced any of
the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any garbage or rubbish;
(6) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or
maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop,
repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business
or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or
public entity that operates more than ten such vehicles;
(7) Any direct discharge of a pesticide or fertilizer;
(8) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(9) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(10) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(11) Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful
quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning
substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill,
leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred,
unless all harmful quantities of such released materials has been previously removed;
(12) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions
filter, or the blow down from a boiler;
(13) Any ready-mix concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or
material from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting
or applying, such material;
(14) Any runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock containment
area containing more than five (5) animals;
(15) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa;
(16) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid, or other
chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/720
(17) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if it contains
any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in water line disinfection;
(18) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code
in this code requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment is adequate to
remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. (This prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow
from firefighting activities by the fire department as further set forth herein.)
(19) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(20) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard, junk yard, auto repair activities, or
storage of vehicles on unimproved surfaces;
(21) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(22) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from
the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
(A) Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements;
(B) No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
(C) No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of benzene; 500 parts per billion
combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX); or 15
milligrams per liter of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH).
(e) Yard waste regulation.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person:
(A) Discharges, deposits, discards, or dumps, or causes or allows to be discharged, deposited,
discarded, or dumped any grass clippings, leaf litter, brush cuttings, and/or animal waste into
the MS4.
(B) Places or causes to be placed or dropped, grass clippings, leaf litter, brush cuttings,
and/or animal waste within any street in the corporate limits of the city in such a manner that
the same may be washed by the flow of water into the MS4.
(2) It shall be a defense to prosecution that these wastes occurred naturally or from normal
landscape maintenance (e.g., leaves falling from trees, grass clippings left on lawns). Intentionally
sweeping or blowing grass clippings or leaves into the streets or gutters is prohibited.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful
quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or other
construction activities, or associated with filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earthen
materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control
measures to the maximum extent practicable.
(g) Illicit connection regulation.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/720
at the time of connection.
(h) A person commits an offense if the person causes or allows any pavement wash water from a service
station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such wash water has passed through a properly functioning and
maintained grease, oil, and sand interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
(i) Used oil regulation. A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Discharges used oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water,
groundwater, or watercourse;
(2) Knowingly mixes or commingles used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill
or knowingly directly disposes of used oil on land or in a landfill; or
(3) Applies used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use
that introduces used oil into the environment.
Sec. 19.10.010 Nuisance and general violation
(a) An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 that violates or would violate this article is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and shall constitute an offense as provided in section 19.10.019 of this article.
(b) A line conveying sewage or designed to convey sewage that is connected to the MS4 is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, the code enforcement official shall not be
required to provide written notice or a warning prior to taking criminal enforcement action and/or any other
legally available enforcement action.
(d) If the city mails notice in accordance with the provisions stated in this article, and the notice is returned
“refused” or “unclaimed,” said notice shall be deemed delivered for purposes of enforcement action as provided
herein.
Sec. 19.10.011 Submission of NOI or construction site notice to city
(a) The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have a TPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity or regulated construction activity shall submit a copy of the NOI,
construction site notice, NOC, NOT, and/or NEC to the city's director of public works at the same time the
operator submits the original NOI, NOC, NOT, and/or NEC to the TCEQ or is required to submit the
construction site notice to the operator of the MS4 (i.e., the city) by the construction general permit.
(b) The copy of the NOI, construction site notice, NOC, NOT, and/or NEC may be delivered to the director of
public works either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
Director of Public Works
City of Seagoville
702 N. Highway 175
Seagoville, Texas 75159
(c) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated
with an industrial activity or a regulated construction activity without having submitted a copy of any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/720
documentation required by this section, including the NOI and the construction site notice to the director of
public works.
Sec. 19.10.012 Modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans
(a) The city manager may require any operator of a facility to modify the facility's stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) if in the best professional judgment of the city manager, the SWPPP does not comply
with this article or with the requirements of the facility's TPDES or NPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with an industrial activity or a regulated construction activity.
(b) The deficiencies in a facility's SWPPP will be identified in writing, and the city manager will give the
facility operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, to make the necessary changes in
the SWPPP.
Sec. 19.10.013 Best management practices (BMPs) to reduce stormwater pollutants
The city has the authority to respond to noncompliance with BMPs required by the small MS4 in accordance
with TPDES phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)g. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall implement, at their own expense, appropriate pollution control
measures through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent and reduce discharge of pollutants into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. The BMPs must be identified in the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWP3) to satisfy requirements of the TPDES permit.
Sec. 19.10.014 Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities
(a) Authority. The city has the authority to require installation, implementation, and maintenance of control
measures in accordance with TPDES phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)d.
(b) Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility the
applicant of the site must implement a maintenance easement agreement that binds all subsequent owners of
land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement allows the city or their contractor/agent
access to the facility to periodically inspect if the facility is maintained in proper working condition and meets
design standards and other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by
the applicant in the land records.
(c) Maintenance covenants. The applicant of the site must develop a maintenance covenant articulating a
schedule of maintenance activities and plans for periodic inspections to assess the proper functioning of the
stormwater management facility. The maintenance covenant shall be approved by the city and recorded into the
land record prior to final plan approval.
(d) Requirements for annual self-inspections. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at
minimum, an annual self-inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and to verify compliance with
the requirements of this article. The inspections shall be in writing and either submitted to the local jurisdiction
or maintained in a manner that allows local inspectors the ability to review the results of inspections in
conjunction with a site compliance review. Maintenance and repair may include: removal of silt, litter, and other
debris from all catchbasins, inlets and drainage pipes; cutting grass and vegetation removal; and replacement of
landscape vegetation. Maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner as determined by the city. The
city may implement more stringent inspection and maintenance requirements.
(e) Failure to maintain practices. If the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, the city shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility
in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have thirty (30) days to meet maintenance
and repair requirements. If the owner of the facility fails to comply with the requirements of the maintenance
covenant, the city, after reasonable notice, may perform all necessary work to bring the facility into compliance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/720
Sec. 19.10.015 Right of entry: inspection and sampling
(a) The code enforcement official shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises of any person,
including facilities, equipment, practices, or operations related to stormwater discharges to the small MS4 in
accordance with TPDES phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)f, to determine if the
discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. Dischargers shall allow the code enforcement
official ready access to all parts of the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, records, examination, and
copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the code
enforcement official, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications, thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring
records, compliance evaluations, NOIs, construction site notices, NOCs, NOTs, NECs, and any other records,
reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article.
(b) Where the discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the code enforcement official will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
(c) The code enforcement official shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations,
at the discharger's sole cost and expense.
(d) The code enforcement official may require any discharger to the MS4, surface water in the state, or waters
of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater
dischargers, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring, at the discharger's
sole cost and expense.
(e) The code enforcement official may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at
the discharger's sole cost and expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment, as required by this
section, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at the
discharger's sole cost and expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated
to ensure their accuracy.
(f) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the code enforcement
official and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the discharger.
(g) Any violation of this section, including unreasonable delays in allowing the code enforcement official
access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article and shall constitute an offense under section
19.10.024.
(h) If entry onto the property is refused, the code enforcement official shall have every recourse provided by
law, including but not limited to an administrative search warrant or an injunction to secure entry. If the owner,
operator, discharger, or person in control of the property cannot be identified or located, the code enforcement
official shall be authorized to enter the property to the extent allowed by, and in accordance with, law.
Sec. 19.10.016 Enforcement
(a) The city has the authority to assess penalties, including monetary, civil, or criminal penalties in accordance
with TPDES phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)h.
(b) If the city finds a person in violation with this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require:
(1) Monitoring, analysis, and reporting.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/720
(2) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges.
(3) Termination of existing discharges or practices and/or operations in violation of this article.
(4) Abatement and/or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards.
(5) Payment of fines to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) Implementation of pollution control measures or treatment BMPs.
(c) If the property must be remediated, the notice must establish a deadline to restore the site. The notice must
further advise that, if the violator fails to remediate the site by the deadline, a designated governmental agency
or contractor will restore the site at the expense of the violator.
Sec. 19.10.017 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Warning notice. When the code enforcement official finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the code enforcement official may serve
upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and
requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending
discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way
relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice.
Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the code enforcement official to take any action, including
emergency action, criminal enforcement or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
(b) Notification of violation. When the code enforcement official finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the code enforcement official
may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to the code enforcement official. If
the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an
explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the code enforcement official
within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the
alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing
in this section shall limit the authority of the code enforcement official to take any action, including emergency
action, criminal enforcement or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(c) Consent orders. The city manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance with any
provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include specific action to be taken
by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (e), and (f), of
this section and shall be judicially enforceable. The civil penalties provided in section 19.10.023 of this article
shall be applicable to a violation of this section or any person's failure to comply with a consent order.
(d) Show cause hearings. The city manager may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the city manager and show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator
specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section
19.10.016 of this article. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the alleged violator, including, but not limited to, criminal or injunctive relief.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/720
(e) Compliance orders. When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city manager may issue an order to the violator
directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time period. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4, surface water in the state, and
waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a
state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator, including, but not limited to, criminal or injunctive
relief. The civil penalties provided in section 19.10.023 of this article shall be applicable to a violation of this
section or any person's failure to comply with a compliance order.
(f) Emergency cease and desist orders.
(1) When the city manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur,
and that the person's violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to
the MS4, surface water in the state, or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, the city manager may issue an order to the violator directing the violator to
immediately cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
(A) Immediately comply with all requirements of this article; and
(B) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating
the discharge.
(2) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall
immediately comply and stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the city manager may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, surface water in the state, or waters of
the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment. The city manager may
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city
manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for
any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
city manager within five (5) days of the receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the violator. The civil penalties provided in section 19.10.023 of this article shall be applicable to a
violation of this section or any person's failure to comply with an emergency cease and desist order.
Sec. 19.10.018 Response to releases
The city has the authority to respond to and contain releases into the small MS4 in accordance with TPDES
phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)b. When the person responsible has knowledge of any
known or suspected release of materials resulting in or potentially resulting in unauthorized discharges into a
storm sewer system or surface water in the state, the person must contain and clean up the release. If hazardous
materials are released, the person must immediately notify emergency response agencies. If nonhazardous
materials are released, the person must notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by telephone must be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
city.
Sec. 19.10.019 Emergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/720
(a) The city may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service, and/or MS4 discharge
access to a person discharging to the MS4, surface water of the state, waters of the United States, or the POTW
when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
(1) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or
welfare of persons; or
(2) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the MS4, surface water in the state,
or waters of the United States.
(b) When the code enforcement official determines that city-provided water and/or sanitary sewer service or
MS4 access needs to be suspended pursuant to subsection (a), the code enforcement official shall request the city
manager to do so.
(c) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or MS4 access, the code enforcement official shall
notify the violator of the suspension in person or by registered mail or certified mail (return receipt requested)
and shall order the violator to cease the discharge immediately. When time permits, the code enforcement
official should also attempt to notify the violator prior to suspending service or access.
(d) If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (c), the city manager may take such
steps as the city manager deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, surface water in the state,
or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
(e) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the violator until:
(1) The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager, that the noncomplying discharge
has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) The violator pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to, abating, and
remediating the discharge or threatened discharge; and
(3) The violator pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service or access.
(f) A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected may appeal such enforcement
action to the city manager, in writing, within ten (10) days of notice of the suspension in accordance with section
19.10.021 of this article.
(g) The city may obtain a lien against the property to recover its response costs pursuant to the procedure set
out in section 19.10.022 of this article.
(h) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise
of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
Sec. 19.10.020 Nonemergency suspension of utility service and MS4 access
(a) The city may terminate the city-provided water supply, sanitary sewer connection, and/or MS4 access of
any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article, if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge.
(b) The code enforcement official will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its water supply,
sanitary sewer connection, and/or MS4 access. The violator may petition the city manager for a reconsideration
and hearing pursuant to section 19.10.021 of this article.
(c) The city shall not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the discharger until:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/720
(1) The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager, that the noncomplying discharge
has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and
(2) The violator pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service or MS4 access.
(d) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise
of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates, causes to reinstate, permits or receives a benefit from
the reconnection of the water service, sanitary sewer service, and/or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant
to this section, without the prior approval of the city manager.
Sec. 19.10.021 Right to reconsideration and hearing
(a) Any person subject to a compliance order under section 19.10.017(e), an emergency cease and desist order
under section 19.10.017(f), an emergency suspension of utility service or MS4 access under section 19.10.019,
or a nonemergency suspension of utility service or MS4 access under section 19.10.020 of this article may
petition the board of adjustment to reconsider the basis of the city manger or code enforcement official's order or
suspension within ten (10) days of the issuance of such an order or suspension.
(b) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any
further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order or suspension.
(c) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order or suspension objected to, the
reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioning party's view
of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioning party would accept, and whether the petitioning
party requests a hearing on its petition. Failure of the petitioning party to request a hearing in its petition shall
constitute a waiver of the same.
(d) The effect of any compliance order under section 19.10.017(e) or nonemergency suspension of utility
service or MS4 access under section 19.10.020 shall be stayed pending the board of adjustment's reconsideration
of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the board of adjustment expressly makes a written determination
to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under section 19.10.017(f) or
emergency suspension of utility service or MS4 access under section 19.10.019 shall not be stayed pending the
board of adjustment's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the board of adjustment expressly and in
writing stays its emergency order or emergency suspension of utility service or MS4 access.
(e) Within fifteen (15) days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the board of adjustment shall
either:
(1) Grant the petition in whole or in part and withdraw or modify the order or suspension
accordingly;
(2) Deny the petition, without hearing if a hearing was not timely requested or no issue of material
fact was raised by the petition; or
(3) If a hearing has been timely requested and a material fact has been raised, set a hearing on the
petition.
(f) The board of adjustment may also set a hearing if the board of adjustment determines that a show cause
hearing should be conducted, if grounds exist to revoke or suspend a permit issued under this article, or if
grounds exist to terminate utilities on a nonemergency basis.
(g) Written notice of any hearing set by the board of adjustment pursuant to subsections (e) or (f), above, shall
be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/720
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the petitioning
party.
(h) Notice shall specify the date, time, and place of the hearing. Notice that is mailed shall be deemed
received three (3) days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
(i) The board of adjustment may, prior to rendering a decision at a hearing where the petitioner has failed to
appear, require proof of actual service upon the petitioner.
(j) The board of adjustment shall have the power to:
(1) Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(2) Take evidence; and
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the city manager for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. For purposes of
this section, the board of adjustment shall be empowered to administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules
for the conduct of the hearing. Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary
evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A
transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(k) Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or a city-recognized
holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular city business day.
(l) Decisions of the board of adjustment shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence.
(m) The date of an order or ruling by the board of adjustment under this section shall be deemed to be the date
it is signed by the board of adjustment's representative.
(n) After the conclusion of any hearing provided in this section, the board of adjustment shall make written
findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written decision without undue delay. The board of
adjustment may sustain the city's imposition of, or may impose upon its own motion, civil penalties for any
violation of this article in accordance with section 19.10.023. The board of adjustment may modify its order as is
appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and its action on the petition.
Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued by the board of adjustment.
(o) A hearing on a petition submitted to the board of adjustment shall exhaust all administrative remedies of
the petitioning party/alleged violator.
Sec. 19.10.022 Nuisance abatement
(a) Unless specifically stated otherwise, any nuisance as defined within this article is hereby declared a public
nuisance if it exists within the corporate limits of the city or within five thousand (5,000) feet of such limits.
(b) The code enforcement official may give notice to cease, abate, remove or otherwise remedy a nuisance
immediately to:
(1) The owner of property upon which a nuisance is located or from which a nuisance originated or
is emanating. If the person creating, allowing, or maintaining the nuisance is not the owner of the
property, notice shall also be given to such person.
(2) Any person creating, allowing, or maintaining a nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/720
(3) Any person with care, custody or control over the premises containing such nuisance.
(c) The notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner/person in writing; or
(2) By letter addressed to the owner/person at the owner's/person's post office address and sent
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). However, if personal or registered or certified
mail service cannot be obtained or the owner's/person's post office address is unknown, notice may
be given:
(A) By publication in the official newspaper of the city at least twice within ten (10)
consecutive days;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the nuisance relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the nuisance relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(d) The notice may order the owner/person to undertake and implement any appropriate action:
(1) To remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the nuisance upon the MS4, the surface water
in the state, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment; and/or
(2) To restore any part of the MS4, the surface water in the state, the waters of the United States, or
any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed.
(e) Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the
appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action;
(2) Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution
or contamination;
(3) Prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the
environment that may result from the nuisance; and
(4) Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the nuisance.
(f) The notice may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified
compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this section
does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
(g) If the owner/person does not comply with the notice within ten (10) days of service, the code enforcement
official may enter any public or private property containing the nuisance and do any work necessary to abate the
nuisance, except the demolition of buildings, unless otherwise permitted in accordance with other state law or
ordinances.
(h) If the immediate abatement of the nuisance is deemed necessary by the code enforcement official to
protect the environment or the public health, safety, or welfare from an imminent and substantial endangerment,
the code enforcement official may, without complying with the notice provisions of this section or without
waiting the ten-day period, enter the subject property and do or cause to be done any work necessary to abate the
nuisance and remediate and restore the environment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/720
(i) The city manager shall conduct an abatement hearing, if a person required to receive notice, requests, not
later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the date of the abatement, the person files a written request to the city for
the abatement hearing. An abatement hearing must be held not later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date
of the request for a hearing is filed. The person may testify, present evidence through witnesses or tangible
documents relating to the city's abatement.
(j) After abating the nuisance, the code enforcement official may inform the owner/person in a notice sent
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) that if the owner/person commits another violation of the
same kind or nature that poses a danger to the environment or to the public health and safety on or before the
first anniversary date of the original notice, the city may without further notice correct the violation at the
owner's expense and assess the expense against the owner's property.
(k) All costs incurred by the city to abate a nuisance and remediate and restore the environment, including the
cost of giving notice as required, shall be initially paid by the city and charged to the owner of the property.
(l) To obtain a lien against the property, the code enforcement official shall file a statement of expenses with
the county clerk for the county in which the property is located. The lien statement shall state the name of the
owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien shall be security for the costs incurred and
interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city.
(m) The lien is inferior only to:
(1) Tax liens; and
(2) Liens for street improvements.
(n) A lien may not be filed against real estate protected by the homestead provisions of the state constitution,
except as otherwise may be permitted by applicable law.
Sec. 19.10.023 Civil penalties
(a) The city may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 54 of
the Texas Local Government Code, which provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(b) A civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation of this article
may be imposed. Each violation of a particular section of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each
day an offense continues shall be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this article.
Sec. 19.10.024 Criminal penalties
(a) It shall be an offense and a violation of this article for any person to intentionally or knowingly violate the
provisions of this article, or fail to comply with any requirement set forth herein, including but not limited to:
(1) Installing or maintaining sampling or monitoring equipment;
(2) Causing or attempting to cause or create a nuisance as defined herein.
(b) A conviction for a violation of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor. A person convicted of a
violation of this article, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation,
such offense being a violation of the health and safety ordinances of the city. Each violation of a particular
section of this article shall constitute a separate offense, and each day an offense continues shall be considered a
new violation for purposes of enforcing this article. No notice shall be required to any person prior to issuance of
a criminal citation under this section.
Sec. 19.10.025 Injunction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/720
Any violation of any provision of this article that constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety,
and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes.
Sec. 19.10.026 Remedies nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under
state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
Sec. 19.10.027 Maintenance agreements
The city has the authority to enter into interagency or interlocal agreements or other maintenance agreements, as
necessary in accordance with TPDES phase II MS4 permit TXR040000 part III section A.3(a)(2)i. This
agreement will include maintenance easements to access and inspect stormwater control practices, and perform
routine maintenance to ensure proper stormwater control. A legally binding covenant will identify the
responsible parties to maintain stormwater control practices.
(Ordinance 07-16, sec. 1, adopted 3/7/16)
CHAPTER 20
RESERVED
CHAPTER 21
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 21.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 21.01.001—21.01.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administrative Provisions*
Sec. 21.01.031 Definitions
Code official. When used in the construction codes, shall mean the city building official, deputy-building
official, building inspector, or code enforcement officer.
Construction code(s). The building, residential, plumbing, fuel gas, mechanical, energy, property maintenance
and electrical codes as adopted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/720
Corporation counsel. When used in the construction codes, shall mean the attorney for the city.
Inspector. When used in this article, shall mean any peace officer of the state or any official inspector for any
department of the city which is charged with code enforcement, including, but not limited to, inspectors for the
departments of zoning and fire prevention and the office of building inspection.
Municipality. When used in the construction codes, shall mean the City of Seagoville.
Sec. 21.01.032 Right of entry for inspection
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of any ordinance or ordinances of the city
and the laws of the state and the United States, or whenever any official inspector has reasonable cause to
believe there exists in any building or upon any premises a violation of such ordinances or laws, the inspector
may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed
upon the inspector by such ordinances or laws, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall
first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or if no owner or other person having charge or control of the
building or premises can be located, the inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry.
Sec. 21.01.033 Building inspection; building official–Title; appointment; term
(a) The office of building inspection is hereby created. The executive in charge shall be known as the building
official.
(b) The building official shall be appointed by the city manager. The building official shall continue in office
during satisfactory service and shall serve subject to the pleasure of the city manager.
Sec. 21.01.034 Same–Qualifications; conflict of interests
The building official shall be in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and
inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any
material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations,
removal, or demolition.
Sec. 21.01.035 Same–Duties
(a) The building official shall receive applications required by the construction codes of the city, issue permits
and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued and
shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is
prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of the construction codes. He shall, when requested by proper
authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in
the codes and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in
buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
(b) Inspections required under the provisions of the construction codes shall be made by the building official
or his duly appointed assistants, provided the person who shall make plumbing inspections shall be licensed in
accordance with the Plumbing License Law (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101). The building official may
accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and
reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall be issued on such reports
unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/720
(c) The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates
issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued.
(d) All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office
hours but shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his written consent.
(e) The building official shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or oftener if
requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated.
(f) The building official shall perform such other duties, as the city manager shall, from time to time, impose
upon the office.
Sec. 21.01.036 No liability of officers, employees and commission members; defense of suits
The building official, or his authorized representative charged with the enforcement of the construction codes,
acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the building official or employee because of
such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be
defended by legal counsel provided by this jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings. The
construction codes shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning,
operating or controlling any building, structure or building service equipment therein for any damages to persons
or property caused by defects, nor shall the Code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as
assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by the construction codes or approvals issued
under the construction codes.
Sec. 21.01.037 Administration and enforcement of construction codes
The construction codes of the city shall be administered and enforced by the office of the building official, to
provide standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the city;
providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees thereof and the inspection of all operations by the
office of the building official.
Sec. 21.01.038 Cooperation of other officials and officers
The building official may request, and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of his duties, the
assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction.
Sec. 21.01.039 Schedule of fees
On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee
for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with city master fee schedule.
Sec. 21.01.040 Refunds
Fee refunds shall comply with the provisions in the city master fee schedule.
Sec. 21.01.041 Permits
(a) Permits required. No building, structural, plumbing, mechanical and/or electrical system regulated by the
construction codes shall be installed, altered, repaired, replaced or remodeled unless a separate permit for each
building or structure has first been obtained from the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation who is not registered by the city as a contractor to secure permits except as provided in section
21.01.049. It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer an permit, or permit a person without
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/720
proper license or registration to do the work, or for any person to make use of any such permit which is not
actually his own, and any such permit obtained or submitted under these conditions shall be null and void.
(b) Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing
on a form furnished by the city agency for that purpose. Every such application shall:
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
(2) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address
or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
(3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
(4) Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations, specifications, and other data as required in
subsection (3) of this section.
(5) Be signed by permittee, or his authorized agent.
(6) Give such other data and information as may be required by the building official.
(c) Plans and specifications. With each application for a permit, and where required by the building official for
enforcement of any provision of the construction codes, plans, specifications and calculations shall be submitted
in the quantity deemed necessary by the building official. When deemed necessary by the building official to
ensure code compliance, the building official may require plans and specifications to be prepared and designed
by an engineer licensed by the state. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data involved with the
practice of engineering, such as structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, heating and cooling, fire, life and
safety systems, shall comply with state and local laws governing the practice of engineering as required by
article 3271a, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes.
(d) Information on plans and specifications. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial
paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed
and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the construction codes and all relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. Additionally, the plans shall be submitted in a .pdf format on a compact disk
(CD) for archiving, if the value of construction exceeds $50,000.00.
(e) Permits issuance. The applications, plans and specifications, and other data, filed by an applicant for
permit may be reviewed by other departments of the city to determine compliance with any applicable laws
under their jurisdiction. If the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and
other data filed therewith conforms to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and the fees specified by the city master fee schedule been paid, the building official may issue a
permit therefore to the applicant. When the building official issues the permit where plans are required, he shall
endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “APPROVED.” Such approved plans and specifications
shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the building official, and all work shall be
done in accordance with the approved plans. The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part
of a plumbing, mechanical and/or an electrical system before the entire plans and specifications for the whole
system have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed
complying with all pertinent requirements of the construction codes. The holder of such permit shall proceed at
his own risk with assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure or building service will be granted.
(f) Retention of plans. One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and
shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in
progress. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official
until final approval of the work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/720
(g) Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed
to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes, or of any
other ordinance of the city, nor shall the issuance of a permit or approval of plans be construed as representing or
warranting the safety or lack of defects of any work described therein. No permit presuming to give authority to
violate or cancel the provisions of the construction codes shall be valid. The issuance of a permit based upon
plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction
of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on
there under when in violation of the construction codes or of any other ordinances of the city.
(h) Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of the construction codes
shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not
commenced within 90 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days or more. Upon
expiration of such permit, no construction shall be permitted without first having obtained a new permit and the
fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have
been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such
suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the
permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension
of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within
the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for
action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be
extended more than once.
(i) Suspension or revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under
the provisions of the construction codes whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city.
Sec. 21.01.042 Inspections
(a) General. All work for which a permit is required by the construction codes shall be subject to inspection
by the building official. No portion of any work intended to be concealed shall be concealed until inspected and
approved. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material necessary to allow inspection. When the installation is complete, an additional and
final inspection shall be made. Electrical systems and equipment regulated by the construction codes shall not be
connected to the energy source until authorized by the building official.
(b) Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the
building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official may require that every request for
inspection is filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or
by telephone at the option of the building official. It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections
required by the construction codes to provide access to and means for proper inspection of such work.
(c) Operation of electrical equipment. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
operation of any electrical system or equipment installed to replace existing equipment. The request for
inspection of such equipment must have been filed with the building official not more than 48 hours after such
replacement work is completed and before any permanent portion of the building conceals any portion of such
electrical system.
(d) Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections required by the construction codes, the building
official may make or require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this
code and other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/720
Sec. 21.01.043 Third party plan review and inspection
(a) Permitted. When approved by the building official, third party organizations may be permitted to perform
the plan review and/or field inspection provisions of this code. When authorized to perform services, the third
party organization shall comply with the provisions of this section.
(b) Plan review.
(1) Performance of plan review by a third party organization shall not exempt or otherwise relieve
the owner and/or other parties from the submittal for a permit with the appropriate plans as
prescribed in this code.
(2) Along with the submittal of plans, documents as required by the building official shall also be
submitted with the following information:
(A) Name of the third party organization and all individuals involved in the plan review.
(B) Listing of the plan review results including but not limited to the construction type,
occupancy group, occupant load, area calculations, story calculations, height measurements,
and exiting calculations.
(C) Other information as required by the building official.
(c) Field inspections.
(1) Whenever the owner/builder wishes to use a third party organization for field inspection, he
shall submit the appropriate forms to the building official for approval before inspections commence.
The building official shall review the application to confirm that the chosen third party organization
is approved and has all required insurance.
(2) The building official shall have a right to make periodic site visits, at his discretion, to review
and inspect the work under construction. Whenever possible, the building official will attempt to
coordinate such visits with the third party organization.
(3) The building official shall maintain full interpretation authority of all affected codes as well as
the authority to require corrections, including, but not limited to, notices, stop work orders and/or
citations.
(4) The project may proceed with construction only upon approval of the third party organization
after performing the inspections as required by this code or as otherwise required by the building
official. If, upon review, the building official believes that compliance with all applicable codes has
not been achieved, the building official shall retain the right to require corrections. If corrections are
required, the owner/builder and third party organization may propose methods of correction that do
not require uncovering of completed work. However, the building official may require uncovering of
completed work after consideration of the extent of the work involved versus the level of compliance
needed and then only as a last resort when the building official determines that the proposed methods
of correction will not result in adequate compliance.
(5) The third party organization shall issue to the owner/builder and the building official a formal
inspection report for each inspection completed, verifying either that the work inspected is in
compliance with this code or specifically detailing corrections necessary to bring such work into
conformance with said codes and regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/720
(6) The third party organization shall notify the building official if, at any time, the owner/builder
fails to correct construction deficiencies as noted or if the owner/builder covers work prior to
inspection or otherwise hinders the ability of the third party organization to perform required
inspections.
(d) Insurance. The third party organization shall obtain and maintain insurance coverage as prescribed by the
building official.
(e) Indemnification. The third party organization, the builder and the owner shall execute an indemnification
agreement in a form approved by the city attorney.
(f) Conflict of interest. The licensed architect, registered engineer, or other authorized person, entity or
corporation who prepared or supervised preparation of the project plans and/or specifications, along with, the
owner, builder, subcontractor, their agents, officers and employees shall not be associated in any way with the
third party organization.
(g) Qualifications. The third party organization shall submit documents, as required by the building official,
to show adequate training, knowledge and/or certification in the fields upon which service is to be rendered. The
building official shall review the documents along with proof of required insurance and all required executed
agreements. If in compliance, the building official shall approve the third party organization. If not approved, or
if approval is revoked for just cause by the building official, the third party organization may appeal to the
building and standards commission. Just cause may include but not be limited to violation of any provision of
this ordinance, loss or expiration of required insurance, violation of the conflict of interest provision or any
action that may result in the questioning of qualifications.
(h) Certificate of occupancy. A certification of occupancy shall be issued, when necessary, by the building
official upon completion of all requirements specified above and, upon completion of all requirements of any
other affected department of the city. Such completion shall be determined upon the submittal of all inspection
reports by the third party organization noting that all required construction inspections have been approved and
after the building official has perform and approve a final inspection when deemed necessary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 21.01.044 Contractor's registration
(a) Registration of contractors. Each contractor shall be required to maintain a registration with the city before
performing any type of construction work. Each contractor shall furnish the building inspection department with
the following information:
(1) Contractor classification.
(2) Company name.
(3) Company mailing address.
(4) Company phone number.
(5) Principal owner's name and mailing address.
(6) Proof of valid driver's license number for principal and/or individual who will be completing
work in the city.
(7) Certificate of liability insurance with a minimum coverage of $300,000.00 per occurrence,
naming the city as a certificate holder.
(8) If licensed by the state, a copy of all state licenses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/720
(Ordinance 12-14 adopted 9/15/14)
(b) Registration fee. For a contractor registration, a fee shall be paid in addition to the other provision
provided herein. The fee for initially establishing registration data shall be in accordance with the city master fee
schedule. The annual renewal fee for continuing the validity of registration data shall be in accordance with the
master fee schedule. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Registration renewal. Contractor registration is valid for each calendar year, beginning the date the
registration is approved or January 1st, and expiring on December 31st of each year. The registration may be
renewed for the ensuing calendar year by filing a new registration and the payment of a renewal fee as set forth
herein. No refund shall be made in the event of the revocation or surrender of any such registration certificate.
(Ordinance 12-14 adopted 9/15/14)
(d) Registration denial. The registration of a contractor may be denied by the building official or the
registration may be revoked by the building and standards commission if the registration is issued on the basis of
incorrect information supplied by the contractor.
(e) Registration revocation and suspension.
(1) In the event of outstanding violations of city requirements, the building official may call for a
hearing before the building and standards commission for revocation or suspension of a contractor's
registration. A hearing shall be held after the contractor has been given notice of the hearing by
personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing date.
(2) The building and standards commission shall hold a hearing, and if the contractor is found to
have violated city requirements, then the commission may order the contractor's registration to be
suspended for a specified period of time. If more than three violations of city requirements occur
within one calendar year, then the commission may revoke the contractor's registration for one year.
After the one-year revocation, the contractor may reapply for registration.
(3) After the hearing, the contractor shall be notified in writing of the determination of the building
and standards commission by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested.
Sec. 21.01.045 Transfer of Registration
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to lend, rent, or transfer a construction registration
issued by the city to another other person firm, or corporation for any purpose.
Sec. 21.01.046 Reinspection fees for plumbing, electrical, mechanical or building construction
(a) In addition to the permit fees provided for in the plumbing, electrical, mechanical and building codes of
the city an additional fee shall be charged for each second (or more) reinspection made for plumbing, electrical,
mechanical or building construction.
(b) This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure
to comply with the requirements of this code but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the
job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
(c) In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be
performed until the required fees have been paid and recorded at the building official's office.
(d) Reinspection fees shall be in accordance with the city master fee schedule.
Sec. 21.01.047 Posting
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/720
The construction permit shall be posted in plain view at the site of construction during the entire period of
construction.
Sec. 21.01.048 Stop work orders
Upon notice from the code official, any work that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction
codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state
the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not
be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a violation and penalties in accordance
with section 21.01.054 of this article.
Sec. 21.01.049 Work by homeowner
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any person from actually doing his own construction work on his
own residentially zoned property or premises, provided the property is occupied by him, as his homestead, that a
permit is paid for and obtained, that the materials, equipment, and work be in strict accordance with the
construction rules and regulations of this article, and the building official's approval can be obtained upon
inspection in regular order. The property owner must actually perform the work; no other than the actual owner
shall do any part of it, unless the other persons hold a state license and registrations with the city as a contractor.
Sec. 21.01.050 Conflicting provisions
Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction
or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
Sec. 21.01.051 Alternate materials and methods of construction
(a) The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the construction codes, provided any alternate has been approved and
its use authorized by the building official.
(b) The building official may approve any alternate, provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory
and complies with the provisions of the construction codes and that the material, method or work offered is, for
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes in suitability, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(c) The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims
regarding the use of alternates. Provided, however, that the approval or authorization of any alternate shall not be
construed as warranting or representing the safety of any approved alternate.
Sec. 21.01.052 Modifications
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the construction codes, the
building official may grant modifications for individual cases, provided he shall first find that a special
individual reason makes the strict letter of the construction codes impractical and the modification is in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this code, and that such modification does not lessen health, life and
fire safety requirements.
Sec. 21.01.053 Tests
(a) Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of the provisions of this code or evidence
that materials or construction do not conform to the requirements of this code, the building official may require
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/720
tests as evidence of compliance to be made at the sole expense of the person providing such materials or
performing such construction.
(b) Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of
recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the building official may determine test
procedures.
(c) All tests shall be made by an approved agency. The building official shall retain reports of such tests for a
period deemed appropriate by the building official.
Sec. 21.01.054 Violations
Any person who shall violate a provision of the construction codes or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the
construction codes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) per day per violation. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Sec. 21.01.055 Board of adjustment
In accordance with chapter 54 of the Local Government Code, the board of adjustment of the city shall sit as a
building and standards commission, with the powers and duties imposed therein. Members of the board, when
serving in the capacity of a building and standards commission, must meet the same qualifications and serve for
the same terms of office as members of the board of adjustment.
Sec. 21.01.056 Appeals to commission meetings on decision of building official
(a) Any person aggrieved by any interpretation or by any decision or ruling of the building official under the
construction codes, shall have the right to make an appeal to the building and standards commission. Notice of
appeal shall be in writing and must be filed within 30 days. The notice of appeal fee shall be in accordance with
the city master fee schedule. Such an appeal shall be considered at a commission meeting and shall be subject to
the regulations contained herein for commission meetings.
(b) Within a period of 30 days from the filing of the appeal, the commission shall hear the appeal, together
with the testimony of all parties concerned, and render a decision thereon. In hearing such an appeal, the
commission shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of the construction codes, but shall
have the power to interpret its provisions, and in case of alternate types of construction or materials, shall
determine whether such alternate types of construction or material is in fact equal to the standards of the
construction codes, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety to the public health and
welfare.
Sec. 21.01.057 Procedure
(a) The board may adopt rules not inconsistent with this article. Meetings of the board will be held at the call
of the chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, or as the board may determine from time to time. The
chairman or in his absence, the acting chairman may administer rolls and compel the attendance of witnesses.
All meetings are open to the public.
(b) The building official or his designated representative may act as secretary to the board, but shall not be a
member. The secretary shall keep a record of the cases, activities, and actions of the board and its
determinations, give notice of the date and time of hearings, and perform such other duties as are consistent with
or may be necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(c) Notice of all proceedings before the board shall be given:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/720
(1) By personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the
United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service to the record owners of the affected
property sent to the last known address, and each mortgagee, lienholder and each holder of a
recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records of the county clerk of the county
in which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the
deed of trust establishing lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk;
and
(2) To all unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement
situated on the affected property or as close to the front as practicable;
(3) The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day preceding the date of the hearing
before the board and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one (1) occasion before the tenth day
preceding the date fixed for the hearing;
(4) The notice shall contain the following:
(A) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(B) A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building;
and
(C) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, repair, or demolish the building or
relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable
time.
(5) If the notice sent to the last known address of the person being notified is returned undelivered,
the building official may serve the notice personally if the person to be notified can be found in
Dallas County, Texas. If notice sent to an owner is returned undelivered, and after diligent search, the
building official is unable to discover a correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the owner
personally, then the building official shall give notice by publication in the official newspaper of the
city at least five (5) days before the hearing.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(d) At each hearing of the board an owner, lessor, occupant, or lienholder may present witnesses in his own
behalf and is entitled to cross-examine any witnesses appearing against him.
(e) A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the board. The members of the
board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the board. No action can be taken by the board
without four affirmative votes of the board. No members of the board shall abstain from participation unless they
have a conflict of interest as defined by state law or local ordinance. The chairman may participate in the
discussion of all matters coming before the board and shall be entitled to vote.
(f) After a public hearing, the decision of the board is final as to the administrative remedies.
(g) Once the decision of the board has become final under this article, the person affected by the order may
appeal the decision to the state district court, by filing a petition with the district court within thirty (30) calendar
days after the date a copy of the final decision of the board is personally delivered, mailed by first class mail,
with certified return receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature
confirmation service, to all persons whom notice is required to be sent. The board shall mail such copy promptly
after the decision becomes final. In addition, a copy shall be published one (1) time in the official newspaper of
the city within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy as herein provided, and a copy
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/720
shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. On presentation of the petition, the court may allow a writ of
certiorari pursuant to subchapter C, chapter 54, Local Government Code of the state, as amended. If no appeals
are taken from the decision of the board within the required period, the decision of the board shall, in all things,
be final and binding. The appeal in district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule.
(Ordinance 27-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 21.01.058 Failure to comply with board order
(a) A person commits an offense if he fails to correct a violation of this article in compliance with a board
order that has become final.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the board order has been appealed to the state
district court.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 21.02.001–21.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 21.02.051 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Building Code, 2018 edition, including all appendix
chapters, to provide standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in
the city; providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees thereof and the inspection of all
operations by the office of the building official.
Sec. 21.02.052 Amendments
The sections of the 2018 International Building Code that are changed, added, or deleted are as follows:
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 101.4; amend to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced
elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this
code to the prescribed extend of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to
the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to
reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the
electrical code as adopted.
Section 101.4.8; add the following:
The provisions of the electrical code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including
alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/720
Section 103 and 103.1; amend the department name:
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The department of Building Safety Community
Development is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building
official.
Section 104.2.1; delete section and replace as follows:
Section 104.2.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing
buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. Substantially improved or damaged building and
structures are defined in Seagoville's Municipal Code Article 21.07 Flood Damage Prevention.
Anything referencing IBC section 104.2.1 shall meet all requirements in the relevant portions of
Flood Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code.
Section 104.10.1; delete section and replace as follows:
Section 104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are defined in Seagoville's Municipal
Code Article 21.07 Flood Damage Prevention. Anything referencing IBC section 104.2.1 shall meet
all requirements in the relevant portions of Flood Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code.
Section 105.2; delete entire section.
Section 109; add section 109.7 to read as follows:
109.7 Reinspection fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when:
1. The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives;
2. No building address or permit card is clearly posted;
3. City approved plans are not on the jobsite available to the inspector;
4. The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called;
5. The jobsite is red-tagged twice for the same item;
6. The original red tag has been removed from the jobsite.
7. Failure to maintain erosion control devices or control trash.
Any reinspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that jobsite.
Section 109; add section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows:
109.8 Work without a permit.
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a
permit may be issued for such work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/720
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or
not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the
permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of
either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law.
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required
inspection in violation of section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule.
Section 110.3.5 Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection; delete exception.
Section 202; amend definition of ambulatory care facility as follows:
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical,
surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are
rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided or staff has accepted responsibility
for care recipients already incapable. This group may include but not be limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers
Section 202; add the following definition:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis,
who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment
which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency
situation without physical assistance from staff.
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The Fire Marshal or his/her designated employee.
Section 202; amend each of these definitions to read as follows:
ATRIUM. An opening connecting two three or more stories ... {Remainder unchanged}
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building having any floor used for human occupancy located more
than 75 55 feet (22 860 16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor
vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and
servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or
replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs.
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall
prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and approved by
the Building Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction
requiring special inspection.
SUPERVISING STATION. A facility that receives signals and at which personnel are in attendance
at all times to respond to these signals, shall mean a licensed fire alarm company registered by the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/720
Texas Fire Commission.
SUPERVISORY SERVICE. The service required to monitor performance of guard tours and the
operative condition of fixed suppression systems or other systems for the protections of life and
property, shall mean a licensed fire alarm company registered by the Texas Fire Commission.
Section 303.1.3 Associated with group E occupancies; amend as follows:
A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not
considered a separate occupancy, except when applying the assembly requirements of chapter 10 and
11.
Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies:
Fire stations
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less
Section 307.1; add the following sentence to the end of exception 4:
4. {Text unchanged} See also IFC chapter 12, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions.
Section 310.3; add new subsection to read as follows:
Section 310.3.1 Residential R-1 transient living occupancy. No cooking appliances shall be stored
or used within rental unit unless an approved fire sprinkler system is installed, approved and
operational.
Section 403.1, exception 3; amend to read as follows:
3. The open air portion of a building with a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance with section
303.6.
Section 403.3, exception; delete item 2.
Section 403.3.2; amend to read as follows:
403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 420 120 feet (128
36.5 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two
water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each
connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the
connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to
operate.
Exception: {Text unchanged}
Section 404.5; delete exception.
Section 406.3.3.1 Carport separation; add sentence at end to read as follows:
A fire separation is not required between a group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is
entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm).
Section 502.1; amend to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/720
502.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be ... {text unchanged} ... Each
character shall be a minimum of 4 6 inches (102 152 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2
3/4-inch (12.7 19 mm), provided the building is within 100 feet of the road. If the building sets back
greater than 100 feet each character shall not be less than 12 inches in height and not less than 1 inch
in width. Apartment building numbers must be 12 inches in height with unit numbers 6 inches in
height on a 20-inch by 30-inch plaque with contrasting background. Plaques shall be placed on all
street frontages. Where ... {remainder unchanged}
Table 506.2; delete sentence from table:
I. The maximum allowable area for a single-story non sprinklered Group U greenhouse is
permitted to be 9000 square feet or the allowable area shall be permitted to comply with Table
C102.1 of Appendix C.
Section 506.3.1 Minimum percentage of perimeter; add sentence at end to read as follows:
506.3.1 {Text unchanged} In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street
or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or
approved fire lane shall be provided.
Section 602.1.1 Minimum requirements; add sentence at end to read as follows:
602.1.1 {Text unchanged} Where a building contains more than one distinct type of construction, the
building shall comply with the most restrictive area, height, and stories, for the lesser type of
construction or be separated by fire walls.
Section 708.4.2 Fire-blocks and draft-stops in combustible construction; amend Exception 1 to read as follows:
1. Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1, or in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 provided that sprinkler protection is
provided in the space between the top of the fire partition and the underside of the floor or roof
sheathing, deck or slab above as required for systems complying with Section 903.3.1.1. Portions of
buildings containing concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation as permitted for
sprinkler omission shall not apply to this exception for draft-stopping. ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 718.3 Draft-stopping in floors; amend sentence in Exception to read as follows:
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in
the floor space.
Section 718.4 Draft-stopping in attics; amend sentence in Exception to read as follows:
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in
the attic space.
Section 901.6.1; add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems
as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing
that is required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be
back-flushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps
are missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/720
Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the
different types of standpipe systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply
capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant
or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water
through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions
properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry
standpipe. There are no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function
properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such
caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. All FDC connections shall be equipped
with 5-inch Storz connectors with caps.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas
Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM)
Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as
“Fifth Year” for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe
Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the fire code official shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III
standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting
equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved
cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official.
Section 903.1.1; amend to read as follows:
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
section 904 shall be permitted instead of in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where
recognized by the applicable standard and, or as approved by the fire code official.
Section 903.2; add paragraph to read as the follows:
Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and
elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip
requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine
room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating
“ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
Section 903.2; delete the exception.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/720
Section 903.2.9; add section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows:
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all self-service storage facilities.
Section 903.2.11; amend 903.2.11.3 as follows:
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings that have one or more stories with an occupant load of 30 or more, other than
penthouses in compliance with section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 55 35 feet (16
764 10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the
finished floor.
Exceptions:
1. Open parking structures in compliance with section 406.5 of the International Building
Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.
2. Occupancies in group F-2.
Section 903.2.11; add new subsections 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, 903.2.11.9, and 903.2.11.10 as follows:
903.2.11.7 High-piled combustible storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see IFC chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.
903.2.11.8 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
903.2.11.9 Buildings 6,000 sq. ft. and larger. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that
are enlarged to be 6,000 sq. ft. or larger. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define
separate buildings.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with section 406.5 of the International Building
Code.
903.2.11.10 Vacant buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all vacant
buildings with a building area 6,000 square feet or larger and in any existing building that is enlarged
to 6,000 square feet or larger which has lost its legal nonconforming status. For the purpose of this
provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings.
Section 903.3.1.1.1; amend to read as follows:
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not
be required in the following rooms or areas where such ... {text unchanged} ... because it is damp, of
fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or
fire hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of
the contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated
from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having
a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/720
4. In rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly noncombustible
contents.
5. Fire service access Elevator machine rooms, and machinery spaces, and hoistways, other
than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any
circumstances.
6. {Delete}
Section 903.3.1.2.3; re-name section and amend text as follows:
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages, Breezeways, and Attics. Sprinkler protection is required in
attached garages and breezeways in addition to the following attic spaces:
1. {Text unchanged}
2. {Text unchanged}
3. {Delete and replace as follows:} Attic spaces of buildings that are two or more stories in
height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
4. Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers
shall comply with one of the following: {Remainder unchanged}
Section 903.3.1.3; amend to read as follows:
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and twofamily
dwellings, group R-3; and Group R-4 Condition 1; and townhouses shall be permitted to be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law.
Section 903.3.1.4; add to read as follows:
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to
allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the
rest of the building, and
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable
referenced NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved
by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.
Section 903.3.5 Water supplies; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/720
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference IFC section 507.4 for additional design requirements.
Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as
follows:
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon
tampering.
Section 903.4.2 Alarms; add second paragraph to read as follows:
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to
the fire department connection.
Section 905.2; amend to read as follows:
905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and
NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a
maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.
Section 905.3; add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
905.3.9 Building exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story
and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) of travel,
vertically or horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic
wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided.
Exceptions:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry, and manual dry standpipes are allowed as
provided for in NFPA 14 where approved by the fire code official.
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.
Section 905.4 Location of class I standpipe hose connections; amend items 1 through 6 to read as follows and
add item 7:
1. In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above
and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at the main floor landing between stories,
unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
2. {Text unchanged}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit
stairway hose connection by a ... {Remainder unchanged}
4. {Text unchanged}
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/720
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve
the roof or at the highest landing of an interior exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in
accordance with section 1011.12.
6. {Text unchanged}
7. When required by this chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required
exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as
otherwise approved by the fire code official.
Section 905.9 Valve supervision; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection
valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate an alarm signal at the central station upon tampering.
Section 907.1; add subsection 907.1.4 to read as follows:
907.1.4 Design standards. All alarm systems new or replacement shall be addressable. Alarm
systems serving more than 20 smoke detectors shall be analog addressable.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion
initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When
cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building must comply within 12
months of permit application.
Section 907.2.1; amend to read as follows:
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with section 907.5 shall be installed in group A occupancies having an occupant load of
300 or more persons, or where the Group A occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below
the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in
accordance with section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single
occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for
assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the group E occupancy.
Exception: {Text unchanged}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at
the walking surface level; and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
Section 907.2.3; amend to read as follows:
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing
an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of section 907.5.2.2 and
installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies.
When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be
connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed
in group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/720
whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant
load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems.
Section 907.2.3; add exception 1.1 to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. {Text unchanged}
1.1. Residential in-home day care with not more than 12 children may use
interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five
children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see section 907.2.6.)
{Text unchanged for remainder of exceptions}
Section 907.2.12, exception 3; amend to read as follows:
3. Open air portions of bBuildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section
303.1 of the International Building Code. However, this exception does not apply to accessory uses
including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas.
Section 907.4.2 Manual fire alarm boxes; amend to read as follows:
{Text unchanged} ... sections 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.6.7
Section 907.4.2; add new subsection 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.
Section 907.6.1; add new subsection 907.6.1.1 to read as follows:
907.6.1.1 Wiring installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a
failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not
interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be
installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable
devices (class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA
72 requirements for class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four (4) feet separation horizontal
and one (1) foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit
(IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired class B, provided the distance from
the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or less.
Section 907.6.3; delete all four exceptions.
Section 907.6.6; add sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows:
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station.
Section 907.6.6; add new subsection 907.6.6.3 to read as follows:
907.6.6.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit
alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote
supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device
designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be
transmitted as a general alarm or zone condition.
Section 910.2; amend Exception 2 and 3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/720
2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal are
prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*s)1/2 or less that are
listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat
removal are prohibited.
Section 910.2; add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows:
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square
feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
2. In areas of buildings in group H used for storing class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive)
materials, or class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity
classification.
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible
materials.
Section 910.3; add subsection 910.3.4 to read as follows:
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the
provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically.
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature
rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature
rating of the sprinklers installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by
actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above
ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.
Section 910.4.3.1; amend to read as follows:
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor
level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of
makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of
smoke exhaust.
Section 912.2; add subsection 912.2.3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/720
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 50 feet of the fire
department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path.
Section 913.2.1; add subsection 913.2.1.1 and exception to read as follows:
913.2.1.1 Fire Pump Room Access. When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire
pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 feet
in width and 6 feet 8 inches in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box
shall be provided at this door, as required by IFC Section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an
exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building
shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as
approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by IFC
Section 506.1.
Section 1006.2.2; add new subsection 1006.2.2.7 as follows:
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply.
Reference the electrical code as adopted.
Section 1009.8; add Exception 7 to read as follows:
7. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans,
including variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of Section 1009 and chapter 11.
Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt Locks; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows:
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S
occupancy. ... {remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M, or S occupancy ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 1020.1 Construction; add exception 6 to read as follows:
6. In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction
within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection
within the corridor. The actuation of any detector must activate self-annunciating alarms audible in
all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors must be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm
system where such system is provided.
Section 1020.6; amend to read as follows:
1020.6 Corridor continuity. Fire-resistance-rated All corridors shall be continuous from the point of
entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms. ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 1029.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers; delete this section.
Section 1101.1 Scope; add exception to Section 1101.1 as follows:
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
Section 1612.3; amend to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/720
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Seagoville's Municipal Code Article 21.07 Flood
Damage Prevention defines and identifies anything relating to floods, flooding, and/or areas where
flooding is most likely to occur. Anything referencing IBC section 1612.3 shall meet all requirements
in the relevant portions of Flood Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code. To establish flood
hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data.
The Flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance
Study for [insert jurisdiction],” dated [insert date], as amended or revised with the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related
supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.
Section 2902.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
In other than Group E occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in table 2902.1 may be lowered,
if requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the
building official.
Table 2902.1; amend footnote g to read as follows:
g. Drinking fountains are not required in M occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B
occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments.
Section 2902.1; add new subsection 2902.1.4 to read as follows:
2902.1.4 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in
this chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section.
2902.1.4.1 Handwashing lavatory. At least one handwashing lavatory shall be provided for
use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing
areas. Additional handwashing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by
employees.
2902.1.4.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service
sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of
mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid
waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City of
Seagoville Health Department.
Section 3001.2 Emergency Elevator Communication Systems for the deaf, hard of hearing and speech impaired;
delete this section.
Section 3002.1 Hoistway enclosure protection required; add exceptions as follows:
Exceptions:
4. Elevators completely located within atriums shall not require hoistway enclosure
protection.
5. Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, shall not
require hoistway enclosure protection.
Section 3005.4; amend as follows:
3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine
rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces outside of but attached to a hoistway that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/720
have openings into the hoistway shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.
{Remainder unchanged}
Section 3005; add new subsections 3005.7 and 3005.8 as follows:
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces.
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted
by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1.
3005.7.2
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine
rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoistways.
However, smoke or heat detectors shall be provided.
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler
control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor
that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system.
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the
hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator
lobby shall be provided.
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not
be installed.
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room,
machinery spaces and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed
locations stating: “No Storage Allowed.”
Section 3006.1; delete and replace as follows:
3006.1 Access. An approved means of access shall be provided to elevator machine rooms and
overhead machinery spaces.
Section 3006.2, Hoistway opening protection required; amend as follows:
5. The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 75 55 feet (22 860 16 764
mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade
to the highest floors served by the hoistway.
Section 3006.5; add a sentence to read as follows and delete exceptions 1 and 2:
3006.5. Machine rooms and machinery spaces: {Text unchanged} ... Storage shall not be allowed
within the elevator machine room. Provide approved signage at each entry door to the elevator
machine room stating “Elevator Machinery - No Storage Allowed.”
Section 3109.1; amend to read as follows:
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through
3109.5, and other applicable sections of this code, the adopted 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code as amended, and all applicable state laws.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/720
(Ordinance 05-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.053–21.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 21.02.101 Adopted
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition, including all appendix
chapters, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted as the city residential
code and is made a part hereof by reference, except as modified or amended in this code.
Sec. 21.02.102 Amendments
The residential code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition, as follows:
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings of the City of Seagoville, and shall be ... {remainder unchanged}
Section R102.4; amend to read as follows:
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever
amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code
and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA
70 or the electrical code shall mean the electrical code as adopted.
Section R103 and R103.1; amend to insert the correct department name:
SECTION R103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
SEAGOVILLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The department of building safety Seagoville Community
Development is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building
official.
Section R104.10.1 Flood Hazard areas; delete this section.
Section R105.2, Work exempt from permits; delete this section.
Section R105.3.1.1; delete this section.
Section R106.1.4; delete this section.
Sections R110.1 through R110.5; delete all of these sections.
Section R202; add the following definition:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/720
HOMEOWNERS PERMIT. A homeowner permit is a permit applied for by the property owner of
record that owns and resides at the address the applicant is making a permit application for, to
perform a particular construction project.
Section R202; amend definition of “Townhouse” as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units
separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or
public way on at least two sides.
Table R301.2(1); complete table as follows, delete Manual J Design Criteria portion of table, and delete footnote
N:
WIND DESIGN
Ground Snow
Load
Speed (mph)d Topographic
Effectsk
Special Wind
RegionL
Windborne
Debris Zonem
Seismic Design
Categoryf
5 lbs. per sq. ft. 115 (3-sec gust) or
76 fastest mile
No No No A
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
Weatheringa Frost line depthb Termitec
moderate 6" very heavy
Winter Design Tempe
Ice Shield
Under-Layment
Requiredh
Flood Hazardsg Air Freezing
Indexi Mean Annual Tempj
22ºF No local code 150 64.9ºF
Editor's note–The layout of the table above was changed by the editor in order to fit on the printed page.
Section R302.1; add exception #6 as follows:
6. Open noncombustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted
ordinances.
Section R302.2, exception; amend to read as follows:
Exception: A common two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly, or one-hour fire-resistancerated
wall assembly when equipped with a sprinkler system ... {remainder unchanged}
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/720
Section R302.3; add exception #3 to read as follows:
3. Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be
separated as required for townhouses.
Section R302.5.1; amend as follows:
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping
purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped
with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel
doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors equipped with a selfclosing
device.
Section R303.3 Exception; add a sentence to the end as follows:
Spaces containing only a water closet or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an
approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.
Section R303.4 Mechanical ventilation; amend as follows:
R303.4 Mechanical ventilation. Where the air infiltration rate of a dwelling unit is 5 air changes per
hour or less when tested with a blower ... {remainder unchanged}.
Section R313.2; delete this section, exception, and subsection.
Section R315.2.2; amend Exception 2 to read as follows:
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing appliances or all electrically powered mechanical
systems.
Section R322.1.4; deleted section and replace as follows:
R322.1.4 Establishing the design flood elevation. Seagoville's Municipal Code Article 21.07 Flood
Damage Prevention defines and identifies anything relating to floods, flooding, and/or areas where
flooding is most likely to occur. Anything referencing IBC section R322.1.4 shall meet all
requirements in the relevant portions of Flood Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code.
Section R322.2.1; deleted section and replace as follows:
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. Seagoville's Municipal Code Article 21.07 Flood Damage
Prevention defines and identifies anything relating to floods, flooding, and/or areas where flooding is
most likely to occur. Anything referencing IBC section R322.2.1 shall meet all requirements in the
relevant portions of Flood Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code.
Section R322.3.2; deleted section item 1 and replace as follows;
1. Seagoville's Municipal Code Article 21.07 Flood Damage Prevention defines and identifies
anything relating to floods, flooding, and/or areas where flooding is most likely to occur. Anything
referencing IBC section R322.3.2 shall meet all requirements in the relevant portions of Flood
Damage Prevention in the Municipal Code.
Section R401.2; add two paragraphs as follows:
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation,
regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/720
All foundation repairs shall be engineered designed, signed, and stamped prior to submittal for
review.
Section R602.6.1; amend as follows:
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ...
than 50 percent of its width shall be required to have a 2x6 wall and a galvanized metal tie not less
than 0.054-inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 ga) and 1 1/2 5-inches (38 127 mm) wide shall be fastened
across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148-inch diameter)
nails having a minimum length of 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners shall be
offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6-inches
(152 mm) past the opening. See Figure R602.6.1. {exception unchanged}
Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure:
Section R703.1; add two sentences as follows:
All exterior trim shall be cementitious materials only. Wood shall not be permitted.
Section R703.7.4.1; add subsection R703.7.4.1.2 as follows:
R703.8.4.1.2 Veneer Ties for Wall Studs. In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to
studs as follows:
1. When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in
(737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/720
2. When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in
(483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation.
Section R902.1; amend body and add Exception 5 as follows:
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in sections
R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed in areas designated by law as requiring
their use or when the edge of the roof is less than 3 feet from a lot line. {Remainder of body
unchanged}
Exceptions:
{1 through 4: Unchanged}
5. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory
structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor
area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 square meters).
Chapter 11; delete entire chapter and replace with sentence as follows:
All references to Chapter 11 shall meet the requirements of the 2018 IECC for energy code
provisions and amendments as adopted.
Section M1305.1.2; amend as follows:
M1305.1.2 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided... {bulk of paragraph
unchanged} ... along all sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening
dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 36 inches (508 mm by 762 914 mm), and large
enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor
as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the
following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. A walkway 48-inches in width.
Exceptions: {unchanged}
Section M1411.3; amend as follows:
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed
from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means
of a direct or indirect drain. ... {remaining text unchanged}
Section M1411.3.1, items 3 and 4; amend to read as follows:
3. An auxiliary drain pan... {bulk of text unchanged} ... with item 1 of this section. A water level
detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
4. A water level detection device... {bulk of text unchanged} ... overflow rim of such pan. A water
level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/720
Section M1411.3.1.1; add sentence to end to read as follows:
A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official.
Section M1503.6; amend body and exception as follows:
M1503.6 Makeup air required. Where one or more gas, liquid or solid fuel-burning appliance that
is neither direct-vent nor uses a mechanical draft venting system is located within a dwelling unit's air
barrier, each exhaust system capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s)
shall be mechanically or passively provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the
difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall
be equipped with not fewer than one damper complying with Section M1503.6.2.
Exception: Makeup air is not required for exhaust systems installed for the exclusive purpose
of space cooling and intended to be operated only when windows or other air inlets are open.
Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric,
the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28
m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of
600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate
approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per
minute.
Section M2005.2; amend as follows:
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a
bedroom, storage closet, or installed in any attic unless approved by the building official. Water
heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion
air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bathroom when
through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements
of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device.
Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required.
Section G2408.3 (305.5); delete this section.
Section G2415.2.1 (404.2.1); add paragraph as follows:
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure
with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove”
Section G2415.12 (404.12); amend as follows:
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a
minimum depth of 12 18-inches (305 457 mm) below grade, except as provided for in section
G2415.12.1.
Section G2415.12.1 (404.12.1); amend as follows:
G2415.12.1 Individual outside appliances. Individual lines to outside lights, grills, and other
appliances shall be installed a minimum of 8 18-inches (203 457 mm) below finished grade, ...
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/720
{remaining text unchanged}
Section G2417.1 (406.1); add following sentences to end:
The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to
determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable
advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material,
power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the
permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure
prescribed in the following tests.
Section G2417.4.1; amend as follows:
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and onehalf
times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the
discretion of the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6)
inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. irrespective of design
pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed
a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum
yield strength of the pipe. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a
dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound
incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For
tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter
of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a
pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in
excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of
water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per
square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column
(52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed
maximum working pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working
condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing.
Section G2417.4.2; amend as follows:
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to
the building official, but in no case for be not less than 10 fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping,
and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48
kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the building official, but in no
case for less than thirty (30) minutes.
Section G2420.1 (406.1); add subsection G2420.1.4 as follows:
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel
(CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support,
suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to
prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the
valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the
system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and
installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add sentence as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/720
A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance
shutoff is located in the firebox.
Section G2421.1 (410.1); add sentence and exception as follows:
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in
section M1305.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete exception 1 and exception 4.
Section G2445.2 (621.2); add exception as follows:
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in
accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the building official
unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code section
108.7 of the fuel gas code.
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); amend to read as follows:
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to
access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code.
Section P2603.3; amend as follows:
P2603.3 Protection against corrosion. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and
galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder
walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive
soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less
than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material plastic.
Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing
shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing.
Section P2603.5.1; amend as follows:
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a
minimum of 48 inches (1219 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection.
Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade.
Section P2604.2; add subsection P2604.2.1 as follows:
P2604.2.1 Plastic sewer and DWV piping installation. Plastic sewer and DWV piping installed
underground shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Trench
width shall be controlled to not exceed the outside the pipe diameter plus 16 inches (406 mm) or in a
trench which has a controlled width equal to the nominal diameter of the piping multiplied by 1.25
plus 12 inches (305 mm). The piping shall be bedded in 4-inches (102 mm) of sand and then
backfilled compacting the side fill in 6-inch (152 mm) layers on each side of the piping. The
compaction shall be to minimum of 85 percent standard proctor density and extend to a minimum of
6-inches (152 mm) above the top of the pipe.
Section P2801.6; amend as follows:
P2801.6 Required pan. Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water storage tank is
installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will cause damage, the tank shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/720
installed in a pan constructed of one of the following:
1. Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) in thickness.
2. Plastic not less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) in thickness.
3. Other approved materials.
A plastic pan beneath a gas-fired water heater shall be constructed of material having a flame spread
index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with
ASTM E84 or UL 723.
Section P2801.6.1; amend as follows:
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) in depth
and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water
heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 1-
inch (19 25 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table P2906.5.
Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the
administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with
those instructions. Where a pan drain was not previously installed, a pan drain shall not be required
for a replacement water heater installation.
Section P2804.6.1; amend as follows:
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure
relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. {Unchanged}
2. Discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the water heater.
3. {Unchanged}
4. {Body unchanged}
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures
installation instructions and installed with those instructions. The T&P shall be either 3/4-
inch copper or 1-inch CPVC.
5. Discharge to the floor, to the pan serving the water heater or storage tank, to a waste
receptor an approved location or to the outdoors.
{Remaining items 6 through 14 unchanged}
Section P2902.5.3; amend as follows:
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be
protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker,
a double-check assembly, or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. Valves shall not be
installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the
system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/720
Section P3003.9.2; amend to read as follows:
P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer,
or other approved primer, that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple
in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2, or CSA B182.1 shall be
applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in
accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent-cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.
Exception: A primer is not required where both of the following conditions apply:
1. The solvent cement used is third-party certified as conforming to ASTM D 2564.
2. The solvent cement is used only for joining PVC drain, waste, and vent pipe and
fittings in not pressure applications in sizes up to and including 4 inches (102mm) in
diameter.
Section P3111; delete this section.
Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following:
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the
floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard
height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately
downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain
through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical
fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest
partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not
less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings
shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4)
inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the
drainboard shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a
ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named.
Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return
vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of
the foot vent.
(Ordinance 13-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.103–21.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 21.02.151 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems
in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition,
published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
Sec. 21.02.152 Amendments
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/720
The energy conservation code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, as follows:
Section C101.1 and R101.1; amend to read as follows:
C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Sections C101.4.2 and R101.4.2; add subsections to read as follows:
C101.4.2/R101.4.2 Historic buildings. Any building or structure that is listed in the state or National
Register of Historic Places; designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or
survey; certified as a contributing resource with a national register listed or locally designated
historic district; or with an opinion or certification that the property is eligible to be listed on the
national or state registers of historic places either individually or as a contributing building to a
historic district by the state historic preservation officer of the Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places, shall comply with the provisions of this code.
Exception: Whenever a provision or provisions shall invalidate or jeopardize the historical
designation or listing, that provision or provisions may be exempted.
Sections C102.1 and R102.1; add subsections to read as follows:
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited
energy efficiency program and determined by the energy systems laboratory to be in compliance with
the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the code official, be
considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star
Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance.
R102.1.2 (N1101.4.1) Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local
accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in
compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code
Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy
Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless
of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and
duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) and R403.3.3 (N1103.3.3)
respectively.
Sections C202 and R202 (N1101.6); add the following definitions:
GLAZING AREA. Total area of the glazed fenestration measured using the rough opening and
including sash, curbing or other framing elements that enclose conditioned space. Glazing area
includes the area of glazed fenestration assemblies in walls bounding conditioned basements. For
doors where the daylight opening area is less that 50 percent of the door area, the glazing area is the
daylight opening area. For all other doors, the glazing area is the rough opening area for the door
including the door and the frame.
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently
attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the
fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device.
Section R202 (N1101.6); add the following definition:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/720
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it
performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible
transmittance (VT).
Table 402.1.2 (N1102.1.2) Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component; the Fenestration U-factor
for Climate Zone 3 is amended as follows:
CLIMATE ZONE FENESTRATION U-FACTOR
3 0.32 0.35
Table 402.1.4 (N1102.1.4) Equivalent U-Factors; the Fenestration U-factor for Climate Zone 3 is amended as
follows:
CLIMATE ZONE FENESTRATION U-FACTOR
3 0.32 0.35
Section R402.3.2 (N1102.3.2) Glazed fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the
exception to read as follows:
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device,
the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2
SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections.
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projectionsa
Projection Factor SHGC Multiplier
(all Other Orientation)
SHGC Multiplier
(North Oriented)
0–0.10 1.00 1.00
>0.10–0.20 0.91 0.95
>0.20–0.30 0.82 0.91
>0.30–0.40 0.74 0.87
>0.40–0.50 0.67 0.84
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/720
>0.50–0.60 0.61 0.81
>0.60–0.70 0.56 0.78
>0.70–0.80 0.51 0.76
>0.80–0.90 0.47 0.75
>0.90–1.00 0.44 0.73
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north.
Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) Testing; add a last paragraph to read as follows:
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration
testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified
individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any
financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
Section R402.4.1; add new subsection and table to read as follows:
R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) Testing option - ACH tradeoff. As an option to the air leakage rate set out
in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2), 1- and 2-family homes meeting all of the listed criteria below
and the thermal envelope requirements in Table R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) will be considered compliant
when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to not less than or equal to four air changes per
hour when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in
Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2).
The compliance equivalency is limited as follows:
1. Limited to a conditioned floor area between 1,000 and 6,000 square feet,
2. Limited to between 2 to 6 bedrooms,
3. Assumes all ductwork and mechanical equipment is located in the unconditioned attic,
4. Assumes typical wood framing in the walls and roof, and
5. Assumes one of the following heating/cooling systems:
a. All electric system with a heat pump for heating, or
b. A system with electric cooling and natural gas heating.
Dwellings using electric resistance strip heating do not qualify for this tradeoff.
Table R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3)a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/720
Envelope Component Option #1 Option #2
R402.4 Air Leakage < 4 ACH50 < 4 ACH50
Wall Insulation R-value R13 + R3b R13 + R3b
Fenestration U-factor < 0.32 < 0.32
Fenestration SHGC < 0.25 < 0.25
Ceiling R-value > R49 > R49
Duct Insulation R-value R8 R6
Radiant Barrier Required No Yes
a Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code provisions are applicable.
b The first value listed is the R-value of cavity insulation while the second value is the R-value of the continuous
insulation or insulated siding.
Section R402.4.1; add new subsections to read as follows:
R402.4.1.4 Testing options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. As an option to the air leakage rate
set out in Section R402.4.1.2, multifamily dwelling units will be considered compliant when tested
and verified as having an air leakage rate to the air leakage rate set out in either Section R402.4.1.4.1
or Section R402.4.1.4.2 when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and
reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2
R402.4.1.4.1 Total air leakage rate for interior multifamily dwelling units. Interior
multifamily dwelling units with a measured, “unguarded” total air leakage result of 5.3 ACH50
or less shall be considered compliant.
R402.4.1.4.2 Total air leakage rate for corner multifamily dwelling units. Corner
multifamily units with a measured, “unguarded” total leakage result of less than 5.0 ACH50
shall be considered compliant.
R402.4.1.5 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or
more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as
required by Section R402.4.1.2. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, “Initial Testing” is required
for each multifamily property. “Initial Testing” shall consist of the 3rd party testing contractor
performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the
“Initial Testing” must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling
units selected for the “Initial Testing” must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for
“Initial Testing” shall not be included in a “sample group” or counted toward the minimum 15% of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/720
dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for “Initial
Testing.” The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing
contractor.
R402.4.1.5.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a “sample
group” which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units
within the “sample group” must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for
testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each
“sample group” for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the
designated 3rd party testing contractor.
If each tested dwelling unit within a “sample group” meets the minimum code
requirements, then all dwelling units in the “sample group” are considered to meet the
minimum code requirements.
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each “sample
group” must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of
all of the tested dwelling units across all “sample groups” shall not be less than a
minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building.
R402.4.1.5.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the
identified “sample group” fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder
will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in
the “sample group” will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party
testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure.
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the
sample group must be individually tested for code compliance.
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to
use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating
“Initial Testing.” Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling
units are individually verified to meet all code requirements.
A Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued for any building until testing has been
performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s)
identified for testing.
Section R403.3.3 (N1103.3.3) Duct Testing (Mandatory); add a last paragraph to read as follows:
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing
leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The
certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have
any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure.
Section R403.3.4; add new subsection to read as follows:
R403.3.4.1 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or
more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as
required by Section R403.3.3. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, “Initial Testing” is required for
each multifamily property. “Initial Testing” shall consist of the 3rd party testing contractor
performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the
“Initial Testing” must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling
units selected for the “Initial Testing” must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for
“Initial Testing” shall not be included in a “sample group” or counted toward the minimum 15% of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/720
dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for “Initial
Testing.” The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3rd party testing
contractor.
R403.3.4.1.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a “sample
group” which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units
within the “sample group” must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for
testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each
“sample group” for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the
designated 3rd party testing contractor.
If each tested dwelling unit within a “sample group” meets the minimum code
requirements, then all dwelling units in the “sample group” are considered to meet the
minimum code requirements.
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each “sample
group” must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of
all of the tested dwelling units across all “sample groups” shall not be less than a
minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building.
R403.3.4.1.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the
identified “sample group” fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder
will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in
the “sample group” will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party
testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure.
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the
sample group must be individually tested for code compliance.
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to
use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating
“Initial Testing.” Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling
units are individually verified to meet all code requirements.
A Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued for any building until testing has been
performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s)
identified for testing.
Section C402.2.8/R402.2.14; add new subsections to read as follows:
Section C402.2.8/R402.2.14 (N1102.2.14) Insulation installed in walls. Insulation installed in walls
shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood
structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building official.
Section C403.7.4 Energy recovery ventilation systems (Mandatory); add exception #12 to read as follows:
12. Individual ventilation systems that serve an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit.
Section C403.11.1 Duct and Plenum Insulation and Sealing (Mandatory); add second and third paragraphs after
the exceptions to read as follows:
Environmental ducts and plenums installed in vertical chases, both supply and exhaust, where the
ducts or plenums will not be accessible after construction completion, shall be leak tested in
accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Air Leakage Test Manual to the installed ductwork class and
pressure requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/720
Documentation shall be furnished demonstrating that representative sections totaling not less than 25
percent of the duct area have been tested and that all tested sections comply with the requirements of
this section.
Section R404.1 (N1104.1); revised in its entirety to read as follows:
Section R404.1 (N1104.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory). Not less than 90 75 percent of the
lamps in permanently installed lighting fixtures or not less than 75 percent of the permanently
installed lighting fixtures shall contain only high-efficacy lamps.
Section R405.2 (N1105.2); add exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions:
1. For one- and two-family dwellings the maximum envelope leakage of 4 ACH50 is
permitted provided the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all
other requirements of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The
annual energy cost or source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than
that of the Standard Reference Design.
2. For multifamily or townhomes and buildings classified as Group R2 and Group R4 of
three stories or less the maximum envelope leakage of less than 5 ACH50 is permitted provided
the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all other requirements
of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The annual energy cost or
source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than that of the Standard
Reference Design.
Section R405.6.2 (N1105.6.2); add the following paragraph:
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM RateTM,
Energy Gauge(R); ICF International Beacon Residential; Ekotrope, HERS Module; Right-Energy
HERS; and IC3. Other performance software programs as listed by RESNET(R) and having the ability
to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation
programs and may be considered by the building official.
Section C405.9. Voltage drop in feeders; deleted in its entirety.
Table R406.4 (N1106.4) Maximum Energy Rating Index; amend to read as follows:
Table R406.4 (N1106.4)1
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 65
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019.
Table R406.4 (N1106.4)2
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/720
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 63
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022.
Table R406.4 (N1106.4)3
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
3 59
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022.
Section C408.3.1 Functional Testing; amend to read as follows:
C408.3.1 Functional Testing. Prior to passing final inspection, the registered design professional or
approved agency shall provide evidence that the lighting control systems have been tested to ensure that
control hardware and software are calibrated, adjusted, programmed, and in proper working condition
in accordance with the construction documents and manufacturer's instructions. Functional testing
shall be in accordance with Sections C408.3.1.1 through C408.3.1.3 for the applicable control type.
(Ordinance 09-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.153–21.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Electricity*
Part I. In General
Sec. 21.02.201 Application
The provisions of this article shall apply to all activity involving the installation, servicing, repair, replacement,
additions, modification, and/or maintenance of electrical systems, conductors, equipment, fittings, devices,
motors, appliances, fixtures, signs and all other electrical equipment within or on public or private buildings and
premises, except as otherwise provided in this article. The provisions of this article shall not apply to
installations used by electricity supply, electric railway or communications agencies in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electrical power or for the operation of street railways, signals or the transmission
of intelligence data when located within or on public thoroughfares; provided, however, that such agencies are
operating under a franchise agreement with the city.
Sec. 21.02.202 Application to existing electrical systems and equipment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/720
(a) Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to any electrical system and
equipment without requiring the existing electrical system and equipment to comply with all the requirements of
this code, provided that addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new electrical system and
equipment and provided further that no hazard to life, health or safety will be created by such additions,
alterations or repairs. Minor additions, alterations and repairs to existing electrical system and equipment may be
made in accordance with the law in effect at the time the original installation was made, when approved by the
building official.
(b) Existing installations. Electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of
this code may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance
with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such electrical system and
equipment.
(c) Change in building occupancy. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of any building or
structure undergoing a change in use or occupancy, as defined in the building code, shall comply with the
requirements of this code which are applicable to the new use or occupancy.
(d) Maintenance. All electrical systems and equipment, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be
maintained in a proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe and hazard-free
condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with
this code. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the electrical system. To
determine compliance with this subsection, the building official may cause any electrical system to be
reinspected.
(e) Moved building. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of buildings or structures moved into
or within the city shall comply with the provisions of this code for new installations.
Sec. 21.02.203 Definitions
For the purpose of these provisions, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as
specified in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within
the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language,
Unabridged, 2002, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular
include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include feminine and the
feminine the masculine.
Electrical apprentice. An individual, licensed as an apprentice who works under the on-site supervision of a
master electrician, a journeyman electrician, or a residential wireman, on behalf of an electrical contractor, or
employing governmental entity performing electrical work as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section
1305.002(11).
Electrical code. The National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection Association as adopted
by the city.
Electrical contracting. The business of designing, installing, erecting, repairing, or altering electrical wires or
conductors to be used for light, heat, power, or signaling purposes. The term includes the installation or repair of
ducts, raceways, or conduits for the reception or protection of wires or conductors and the installation or repair
of any electrical machinery, apparatus, or system used for electrical light, heat, power, or signaling.
Electrical contractor. Any person, firm, or corporation to whom a valid, current electrical contractor's
registration has been issued by the city.
Electrical maintenance work. The replacement, or repair of existing electrical appurtenances, apparatus,
equipment, machinery, or controls used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or
attached to a building, residence, structure, property, or premises. All replacements or repairs must be of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/720
same rating and type as the existing installation. No improvements may be made that are necessary to comply
with applicable codes under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1305. Electrical maintenance work does not
include the replacement of any raceways, conductors, disconnecting means, or service feeder components. It
also does not include the installation of any new electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or
controls beyond the scope of any existing electrical installation.
Electrical sign contracting. The business of designing, manufacturing, installing, connecting, reconnecting, or
servicing an electric sign, cold cathode, neon gas tubing, or outline gas tubing, or altering electric sign wiring or
conductors either inside or outside of a building.
Electrical work. Any labor or material used in installing, maintaining, or extending an electrical wiring system
and the appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on,
outside, or attached to a building, residence, structure, property, or premises. The term includes service entrance
conductors as defined by the National Electrical Code.
General supervision. The exercise of oversight by a master electrician on behalf of an electrical contractor, or by
a master sign electrician on behalf of an electrical sign contractor of performance by all classes of electrical
licensees of electrical work bearing responsibility for the work's compliance with applicable codes under Texas
Occupations Code, chapter 1305.
Journeyman electrician. A person to whom a valid, current journeyman electrician's registration has been issued
by the city.
Maintenance electrician. An individual, licensed as a maintenance electrician, who works under the general
supervision of a master electrician, on behalf of an electrical contractor, or employing governmental entity and
performs electrical maintenance work as defined in this section.
Master electrician. A person to whom a valid, current master electrician's registration has been issued by the
city.
On-site supervision. The exercise of supervision of electrical work or electrical sign work by a licensed
individual other than an electrical apprentice. Continuous supervision of an electrical apprentice is not required,
though the on-site supervising licensee is responsible for review and inspection of the electrical apprentice's
work to ensure compliance with any applicable codes or standards.
Residential wireman. A person who may only perform electrical installations in single-family and multifamily
dwellings not exceeding four stories.
Sec. 21.02.204 Unsafe electrical systems or equipment
All electrical systems or equipment regulated by this code which are unsafe, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of electrical systems
or equipment regulated by this code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the
purpose of this section, an unsafe use. All such unsafe electrical systems or equipment are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedures set forth in section 21.01.059 or such alternate procedure as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As
an alternative, the building official or other employee or official of the city as designated by the governing body
may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.
Sec. 21.02.205 Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies
The building official or his authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect any electric power or
energy service supplied to the building, structure or building service equipment therein regulated by this code in
case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or, where there is a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/720
violation of the temporary electric connection. The building official shall whenever possible notify the serving
utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of such
disconnection immediately thereafter.
Sec. 21.02.206 Authority to condemn electrical system and equipment
Whenever the building official ascertains that any electrical system or equipment regulated in this code has
become hazardous to life, health or property, he may order in writing that such electrical system or equipment
either be removed or restored to a safe condition, whichever is appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix a
time limit for compliance with such order. No person shall use or maintain defective electrical system or
equipment after receiving such notice. When such equipment or installation is to be disconnected, a written
notice of such disconnection and causes therefore shall be given within 24 hours of the order to disconnect to the
serving utility, the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises. When any electrical system or
equipment is maintained in violation of this code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions
of this section, the building official shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
Sec. 21.02.207 Connection after order to disconnect
No person shall make connections from any energy or power supply nor supply power to any electrical system
or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of
which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the
reconnection and use of such electrical system or equipment.
Sec. 21.02.208 Electrical license and registration
(a) Registration required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who is not registered as a
qualified electrician in the city to engage in work regulated by this code. Prior to the approval of any permit to
do work regulated by this code, the applicant for such permit must first register in person with the building
inspection division.
(b) Classifications of electrician licenses.
(1) Master electrician. A person possessing the necessary qualifications, training and technical
knowledge to plan, lay out, and supervise the installation, maintenance and extension of electrical
conductors and equipment. This person shall have the authority to order the correction of defects or
non-complying work installed in violation of this code.
(2) Master sign electrician. A person possessing the equivalent qualifications as a master
electrician, but limited to installation of signs only - no work may be undertaken on the premises'
wiring system by this person, other than the sole connection of a sign to an existing branch circuit or
feeder.
(3) Journeyman electrician. A person possessing the necessary qualifications, training and
technical knowledge to install, maintain and extend electrical conductors and equipment and capable
of doing this work in accordance with prepared plans and specifications and under the supervision of
a master electrician.
(4) Journeyman sign electrician. A person possessing the equivalent qualifications as a journeyman
electrician, but limited to the installation of signs only, under the supervision of a master sign
electrician. No work may be undertaken on the premises' wiring system by this person, other than the
sole connection of a sign to an existing branch circuit or feeder.
(5) Maintenance electrician. A person engaged in the trade of maintaining the electrical system on
premises owned and operated by the maintenance electrician's employer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/720
(6) Residential electrician. A person possessing the necessary qualifications, training, and technical
knowledge to install, maintain and extend electrical conductors and equipment and capable of doing
this work in accordance with prepared plans and specifications and under the supervision of a master
electrician. The scope of work allowed by this license is limited to residential premises wiring
systems of 225 amperes or less.
(7) Electrical contractor. A person engaged in the business of installing, maintaining or extending,
by contract, electrical conductors and equipment. This person shall be a master electrician. An
electrical contractor is the only registered electrician that is allowed to acquire a permit.
(8) Electrical apprentice. An individual, licensed as an apprentice who works under the on-site
supervision of a master electrician, a journeyman electrician, or a residential wireman, on behalf of
an electrical contractor, or employing governmental entity performing electrical work as defined by
Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.002(11).
(9) Residential wireman. An individual, licensed as a residential wireman, who works under the
general supervision of a master electrician, on behalf of an electrical contractor, or employing
governmental entity, while performing electrical work that is limited to electrical installations in
single family and multifamily dwellings not exceeding four stories, as defined by Texas Occupations
Code, section 1305.002(13).
Sec. 21.02.209 Supervision
The actual work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing of electrical work for which a permit is required
by this code shall have supervision by a licensed master or journeyman electrician as provided by this code. In
the event the owner of electrical contracting business is not a licensed master electrician, a master electrician
shall be designated by the owner of such place of business to the building official as the person responsible for,
and supervising, the electrical work done by such electrical contractor. Such designated master electrician shall
be the supervisory electrician for only one (1) electrical contractor within the city at any one time. Should such
supervision not be constantly provided, the electrical inspector may order the work being done by such electrical
contractor to be discontinued until proper supervision and control has been provided and the name of the new
master electrician disclosed to building official.
Sec. 21.02.210 Electrical company vehicles to be marked
All electrical contractors vehicles engaged in doing work in the city shall have signs permanently affixed to both
sides of the vehicle indicating the company name of the electrical contractor.
Sec. 21.02.211 License display
Each holder of a master, journeyman or specialist license shall carry evidence of proper license on his person at
all times while doing electrical work and shall produce and exhibit same when requested by an inspector or
officer of the city.
Sec. 21.02.212 Exception from licensing and registration
Persons who are not registered electricians may carry out the following classes of work:
(1) The replacement of lamps, fuses and the connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles
which have been permanently installed.
(2) The installation, alteration, or repairing of any wiring, devices, or equipment for signaling,
remote control, or the transmission of information, provided such are inherently power limited and
have a maximum nameplate rating not exceeding one volt ampere.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/720
(3) The installation, alteration or repair of the electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment
installed by or for an electrical public service corporation legally operating in the city when for the
use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of the electrical
energy or for the use of such a corporation in the operation of street railways, signals or the
transmission of information.
(4) Any work involved in the manufacture or test of electrical materials, devices, appliances or
apparatus, but not including any installation of wiring other than that required for testing purposes
unless such equipment as complete is approved by the Electrical Inspector before it is installed or
used.
(5) Electrical work done by a property owner in a building owned and occupied by him and
classified as his homestead. Where the electrical work done by property owner is deemed by the
building official to be hazardous to persons or property, and repairable beyond the skills and
electrical knowledge of the property owner by the building official, or his authorized representative,
the building official may void the permit or validation obtained by the homeowner. In such an event,
the electrical work shall only be completed by a licensed electrical contractor, registered with the city.
Sec. 21.02.213 Service connections
(a) Connection approval. An electrical system or equipment regulated by this code for which a permit is
required shall not be connected to a source of energy or power until approved by the building official.
(b) Temporary connections. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the electrical
system or equipment to the source of energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for the use
under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(c) Authorized connection. When new electrical meters are installed or existing electrical meters are to be
relocated, the disconnection, connection or reconnection to the meter shall be made only by authorized
employees of the Texas Utilities Electric Company. Only authorized employees of Texas Utilities Electric
Company shall be permitted to make connection between the customer's service entrance conductors and Texas
Utilities Electric Company lines.
Sec. 21.02.214 Electrician's license
(a) Required; exception. No person shall erect, construct, repair, alter or change any electrical installation,
work or wiring, or set any electrical machinery, unless he has a current license so to do issued in accord with this
section; provided that, this requirement shall not apply to a person doing electrical work on or in a dwelling
owned and occupied by him, as authorized in section 21.01.049.
(b) Application. Application for a municipal license under this section shall be filed with the building official.
All applicants for a master electrician's or journeyman electrician's municipal license shall submit proof of
having met the requirements of the Texas Electrician Licensing Act. Any person holding a master electrician's or
journeyman electrician's license from the City of Dallas, which license is valid and current, shall not be required
to have the state license required by this subsection, but shall pay the fees prescribed in subsection (c) below and
secure a municipal license under this section before performing any work in the city.
(c) Fee. The annual fee for a municipal license under this section shall be in accordance with the city master
fee schedule.
(d) Issuance; expiration; renewal. If an applicant for a municipal license under this section pays the prescribed
fee and files any required bond, the building official shall issue the license. Such license shall expire on the
thirty-first day of December next following its issuance and may be renewed on or before such day by payment
of the renewal fee prescribed in subsection (c) above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/720
(e) Revocation. Any failure on the part of the holder of an municipal license to comply with the provisions of
any ordinance of the city regulating electric wiring and apparatus, or to faithfully carry out the conditions of a
contract for installing electric wiring and apparatus, shall be deemed sufficient cause for revoking the license,
together with all rights and privileges thereunder and the forfeiture of the bond filed pursuant to the requirements
of section 21.02.214(d). The building official is hereby authorized to refuse to issue a license to any person
associated with the previous holder of a revoked license.
Sec. 21.02.215 Insurance
Each electrical contractor shall maintain insurance as required by the state and shall provide proof of insurance
to the building official at time of registration.
Sec. 21.02.216 Contractors to file certain information with electrical inspector
All electrical contractors licensed under this article shall file with the building official their correct address and
telephone number, and any changes therein shall be immediately filed with the building official. If such a
contractor changes the firm name, or if additional members are taken into the firm, or if the firm is incorporated,
a notice of such changes shall be forwarded to the building official, otherwise the license is subject to revocation
because of its questionable ownership.
Sec. 21.02.217 Permits
(a) No person shall enter upon the erection, construction, alteration or change of any electrical installation,
machinery, apparatus, work or wiring in the city, until a permit has been issued by the building official, covering
each installation to be made. When required by the building official, plans and specifications for the proposed
work must be filed with him before the permit is granted.
(b) When any wiring or apparatus is installed in such a manner that the same could be used for electric light or
power purposes, it shall be deemed that such wiring or apparatus is to be used for such purposes and a permit
shall be required as provided in this section.
(c) A permit required by this section shall be issued only to a duly licensed electrician; provided that, such a
permit may be issued for work to be done by a person on or in a dwelling owned and occupied by him, even
though such person is not so licensed.
(d) The fee for a permit under this section shall be as follows, based on the value of the work to be done.
Sec. 21.02.218 Inspection and approval of work; temporary connection of current
(a) No current shall be connected to any electrical installation for which a permit is issued under this article,
until all work has been inspected and approved by the building official. If such work is approved, the inspector
shall issue a final certificate of approval for the installation, which certificate shall be the authority for
connecting current to the installation.
(b) Not withstanding the provisions of subsection (a), where, for good and sufficient causes, it is necessary to
have electricity on any installation, before the final certificate can be issued, the building official may issue a
temporary permit, provided that all parts to which current is applied are in a safe condition. Such permit shall
expire after thirty (30) days from its date. If, at the end of thirty (30) days, the installation is still incomplete,
another permit must be obtained for the next thirty (30) days and each succeeding thirty (30) days, while the
installation is incomplete.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any electric light, heat or power company to do any wiring of any nature in or in
any building, except power houses and substations of electric light, heat and power companies operating under a
franchise granted by the city, or to make any electrical connection to any building or electrical wiring or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/720
apparatus, until a certificate of approval or a temporary permit authorizing connection has been issued by the
electrical inspector pursuant to this section.
Sec. 21.02.219 Failure of electricians to correct defective work; persistent violations by electricians
Any person engaged in the business of electrical construction and the installation of wiring and apparatus for
electric, heat or power in the city, who shall fail to correct promptly any defects in any work done by him,
contrary to this article, after having been notified thereof by the building official, shall not be issued any further
permits under this article until such defects have been corrected. In any case in which any such person shall
continue to or persistently violate the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city in regard to
electrical work, or the orders of the inspector in relation to the same, the license of such person shall be
suspended or revoked by the city council.
Sec. 21.02.220 Inspection of existing installations; correction of defects or disconnecting current
It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect all electrical wiring and apparatus in the city at any time in
order to ascertain whether such electrical wiring or apparatus is in any respect dangerous to life or property. If
any part of any electrical wiring or apparatus is found to be in defective or dangerous condition, the code official
shall notify, in writing, the owner of such wiring or equipment to have the defect corrected within a reasonable
time. If such owner shall refuse or fail to comply with the requirements of the code official and correct all
defects as directed, within the specified time, it shall be the duty of the code official to notify the service
company, firm or individual furnishing the electric current to such defective wiring or equipment to cease to
supply electricity to same. Upon receipt of such notice, the service company, firm or individual furnishing
electric current to such defective wiring or equipment shall immediately disconnect the service or feed wires and
cease to supply current to the defective installation until the defects have been corrected, and shall not reconnect
the current, except upon written authority from the code official.
Sec. 21.02.221 Disconnecting current in emergencies
Every person, firm or corporation owning or controlling electrical wires and apparatus for the transmission of
light, heat or power shall, in time of fire or in case of severe climatic conditions or any other emergency wherein
lives or property of the citizens of the city may be endangered, disconnect the current or service to such wires
and apparatus, when ordered so to do by the mayor, city manager, code official, fire marshal, chief of police or
chief of the fire department.
Sec. 21.02.222 Article does not affect liability for damages
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the liability of any person owning, operating or
installing electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for damage to property or injuries to
persons covered by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any agent thereof be deemed to assume any such
liability by reason of inspections made and certificates issued under this article.
Sec. 21.02.223 Exempt work
(a) An electrical permit shall not be required for the following:
(1) Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an
attachment plug end to be connected to an approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted
by this code.
(2) Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed approved appliances of the same
type and rating in the same location.
(3) Temporary decorative lighting.
(4) Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/720
(5) Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.
(6) Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location.
(7) Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or
gas tube systems.
(8) Taping joints.
(9) Removal of electrical wiring.
(10) Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories.
(11) Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts
and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.
(12) Low-energy power, controls and signal circuits of classes II and III as defined in this code.
(13) A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring,
apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy
or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility in the
exercise of its function as a serving utility.
(b) Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any
work to be done in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 21.02.224–21.02.250 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Code
Sec. 21.02.251 Adopted
The 2017 National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by
reference and made part of this code as a general standard for electrical equipment and installation thereof in the
city as set forth herein. A copy of the 2017 National Electrical Code is on file in the office of the city secretary
for reference and inspection. References to the “electrical code” shall mean the 2017 National Electrical Code
and any amendments legally adopted by the city council.
Sec. 21.02.252 Amendments
The electrical code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the 2017
National Electrical Code, as follows:
(Ordinance 11-2017 adopted 6/5/17)
Article 100, part I; amend the following definition:
Intersystem bonding termination. A device that provides a means for connecting bonding
conductors for communication systems and other systems such as metallic gas piping systems to the
grounding electrode system.
Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/720
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this code shall be
acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of
equipment by a nationally recognized testing lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory
or a qualified third-party inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is
subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third-party
inspection agency approved by the AHJ.
Manufacturer's self-certification of any equipment shall not be used as a basis for approval by the
AHJ.
Informational Note: See 90.7, examination of equipment for safety, and 110.3, examination,
identification, installation, and use of equipment. See definitions of approved, identified,
labeled, and listed.
Article 210.8; add subsection 210.8.9 to read as follows:
9. Appliances installed in other than indoor locations shall be provided with a GFCI 125 volt single
phase, 15- and 20- ampere receptacle and to be installed within 10 feet of the appliance.
Article 230.71(A); add the following exception:
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant. The
number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six.
Article 240.91; delete the article in its entirety.
Article 300.11; add the following exception:
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is located in that
area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal metric designation 16 (trade
size 1/2").
Article 310.15(B)(7); change to read as follows:
(7) 120/240-Volt, 3-wire, single-phase dwelling services and feeders. For dwelling units,
conductors, as listed in table 310.15(B)(7), shall be...{text unchanged}...provided the requirements of
215.2, 220.61, and 230.42 are met. This article shall not be used in conjunction with section 220.82.
Article 500.8(A)(3); change to read as follows:
500.8 Equipment. Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation
standards that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion
properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements.
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion
proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than
-25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient
temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as class
I, division 1 at normal ambient temperature.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/720
(A) Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following:
(1) Equipment listing or labeling
(2) Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection
agency concerned with product evaluation
(3) Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's selfevaluation
or an owner's engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified licensed
professional engineer.
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates
demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special
conditions of use, and other pertinent information. Guidelines for certificates may be
found in ANSI/ISA 12.00.02, Certificate Standard for AEx Equipment for Hazardous
(Classified) Locations.
Article 505.7(A); changed to read as follows:
505.7 Special precaution. Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures
safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance.
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more
than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in
hazardous (classified) locations.
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical
equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable
for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower
temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may
not exist in a location classified class I, zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature.
(A) Implementation of zone classification system. Classification of areas, engineering and
design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by
a qualified persons licensed professional engineer.
Article 680.25(A); changed to read as follows:
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards
supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in part II of this article and on the load side of
the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system.
(A) Wiring methods.
(1) Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal
conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical
damage:
(1) Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit
(2) Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit
(3) Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit
(4) Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or within a building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/720
(5) Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building
(6) Type MC cable where installed within a building and if not subject to
corrosive environment
Exception: An existing feeder between an existing remote panelboard and service equipment
shall be permitted to run in flexible metal conduit or an approved cable assembly that includes
an equipment grounding conductor within its outer sheath. The equipment grounding conductor
shall comply with 250.24(A)(5).
(Ordinance 16-14 adopted 9/15/14)
Sec. 21.02.253 Appendix chapters adopted
(a) Appendix chapter A.
(b) Appendix chapter B.
(c) Appendix chapter C.
(d) Appendix chapter D.
(e) Appendix chapter E.
(f) Appendix chapter F.
(g) Appendix chapter G.
(h) Appendix chapter H.
(Ordinance 11-2017 adopted 6/5/17)
Secs. 21.02.254–21.02.300 Reserved
Division 6. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 21.02.301 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, including all appendix
chapters, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, published by the International Code
Council on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.
Sec. 21.02.302 Amendments
The sections of the 2018 International Plumbing Code that are changed, added, or deleted are as follows:
Table of Contents, chapter 7, section 714; amend as follows:
Section 714 Engineered Computerized Drainage Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/720
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.8; amend to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and
as further regulated in Sections 102.8.1 and 102.8.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the
referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to
reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical Code as
adopted.
Sections 106.6.2; amend as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as indicated in the following
accordance with City's master fee schedule.
Sections 106.6.3; delete entirely.
Section 108.4; amend as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than [amount] dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding [number of days], or both such fine and imprisonment. ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 108.5; amend as follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
Section 109; delete entire section and replace as follows:
Section 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code
official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling
ordinance.
Section 305; amend as follows:
305.1 Protection against contact. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized
steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and
floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil.
Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less
than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material plastic.
Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing
shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing.
Section 305.4.1; amend as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a
minimum of [number] inches (mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/720
Building sewers shall be installed not less than a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade.
Section 305.7; amend to read as follows:
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed
within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which
they would be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an
approved manner.
Section 306; add subsection 306.2.4 as follows:
306.2.4 Plastic sewer and DWV piping installation. Plastic sewer and DWV piping installed
underground shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Trench
width shall be controlled to not exceed the outside the pipe diameter plus 16-inches (406 mm) or in a
trench which has a controlled width equal to the nominal diameter of the diameter of the piping
multiplied by 1.25 plus 12-inches (305 mm). The piping shall be bedded in 4-inches (102 mm) of
sand and then backfilled compacting the side fill in 6-inch (152 mm) layers on each side of the
piping. The compaction shall be to minimum of 85 percent standard proctor density and extend to a
minimum of 6-inches (152 mm) above the top of the pipe.
Section 314.2.1; amend to read as follows:
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed
from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. ... {text unchanged} ... Condensate shall
not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance.
Section 314.2.2; amend as follows:
314.2.2 Drainpipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system shall be cast
iron, galvanized steel, copper and copper alloy, cross-linked polyethylene, polybutylene,
polyethylene, ABS, CPVC, PVC, or polypropylene pipe or tubing when exposed to ultraviolet light.
All piping that will be exposed to ultraviolet light shall be painted. All Ccomponents shall be selected
for the pressure and temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall
be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of chapter 7 relative to the material type.
Condensate waste and drain line size shall not be less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) internal diameter and
shall not decrease in size from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where
the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded [CB1]together for condensate drainage, the
pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with table 314.2.2. All horizontal sections of drain piping
shall be installed in uniform alignment at a uniform slope.
Section 401.1; add a sentence as follows:
The provisions of this chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of the building
code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the code official shall determine which
provision applies.
Section 405.7; delete this section.
Section 409.2; amend to read as follows:
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine ... {remainder
unchanged}
Section 413.4; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/720
412.4 Required location for floor drains. Public laundries and central washing facilities. Floor
drains shall be installed in the following areas.
1. In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple-family
dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains
located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not
less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter.
2. Commercial kitchens.
3. Public restrooms.
Section 405.3.6; add as follows:
405.3.6 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal
lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall
be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, non-absorbent material.
Section 502.3; delete section entirely and replace as follows:
502.3 Water heater locations prohibited. Water heaters shall not be permitted to be installed in any
attic unless approved by the building official.
Section 502; add section 502.6, exception, and section 502.6.1 as follows:
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water
heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be
made accessible by a stairwell to the mezzanine or platform of a commercial building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder.
502.6.1 Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not
adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting
and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with section 502.1.
Section 504.6; amend to read as follows:
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve,
temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall:
1. {Unchanged}
2. Discharge through an air gap. located in the same room as the water heater.
3. {Unchanged}
Note: CPVC shall be one inch in size, due to the inside diameter being smaller than the
3/4 inch required for the pressure relief valve opening.
4. {Body unchanged}
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping
system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacture's
installation instructions and installed with those instructions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/720
5. Discharge to the floor, to the pan serving the water heater or storage tank, to a waste
receptor to a location approved by the building official, or to the outdoors.
{Items 6 through 9 remain unchanged}
10. Terminate not more than 6 inches (152 mm) and not less than two times the discharge
diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor.
{Items 11 through 14 remain unchanged}
Section 504.7.1; add two sentences as follows:
Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the
administrative authority and permitted by the manufacture's installation instructions and installed
with those instructions. If unable to drain the pan to the outdoors, an automatic shut-off assembly
shall be required (i.e. a watts system).
Section 608.1; amend as follows:
608.1 General. A ... {bulk of body unchanged}. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to
applicable local regulations, table 608.1, except and as specifically stated in sections 608.2 through
608.16.10.
Section 608.17.5; amend as follows:
608.17.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The ... {bulk of body unchanged} ... backflow by
an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a
reduced pressure ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 608.18; amend to read as follows:
608.18 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and
constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local
regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with sections 608.18.1 through 608.18.8.
Section 610.1; amend to read as follows:
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 703.6; delete entire section.
Section 704; add subsection 704.5 as follows:
704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron
single stack shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard.
Section 712; add subsection 712.5 as follows:
712.5 Dual pump system. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any “public
use” occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps
or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical, plumbing, or
electrical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see section 1113.
Sections 713 and 713.1; amend as follows:
SECTION 713
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/720
ENGINEERED COMPUTERIZED DRAINAGE DESIGN
713.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be
permitted to be designed by a registered engineer using approved computer design methods.
Section 803; add subsection 803.3 as follows:
803.3 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or
intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed
shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed
ceramic materials.
Section 903.1; amend to read as follows:
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six
(6) inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where ... {remainder unchanged}
Section 918.3; add a sentence as follows:
Air admittance valves shall only be installed with the prior approval of the building official.
Section 1003.2; add sentence as follows:
Any structure, which houses a use that prepares or processes food, shall have an approved and
engineered grease interceptor or a minimum of 1,000-gallon grease trap.
Section 1106.1; amend as follows:
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building
storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches
per hour the 100-year hourly rainfall rate indicated in figure 1106.1 or on other rainfall rates
determined from approved local weather data.
Section 1108.3; amend as follows:
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in
accordance with section 1106 based on the rainfall rate for which the primary system is sized in
tables 1106.2, 1106.3 and 1106.6. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from
exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not
have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system
shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system.
Section 1109; delete this section.
Section 1202.1; delete exceptions 1 and 2.
(Ordinance 08-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.303–21.02.350 Reserved
Division 7. Swimming Pool and Spa Code
Sec. 21.02.351 Adopted
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition, including appendix, as published by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/720
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office
of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 21.02.352 of this article.
Sec. 21.02.352 Amendments
The swimming pool and spa code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to
the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition, as follows:
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of
Seagoville, hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.9; amend to read as follows:
102.9 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local,
state or federal law, to include but not limited to;
1. Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS); Standards for Public Pools and
Spas; §285.181 through §285.208, (TDSHS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two
family dwellings or townhouses).
2. Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR); 2012 Texas Accessibility
Standards (TAS), TAS provide the scoping and technical requirements for accessibility for
swimming pools, wading pools, and spas and shall comply with 2012 TAS, Section 242. (TAS
rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two family dwellings or townhouses).
Exception: Elements regulated under Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR)
and built in accordance with TDLR approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted
by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Sections 103 and 103.1; delete and replace to read as follows:
SECTION 103
SEAGOVILLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Seagoville Community Development Department is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official for operation and
maintenance of any public swimming pool in accordance this code, local and state law.
Section 105.6.2; amend as follows:
105.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for work shall be as indicated in the following accordance with city
master fee schedule.
Section 107.4; delete entire section.
Section 107.5; amend as follows:
107.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/720
Section 202; definitions; add definition to read as follows:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: Dallas County and Kaufman County Health Departments (respective of
where a pool is located) assist the City of Seagoville in the regulating the operation of public pools.
Routine inspections on pools and spas open to the public are conducted to document compliance with
the standards set forth in State law.
Section 305.1; add a sentence at the end to read as follows:
305.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry
into areas having pools and spas. In one-and two-family dwellings and townhouses, wWhere spas or
hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming
pools are equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where
those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through
305.7.
Section 305.2; amend the end of the sentence to read as follows:
305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. ... Sections 305.2.1 through 305.7 and in accordance with
the Texas Administrative Code, Texas Health and Safety Code 757 for public pools.
Section 305.2; add subsection 305.2.7.1 to read as follows:
305.2.7.1 Chainlink fencing prohibited. Chainlink fencing is not permitted as a barrier in public
pools built after January 1, 1994.
Section 305.4; amend as follows:
305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling or structure of a one- and two-family
dwelling or townhouse or its accessory structure serves as part of a barrier and where doors or
windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through that wall, one of the following shall be
required:
1. {Unchanged}
2. {Unchanged}
3. {Unchanged}
The wall of a building with windows in accordance with 2018 International Building Code, Section 1030 in
Group R2 occupancies shall not be used as part of pool enclosure. Other windows that are part of a
pool yard enclosure shall be permanently closed and unable to be opened for public pools.
Section 305.6; amend to read as follows:
305.6 Natural barriers used in a one- and two-family dwelling or townhouse. In the case where
the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not
permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge
a minimum of eighteen (18) inches, a barrier is not required between the natural body of water
shoreline and the pool or spa.
Section 307.1.4 Accessibility; add exception as follows:
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/720
Section 310; amend to read as follows:
310.1 General. Suction entrapment avoidance for pools and spas shall be provided in accordance
with APSP 7 or for public swimming pools in accordance with State of Texas Rules for Public
Swimming Pools and Spas, Title 25 TAC Chapter 265 Subchapter L, Rule §265.190. {Remainder
unchanged}
Section 313.7; delete section entirely and replace as follows:
313.7 Emergency shutoff switch for spas and hot tubs. A clearly labeled emergency shutoff or
control switch for the purpose of stopping the motor(s) that provide power to the recirculation system
and jet system shall be installed at a point readily accessible to the users and not less than 1.5 m (5
ft.) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the spa or hot tub. This requirement shall not apply to oneand
two-family dwellings and townhouses.
Section 402.12; amend body, delete and replace table 402.12, and delete and replace figure 402.12 with Figure
25 TAC §256.186(e)(6) as follows:
Section 402.12 Water envelopes. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with
Table 402.12 Texas department of State Health services, Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265,
Section 186(e) and Figure: 25 TAC 256.186(e)(6).
Maximum Diving Board Height Over
Water
0.75-Meter 1-Meter 3-Meters
Maximum Diving Board Length 12'-0" 16'-0" 16'-0"
Minimum Diving Board Overhang 2'-6" 5'-0" 5'-0"
D1 Minimum 8'-6" 11'-2" 12'-2"
D2 Minimum 9'-0" 10'-10" 11'-10"
D3 Minimum 4'-0" 6'-0" 6'-0"
L1 Minimum 4'-0" 5'-0" 5'-0"
L2 Minimum 12'-0" 16'-5" 19'-9"
L3 Minimum 14'-10" 13'-2" 13'-11"
L4 Minimum 30'-10" 34'-7" 38'-8"
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/720
L5 Minimum 8'-0" 10'-0" 13'-0"
H Minimum 16'-0" 16'-0" 16'-0"
From Plummet to Pool Wall at Side 9'-0" 10'-0" 11'-6"
From Plummet to Adjacent Plummet 10'-0" 10'-0" 10'-0"
Section 402.13; amend as follows:
402.13 Ladders for diving equipment. Ladders shall be provided with two grab rails or two
handrails. There shall be a uniform distance between ladder treads, with a 7 inch (178 mm minimum)
distance and 12 inch (305 mm) maximum distance. Supports, platforms, steps, and ladders for diving
equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads. Steps and ladders shall be of corrosionresistant
material, easily cleanable and with slip-resistant tread.
Exception: The distance between treads for the top and bottom riser can vary.
Section 411.2.1 & 411.2.2; amend as follows:
411.2.1 Tread dimensions and area. Treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth
(i.e., horizontal run) of 12 inches and a minimum width of 20 inches. not be less than 24 inches
(607mm) at the leading edge. Treads shall have an unobstructed surface area of not less than 240
square inches (154838mm2) and an unobstructed horizontal depth of not less than10 inches (254
mm) at the centerline.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/720
411.2.2 Risers. Risers for steps shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches, with the bottom
riser height allowed to taper to zero. except for the bottom riser, shall have a uniform height of not
greater than 12 inches (305 mm) measured at the centerline. The bottom riser height is allowed to
vary to the floor.
Section 411.5.1 & 411.5.2; amend to read as follows:
411.5.1 Swimouts. {Body unchanged}
1. {Unchanged}
2. {Unchanged}
3. {Unchanged}
4. The leading edge shall be visibly set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken
stripe at least 1 (one) inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step.
This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting
color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and
shall be a slip-resistant surface.
411.5.2 Underwater seats and benches. {Body unchanged}
1. {Unchanged}
2. {Unchanged}
3. {Unchanged}
4. {Unchanged}
5. The leading edge shall be visually set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken
stripe at least 1 (one) inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step.
This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting
color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and
shall be a slip-resistant surface.
6. {Unchanged}
7. {Unchanged}
Section 603.2; amend as follows:
603.2 Class D-2 pools. Where a Class D-2 pool has a bather- accessible depth greater than 4 1/2 feet
(1372 mm), the floor shall have a distinctive marking at the 4 1/2 feet (1372 mm) water depth. Class
A and B pools. Where Class A and B pools are over 5 feet deep, the transition point of the pool from
the shallow area to the deep area of the pool shall be visually set apart with a 4-inch minimum width
row of floor tile, a painted line, or similar means using a color contrasting with the bottom; and a
rope and float line shall be provided between 1 foot and 2 feet on the shallow side of the 5-foot depth
along and parallel to this depth from one side of the pool to the other side. The floats shall be spaced
at not greater than 7-foot intervals; and the floats shall be secured so they will not slide or bunch up.
The stretched float line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support
loads normally imposed by users. If the owner or operator of the pool knows or should have known
in the exercise of ordinary care that a rope or float is missing, broken, or defective, the problem shall
be promptly remedied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/720
Section 610.5.1; amend as follows:
610.5.1 Uniform height of 9 10 inches. Except for the bottom riser, risers at the centerline shall have
a maximum uniform height of 9 10 inches (229 254 mm). The bottom riser height shall be permitted
to vary from the other risers.
Section 804; amend to read as follows:
804.1 General. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with Table 804.1 and
Figure 804.1, or the manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater. Negative construction
tolerances shall not be applied to the dimensions of the minimum diving water envelopes given in
Table 804.1.
(Ordinance 10-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.353–21.02.400 Reserved
Division 8. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 21.02.401 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, including all appendix
chapters, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, published by the
International Code Council on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 21.02.402 Amendments
The sections of the 2018 International Mechanical Code that are changed, added, or deleted are as follows.
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.8; change to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those
that are listed in chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments
as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the electrical code as adopted.
Section 106.5.2; amend to read as follows:
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in the following
accordance with city master fee schedule.
Section 106.5.3; delete entirely.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/720
Section 108.4; amend to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than [amount] dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding [number of days], or both such fine and imprisonment. ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 108.5; amend to read as follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
Section 304.6; delete this section.
Section 306.3; amend to read as follows:
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided ... {bulk
of paragraph unchanged} ... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a
minimum of 20 inches by 30 36 inches (508 mm by 762 914 mm), or larger where such dimensions
are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be
rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space,
provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. A walkway 48-inches in width.
Exceptions: {unchanged}
Section 306.5; amend to read as follows:
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring
access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel
will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, an a permanent interior or
exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not
extend closer than 12 feet (3038 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the
equipment and appliance's level service space. Such access shall... {bulk of section to read the same}
... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) ...
{bulk of section to read the same}.
Section 306; add subsection 306.6 to read as follows:
306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water
heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be
made accessible by a stairwell to the mezzanine or platform of a commercial building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. No hot water heater
shall be installed in any attic.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/720
306.6.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not
adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting
and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with section 306.3.1.
Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows:
2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment.
Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event
of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher
level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard
such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance.
Section 403.2.1; add item #5 to read as follows:
5. Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination
thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed
to remove odors from the air.
Section 501.3; amend body and exceptions to read as follows:
501.3 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged
outdoors at a point where it will not cause a nuisance and not less than the distances specified in
section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily drawn
in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, or crawl space, or be directed onto
walkways.
Exceptions:
1. {Delete}
21. {Text unchanged}
32. {Text unchanged}
3. Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when
infiltration of outside air is present.
Section 607.5.1; add sentence to end to read as follows:
For hazardous exhaust systems see section 510.1–510.9 IMC.
(Ordinance 10-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.403–21.02.450 Reserved
Division 9. Fuel Gas Code*
Sec. 21.02.451 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, including all appendix
chapters, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of fuel gas systems in the city and providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, published by the International Code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/720
Council on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this division.
Sec. 21.02.452 Amendments
The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, are hereby amended to read as follows.
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Seagoville,
hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with section 621.2.
Section 102.8; amend to read as follows:
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and
standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments
as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the electrical code as adopted.
Section 106.6.2; amend to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in the following
accordance with city master fee schedule.
Section 106.6.3; delete entirely.
Section 108.4; amend to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than [amount] dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding [number of days], or both such fine and imprisonment. ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 108.5; amend to read as follows:
108.5 Stop-work orders. Upon notice ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT]
dollars or more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
Section 306.3; amend to read as follows:
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided ... {bulk
of paragraph unchanged} ... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a
minimum of 20 inches by 30 36 inches (508 mm by 762 914 mm), and or larger where such
dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an
appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to
the attic space, provide one of the following:
1. A permanent stair.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/720
2. A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity.
3. An access door from an upper floor level.
4. A walkway 48-inches in width.
Exceptions: {unchanged}
Section 306.5; amend to read as follows:
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring
access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel
will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, an a permanent interior or
exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not
extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the
equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall not require ... {remainder
unchanged}
Section 306; add subsection 306.7 to read as follows:
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water
heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be
made accessible by a stairwell to the mezzanine or platform of a commercial building.
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed
through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm)
above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. No hot water heater
shall be installed in any attic.
306.7.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not
adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting
and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with section 306.3.1.
Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure
with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following
wording shall be stamped into the tag:
“WARNING
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure
Do Not Remove”
Section 404.2; add subsection 404.2.1 to read as follows:
404.2. Pipe material. CSST cannot be used in lieu of black pipe for a main gas line.
Section 404.12; amend to read as follows:
404.12. Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of
12 18 inches (305 458 mm) top of pipe below grade, except as provided for in section 404.12.1.
Section 404.12.1; delete this subsection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/720
Section 406.4; amend to read as follows:
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a
pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused
by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the
pressure tests are made. Mechanical gauges used to measure test pressures shall have a range such
that the highest end of the scale is not greater than five times the test pressure.
Section 406.4.1; amend to read as follows:
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and one-half times the
proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of
the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm)
of mercury, measured with a manometer or diaphragm gauge. irrespective of design pressure. Where
the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that
produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength
of the pipe. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a
minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and
pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a
pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and onehalf
inches (3-1/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to
exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14)
inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure
(52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6
kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5
psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working
pressure.
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working
condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing.
Section 406.4.2; amend to read as follows:
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be not less than 1/2-hour for each 500 cubic feet (14 m3)
of pipe volume or fraction thereof. When testing a system having a volume less than 10 cubic feet
(0.28m3) or a system in a single family dwelling, the test duration shall not be held for a length of
time satisfactory to the code official, but in no case for less than 10 fifteen (15) minutes. The duration
of the test shall not be required to exceed 24 hours. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at
pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall
be held for a length of time satisfactory to the code official, but in no case for less than thirty (30)
minutes.
Section 409.1; add subsection 409.1.4 to read as follows:
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST)
piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support,
suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to
prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the
valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the
system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and
installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping.
Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/720
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in
section 306.
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of
being serviced and removed through the required attic opening.
Section 624.1.1; amend to read as follows:
624.1.1 Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing,
relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing
Code.
(Ordinance 12-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.453–21.02.500 Reserved
Division 10. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 21.02.501 Adopted
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, including appendix, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city. Each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the
office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with
the additions, insertion, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 21.02.504 of this article.
Sec. 21.02.502 Referenced standards adopted
International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition; referenced standards.
(Ordinance 07-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Sec. 21.02.503 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this division is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by
establishing minimum standards applicable to buildings and structures. Minimum standards are established with
respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for
human use and habitation. Demolition of structures is provided for as a last resort when compliance with
standards cannot reasonably be achieved.
(b) This division is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this article
be liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this division, or
constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this division.
(Ordinance 23-14 adopted 10/6/14)
Sec. 21.02.504 Amendments
Section 101.1; amend as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Seagoville, hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 103.5; amend as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/720
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the following accordance with City's master
fee schedule.
Section 107.1; amend as follows:
107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in
the manner prescribed in section 107.2 and 107.3 herein to the person responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall comply with Section 108.3. In the
notice herein provided for the city shall have the right to inform the property owner or agent having
charge that if he or she commits another violation of the same kind or nature any time within one
year from original notice, the city may institute the appropriate proceedings at law or to correct or
abate such violation without further notice at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the
property.
Exception: Weeds in excess of 24 inches (610 mm) in height that are a danger to the health, life
or safety of any person, may be immediately abated without notice. Notice shall be not later
than the tenth day after the city causes the work to be done under this section, the city shall give
notice to the property owner in the manner required by this section.
Section 110.4 Salvage materials; delete this section.
Section 112.4; amend as follows:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} shall be in violation of this
code and guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. liable to a fine of not less than [AMOUNT] dollars or
more than [AMOUNT] dollars.
Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Delete reference to ICC Electrical Code and replace with reference
to adopted electrical code.
Section 202 Definitions, add definition for junked vehicle as follows:
JUNK VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(2) is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 hours, if the vehicle is on
public property; or 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
See also Motor vehicles in Property Maintenance Code Section 302.8.
Section 302.3 Sidewalks and driveways; add a sentence as follows:
Repairs and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain free from
obstructions, trip hazards or dilapidated conditions from the edge of street or alley pavement.
Section 302.4 Weeds; delete the first sentence and replace as follows:
302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth in excess of twelve (12) inches in height. {Remainder unchanged}
Section 302.4; add new subsection 302.4.1 as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/720
302.4.1 Trees, shrubs, vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning,
claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied,
within the corporate city limits to permit bushes, trees, shrubs, vegetation or plant substances(s) or
any part(s) thereof, whether living or not, that has its roots on said real property, to hang, overhang,
grow into or grow over any street, alleyway within the city, if said growth is overhanging below
fourteen (14) feet from a point on a vertical line with the starting point on a horizontal plane of the
street or alleyway and no plant or tree growth be allowed within twelve (12) inches of the edge of any
street or alleyway. Sidewalks shall have a clearance of eight (8) feet from a point on a vertical line
with a starting point at the horizontal plane of the sidewalk. When such growth exists it shall be
deemed a nuisance and a danger to public safety. It shall be the duty of the person named as owner of
the property to abate the nuisance so that the overhang is not below the set minimum(s) clearances as
stated above.
Section 302.8 Motor vehicles, amend as follows:
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, an inoperative, or unlicensed, or
unregistered motor vehicles shall not be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicles shall
not at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved paint spray booth
and within a zoning district where spray painting of vehicles is an allowed use.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work,
provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes. Work on vehicles at a residence can only be conducted on those
vehicles legally registered in the resident's name and no others. Any noise that disturbs the
adjacent residential environment would not be allowed to continue.
Section 302; add subsection 302.10 as follows:
302.10 Other exterior property conditions. Unless authorized within a zoning district and under
conditions thereof, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, it shall be unlawful of any
person to allow, permit, conduct or maintain objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary conditions, items,
situations or events on any portion of a lot or tract, outside of an enclosed or covered patio or other
projecting overhang that includes, but is not limited to:
1) Furniture, appliance and other items left outside that were or are not intended for outdoor
use that includes broken or damaged lawn furniture, outdoor structure(s), lawn and garden
accessories and sculpture.
2) Building materials or any item by itself used in construction that is not serving its intended
purpose where there is not an active building permit.
3) Clothing, papers, broken glass, scrap materials, pipe, barrels, piles or stacks of unused
brick or stone, uninstalled fence and/or fence materials.
4) Brush, trash, wood piles, fallen trees or large parts of trees such as the trunk or main
branches, dead trees or other dead vegetation.
5) Lawn equipment in whole or in part where such is kept outside and unprotected from the
elements.
6) Unlicensed and/or inoperable trailers.
7) Boats not on trailers for longer than 30 days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/720
8) Any condition, situation, event or action as described herein where items are covered by
tarpaulin(s) or other such cover.
9) Parts typically associated with trucks, cars, motorcycles, boats, farm equipment,
construction equipment or other vehicle that includes but is not limited to body parts, tires,
wheels, batteries, upholstered items, engines, drive train components, plows, disks, rakes and
other such items.
10) A boat on a trailer, car, truck, trailers or other vehicle with axle(s) not currently licensed
and/or registered.
11) Any vehicle elevated up off the ground for a period of more than 72 hours.
12) Cargo containers placed on any residential property and cargo containers placed on any
commercial property without an active building permit is prohibited.
13) Semi-trucks and/or trailers or parts thereof on a property or in front of a property used as
or zoned for residential use, located on property used or zoned for nonresidential use, other than
where permitted within the approved zoning district and subject to items and conditions thereof
where such is not conducting business or has not conducted business for more than 24 hours.
14) Commercial vehicles, as that term is used and under conditions and/or terms established
under section 17.04.004 of the City's Code of Ordinances parked on a property or in front of a
property used as or zoned for residential use or where located anywhere where such vehicle is
not conducting work at the time related to the vehicle other than where permitted within the
approved zoning district and subject to terms and conditions thereof.
15) Construction equipment in whole or in part where the equipment is not being used for its
intended purpose on the property where parked or stored unless otherwise allowed within that
zoning district subject to terms and conditions thereof.
16) Where outdoor storage and/or display is allowed, accumulation of trash and/or debris and
items or material that is not orderly stacked.
17) Vehicles may only be parked on those approved surfaces as outlined in section 17.04.092
of the City's Code of Ordinances.
18) Signs of all types not included within the approved sign ordinance 03-10.
19) Any vehicular sign used as a source of advertising for a business within city limits not in
compliance with sign ordinance 03-10.
20) The placing or accumulation of any material or item in any area of a property that does or
could provide nesting, harborage or feeding for vermin or pest, or that could negatively affect
the environment's ecological system from runoff areas emitting an odor or odors for longer than
24 hours that a person of reasonable sensibilities may distinguish from ambient odors, seepage
of fuels, oils, chemical or organic compounds into the soils and similar such events.
21) The accumulation of materials that emit any gases, noxious fumes, or odors to such
extent that the same or any of them shall by reason of such offensive odors become a source of
endangerment to the health, safety and welfare to immediate surrounding property or to persons
living or passing in the vicinity within the city.
22) Any trailer, boat or recreational vehicle left parked on any public street or right-of-way
not connected to a legally registered motor vehicle will be considered in violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/720
23) Other situations as determined by the director of development services or their designee.
Section 303.2, Enclosures, amend follows:
Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth
shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier not less than at least 48 inches (1 219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool.
Horizontal members shall not be constructed in such a manner to create a ladder effect. All such
Gates and doors openings directly into such barriers enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing
and latching devices designed to keep and capable of keeping doors securely closed at all times when
not actually in use. It shall be unlawful to maintain a swimming pool, spa or hot tub in the city limits
of Seagoville that is not properly fenced. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches (1372
mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close
and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. An existing
pool enclosure shall not be removed, replaced, or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness
as a safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346 shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
Section 304.3, amend as follows:
304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position
to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property and visible from the rear
alley. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic
numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers Each character shall not be less than a minimum of 4 6 inches
(102 152 mm) in height high with a minimum stroke width of 0.75-inch (12.7 19 mm), provided the
building is within 100 feet of the road. If the building sets back greater than 100 feet each character
shall not be less than 12 inches (51 mm) in height and not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in width.
Apartment building numbers must be 12 inches (51 mm) in height with unit numbers 6 inches (12.7
mm) in height. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed
from the public way, a monument, pole, or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address identification shall be maintained.
Section 304.14; amend as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to October 31, every door, window, and ...
{Remainder unchanged}
Section 602.3; amend as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... during the
period from October 1 to May 31 to maintain ... {Remainder unchanged including exceptions}
Section 602.4; amend as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor ... {bulk of paragraph unchanged} ... during the period from
October 1 to May 31 to maintain ... {Remainder unchanged including exceptions}
(Ordinance 07-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
Secs. 21.02.505–21.02.550 Reserved
Division 11. Existing Building Code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/720
Sec. 21.02.551 Adopted
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the city, being marked and
designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, including appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city. Each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office of
the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertion, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 21.02.552 of this article.
Sec. 21.02.552 Amendments
The existing building code adopted in this article shall be subject to the exceptions and amendments to the
International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition, as follows:
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of
Seagoville, hereinafter ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 102.4; amend to read as follows:
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards
referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.4.1 and 102.4.2.
Section 112, add new subsection to read as follows:
112.4 Means of appeals. Any reason directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice
issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustment, hereinafter referred to
as the “board,” provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code adequately satisfied by
other means.
(a) Notice of meeting. The boards shall meet upon notice from the code official within 20
days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. Notice of any meeting shall be
given to the public in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. All
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(b) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant is
to be given an opportunity to be heard.
(c) Board decision. The board shall, only by a concurring vote of a majority of those present,
either modify the order of the official by granting an extension of time to make all repairs and
improvements necessary to meet code requirements, enforce the recommendations of the
official, or reverse the decision of the code official.
(d) Court review. Any person, whether or not a party of the appeal, shall have the right to
apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for
review shall be made in the manner and within 30 days following the decision of the board.
(e) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices)
shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.
Section 202; amend the definitions of existing building and existing structure as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/720
EXISTING BUILDING - A building erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or
one for which a legal building permit has been issued, structure, or space, with an approved final
inspection issued under a code edition which is at least 2 published code editions preceding the
currently adopted building code; or a change of occupancy.
EXISTING STRUCTURE - A building erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate
code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued, structure, or space, with an approved
final inspection issued under a code edition which is at least 2 published code editions preceding the
currently adopted building code; or a change of occupancy.
Section 305.1; adds an exception to read as follows:
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division
of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
Section 305.4.2; add item 7 to the list of requirements as follows:
7. At least one accessible family or assisted use toilet room shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 11 of the International Building Code.
Section 401.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 405.2.5 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 406.1; add a code reference to read as follows:
406.1 Material. Existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair shall be allowed to be
repaired or replaced with like material, in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70.
Section 502.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 504.1.2; add sentence to end as follows:
Existing fire escapes shall be permitted to be repaired or replaced.
Section 504.1.3; delete this section.
Section 507.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 701.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 702.6; add a code reference to read as follows:
702.6 Materials and methods. All new work shall comply with the materials and methods
requirements in the International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code,
International Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and International Plumbing Code, as
applicable, that specify material standards, detail of installation and connection, joints, penetrations,
and continuity of any element, component, or system in the building.
Section 802.5.1; amend to read as follows:
802.5.1 Minimum requirement. Every portion of a floor, such as a balcony or a loading dock, opensided
walking surfaces, including mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps and landings
that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below and is not provided with guards,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/720
or those in which the existing guards are judged to be in danger of collapsing, shall be provided with
guards.
Section 803.1; add sentence to end to read as follows:
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the
work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls
capable of resisting the passage of smoke containing the subject work area, and if the work area includes
a corridor, hallway, or other exit access, then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access shall be
protected in its entirety on that particular floor level.
Section 803.2.4; amend Exceptions to read as follows:
Exceptions: Supervision is not required where the Fire Code does not require such for new
construction for the following:
1. Underground gate valve with roadway boxes.
2. Halogenated extinguishing systems.
3. Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems.
4. Dry- and wet-chemical extinguishing systems.
5. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R where a common
supply main is used to supply both domestic and automatic sprinkler systems and a separate
shutoff valve for the automatic sprinkler system is not provided.
Section 803.3; delete and replace as follows:
803.3 Standpipes. Refer to Section 1103.6 of the Fire Code for retroactive standpipe requirements.
Section 805.2; delete exception #1.
Section 805.3.1.2; amend as follows:
805.3.1.2 Fire Escapes required. For other than Group I-2, where more than one exit is required, an
existing or newly constructed fire escape complying with section 805.3.1.2.1 shall be accepted as
providing one of the required means of egress.
Section 805.3.1.2.1; amend items as follows:
1. {Unchanged}
2. Access to a new fire escape shall ... {Remainder unchanged}
3. Newly constructed ... at grade level.
4. {Unchanged}
5. In all buildings of Group E occupancy up to and including the 12th grade, buildings of Group I
occupancy, rooming boarding houses, ... {Remainder unchanged}
Section 805.5.2 Transoms; amend to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/720
805.5.2 Transoms. In all buildings of Group I-1, I-2, R-1, R-2, B, E, occupancy... {Remainder
unchanged}
Section 904.1; add sentence to end to read as follows:
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the
work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls
containing the subject work area, and if the work area includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit access,
then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access shall be protected in its entirety on that particular
floor level.
Section 904.1.1; amend to read as follows:
904.1.1 High-rise buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in work areas of where
the high-rise buildings. has a sufficient municipal water supply for the design and installation of an
automatic sprinkler system at the site.
Section 1103.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 1201.4 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
Section 1301.3.2; amend to read as follows:
1301.3.2 Compliance with other codes. Buildings that are evaluated in accordance with this section
shall comply with the International Fire Code. and International Property Maintenance Code.
Section 1301.3.3 Compliance with Flood Hazard Provisions; delete this section.
Section 1402.6 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section.
(Ordinance 06-2019 adopted 1/28/19)
ARTICLE 21.03 DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD BUILDING ABATEMENT*
Sec. 21.03.001 Purpose and scope
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative
with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the construction codes, chapter 214 of the Local
Government Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings, as defined herein, which from any cause
endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may
be required to be repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured.
(b) Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings which are hereinafter defined as dangerous
or substandard buildings whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become dangerous.
Sec. 21.03.002 Definitions
In this article:
Building. Any building, fence, awning, canopy, shed, garage, house, tent or other structure whatsoever and the
enumeration of specific types of structures shall not be deemed to exclude other types of structures to which the
sense and meaning of the provisions hereof in context reasonably have application; however, this definition shall
not include signs.
Building official. The chief code enforcement officer for the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/720
Court. The municipal court of record for the city.
Fire chief. The chief of the fire department or his designee.
Judge. The judge of the municipal court of record for the city.
Sec. 21.03.003 Enforcement
(a) Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. The
building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this article and to adopt and enforce rules and
supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its divisions. Such interpretations, rules and
regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article.
(b) Inspections. The building official and the fire chief are hereby authorized to make such inspections and
take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article.
(c) Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or when
the building official has a reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a
condition which is contrary to or in violation of this article which makes the building or premises unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or premises at reasonable time to inspect or
perform the duties of this article, provided that, if such building or premises be occupied, credentials be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building
or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies
provided by law to secure entry.
(d) Abatement of dangerous or substandard buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the building official to be dangerous or substandard as defined by this article are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, vacation, demolition, removal or securing in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) Unlawful to violate article. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, or
use, occupy or maintain any building or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this article.
(f) Inspection authorized. All buildings within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which
a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
Sec. 21.03.004 Substandard buildings declared
For the purposes of this article, any building, regardless of the date of its construction, which is in violation of
the requirements of any section of the Property Maintenance Code to the extent that the life, limb, health,
property, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof are endangered shall be deemed a substandard
building.
Sec. 21.03.005 Determination by building official
When the building official has inspected any building and has found and determined that the building is
substandard, the building official may take any or all of the following actions, as the building official deems
appropriate:
(1) Issue notice to the record owner that the building is substandard and must be repaired, removed
or demolished;
(2) Issue citation(s) for violation(s) of this code;
(3) Secure the building if permitted by this code;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/720
(4) Recommend to the municipal court that abatement proceedings be commenced pursuant to this
article.
Sec. 21.03.006 Public hearing for abatement of substandard buildings
(a) Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has found and determined that a building is a
substandard building, the building official may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, relocation
of occupants, removal, demolition or securing of the building.
(b) Public hearing to be held. Except when the building official finds that a building is likely to immediately
endanger persons or property, a public hearing before the municipal court shall be held to determine whether a
building complies with the standards set out in the Property Maintenance Code. If the building official
determines in accordance with section 109.1 of the Property Maintenance Code that the building constitutes an
immediate danger, the procedures set forth in that section shall be followed.
(c) Notice. Notice shall be served to the owner of the property by personal delivery or by certified mail, and
shall contain all of the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner;
(2) The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located;
(3) A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard or dangerous,
with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous or
substandard under the Property Maintenance Code;
(4) A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing
proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will
reasonably take to complete the work;
(5) Notice of time and place of the public hearing; and
(6) A statement that if the building is found to be in violation of the Property Maintenance Code,
the court may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a
reasonable time.
(d) Additional notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing, the city may file a copy of the notice
mailed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section in the official public records of the county in which the property
is located. If such notice is not filed of record, each identified mortgagee and lienholder must be notified of any
abatement order issued by the judge at the public hearing, prior to any remedial action by the city.
(e) Burden of proof. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article, and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(f) Conduct of public hearing. At the public hearing, the owner of the building and all other interested persons
may make their appearance and be heard. Any evidence may be received and considered by the judge. The judge
shall preside and shall determine all questions of order. The hearing may be adjourned from day to day or
continued within the discretion of the judge.
Sec. 21.03.007 Orders of the municipal court judge
(a) Findings of the judge. If the judge finds upon evidence presented at the public hearing that the building is
in violation of standards set out in the Property Maintenance Code, the judge may order that the building be
repaired, vacated, removed, demolished, or secured in accordance with this article, the Property Maintenance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/720
Code, and article 21.02 of this code, or that the occupants be relocated by the owner, mortgagee or lienholder
within a reasonable time as provided herein.
(b) Time allowed to complete work.
(1) The order must require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to do either or both
of the following within thirty (30) days;
(A) Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or
(B) Repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the
hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days.
(2) If the judge allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than thirty (30) days to repair,
remove or demolish the building, the judge shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner if occupied or secure the property in accordance with
appendix A of the Property Maintenance Code if unoccupied while the work is being performed.
(3) The judge may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to
repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order
unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee does both of the following:
(A) Submits, at the hearing, a detailed plan and time schedule for work; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing, that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety
(90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(4) If the judge allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete
any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the judge shall require the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee regularly to submit progress reports to the building official to
demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of work. The order may require that the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee appear before the judge or the building official to demonstrate compliance
with the time schedules.
(c) Contents of order. The order of the judge must contain, at a minimum, all of the following:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of minimum standards present in the building;
(3) A description of the ordered actions, including a statement that the owner may repair, if
feasible, or demolish or remove at his option;
(4) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allowed, and charge the
cost to the property; and
(5) If the judge has determined that the building will endanger persons or property, or if the
building is a dwelling with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units, a statement that the city may repair the
building and charge the costs to the property if the ordered action is not taken within the time
allowed.
Sec. 21.03.008 Notice of orders of the municipal court judge
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/720
(a) Order shall be mailed. After the public hearing, the municipal court clerk shall promptly mail, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the record owner of the building, and each identified
lienholder and mortgagee of the building.
(b) Order shall be filed with city secretary. Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued by the
judge, the building official shall file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary.
(c) Order shall be published. Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued by the judge, the building
official shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating all of the following:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
(2) The date the hearing was held;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 21.03.009 Enforcement of orders of the judge
(a) If order not complied with, city may take action. If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed,
or demolished within the time specified by the order, the city may vacate, secure, repair, remove, or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense, provided however:
(1) The city may not act to remove or demolish a building until after the judge has found either of
the following:
(A) That such defects or conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety
of the public or the occupants of the building are endangered and the building is infeasible to
repair; or
(B) There is no reasonable probability that the building will be repaired within a reasonable
period of time if additional time is given.
(2) The city may only repair a building as provided herein to the extent necessary to correct the
conditions which render the building dangerous, and may not act to repair a building unless both
apply:
(A) The judge made a determination that the building is likely to endanger persons or
property; and
(B) The building is a residential dwelling with ten (10) or fewer units.
(b) Posting of notice to vacate building. If the order requires vacation or if compliance is not had with the
order within the time specified therein, the building official is authorized to require that the building be vacated.
Notice to vacate shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the occupant of the building and it
shall be posted at or upon each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
“SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/720
Building Official
City of Seagoville”
(c) Remedial action by city. Any repair or demolition work, or securing of the building, shall be accomplished
and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided. Any surplus realized from the sale of
such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and cleaning the lot, shall
be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
(d) Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order pursuant to section 21.03.007 is directed who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in the
municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city provided herein.
(e) Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in
the building which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished, removed or secured under the provisions of
this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having
an interest or estate in such building, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or
demolishing, removing, or securing any such building pursuant to the provision of this article, or in performing
any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article.
(f) Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition by the property owner or any
lienholder or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to valid unexpired permits issued by the
city. All permits issued pursuant to an order of the judge shall expire upon expiration of the time for compliance
set forth in the order.
Sec. 21.03.010 Performance of work by the city
(a) Procedure. When any work of repair, removal, demolition or securing is to be performed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of any order of the judge, the work may be accomplished by city personnel or by
private contract as may be deemed necessary.
(b) Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and shall constitute a special assessment and a
lien against such property to secure payment thereof, together with ten (10) percent interest per annum on such
amount from the date on which the work is performed; however, no lien shall be placed upon such property
where work was performed and the property is a homestead protected by the Texas Constitution.
(c) Repair to minimum standards only. The city may repair the building at its own expense on the land on
which the building stands or is attached to only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance
with minimum standards.
Sec. 21.03.011 Recovery of cost of securing, repair, removal or demolition
(a) Itemized account and notice of lien. The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses
incurred by the city in the securing, repair, removal or demolition of any building pursuant to this article. Upon
completion of the work, the building official shall prepare and file with the city secretary a sworn account and
notice of lien containing all of the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the real property on which the building is or was located;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/720
(3) The type of work performed; and
(4) The amount of expenses incurred by the city in performing the work and the balance due.
(b) Notice filed in county records. The city secretary shall file the notice of lien along with a copy of the order
of abatement issued by the judge in the deed of records of the county in which the premises are located.
(c) Personal obligation of property owner. The expenses incurred by the city as set forth in the sworn account
of the building official shall be a personal obligation of the property owner in addition to a priority lien upon the
property. The city attorney may bring an action in any court of proper jurisdiction against the owner or property
to recover the costs incurred by the city.
(d) Lien shall be valid and privileged. Upon filing of the notice of lien in the deed records of the county in
which the property is located, the lien shall be valid against the property so assessed. The lien shall be privileged
and subordinate only to tax liens, existing special assessment liens, and shall be paramount to all other liens. The
lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon has been paid.
(e) Assessment must be paid. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed
on any such property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(f) Release of lien. After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building
official, have been fully paid with interest of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the work was performed,
the building official shall execute a release lien which shall be filed in the deed records of the county in which
the property is located.
Sec. 21.03.012 Civil penalty
(a) Civil penalty authorized. In addition to any other enforcement authority provided by law, the judge may,
by order, at an administrative hearing, assess a civil penalty against a property owner as provided for herein for
failure to comply with an order issued by the judge.
(b) Showing required. The civil penalty may be assessed if shown at the administrative hearing that both of
the following apply:
(1) The property owner was notified of the contents of the order issued pursuant to section
21.03.007; and
(2) The property owner committed an act in violation of the order or failed to take an action
necessary for compliance with the order.
(c) Amount of penalty. The civil penalty may be assessed in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead,
in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each violation.
(d) Notice of administrative hearing. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date on which the administrative
hearing is set, the property owner shall be sent a notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The notice shall contain all of the following:
(1) A copy of the order issued by the judge pursuant to section 21.03.007;
(2) A statement that the building official has determined that the property owner committed an act
in violation of that order, or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with that order;
(3) A statement that at the administrative hearing the judge may assess a civil penalty not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/720
the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each
violation; and
(4) Notice of the time and place of the hearing.
(e) Copy of order filed with district clerk. After the civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file with
the district clerk of the county in which the property is located a certified copy of the order assessing the civil
penalty stating the amount and duration of the penalty.
(f) Enforcement. The civil penalty may be enforced by the city in a suit brought by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction for a final judgment in accordance with the assessed penalty. A civil penalty under this
section is final and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any suit.
Sec. 21.03.013 Authority not limited
Notwithstanding all other provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of
the city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate
demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the protection of life, property or general welfare of the
people in the city.
Sec. 21.03.014 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 15-12 adopted 11/19/12)
ARTICLE 21.04 MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS*
Sec. 21.04.001 Purpose; applicability
(a) The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens of the city by
establishing minimum standards applicable to buildings and structures. Minimum standards are established with
respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for
human use and habitation. Demolition of structures is provided for as a last resort when compliance with
standards cannot reasonably be achieved.
(b) This article is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this article be
liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of this article, or
constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this article.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-181)
Sec. 21.04.002 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Abandoned motor vehicle. Has the meaning set out in section 683.002, Texas Transportation Code.
Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
Alter or alteration. Any change or modification in construction or occupancy.
Apartment. A dwelling unit as defined in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/720
Apartment house. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing three
(3) or more separate dwelling units which may share means of egress and other essential facilities.
Basement. Any building story having a floor below grade.
Bathroom. An enclosed space containing one (1) or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also
include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes.
Board. The board of adjustment of the city.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any
kind in which has enclosing walls for at least fifty (50) percent of its perimeter.
Dwelling. A structure or building occupied as a residence.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Extermination. The control and extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods.
Family. One (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons, but not exceeding two (2), living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, though not related by blood, adoption or marriage, shall be
deemed to constitute a family.
Floor space. The total area of all habitable space.
Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
Grade. The natural surface of the ground, or surface [of the] ground after completion of any changing contour.
Habitable room. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments,
closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
Habitable space. The space occupied by one (1) or more persons while living, sleeping, eating, and cooking,
excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, closets, storage space,
foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heating rooms, boiler rooms, and basement or cellar recreation rooms.
Infestation. The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests.
Kitchen. A space, sixty (60) square feet or more in floor area with a minimum width of five (5) feet, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
Kitchenette. A space, less than sixty (60) square feet in floor area, used for cooking or preparation of food.
Multiple dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, which is occupied as the home or residence of more than
two (2) families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said building, and shall
include flats and apartments.
Nuisance. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
(1) Any public nuisance known in common law or in equity jurisprudence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/720
(2) Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned refrigerators and
motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or
vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
(3) Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the building
official or designated representative of the city.
(4) Overcrowding a room with occupants.
(5) Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
(6) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
(7) Uncleanliness, as determined by the building official or designated representative of the city.
(8) Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings,
and as defined in the Code of Ordinances, as determined by the building official or designated
representative of the city.
Openable area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens
directly to the outdoors.
Operating condition. Free of leaks, safe, sanitary, and in good working order.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
rooming units are let.
Owner. A person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion, or title to real property, including but
not limited to:
(1) The holder of fee simple title;
(2) The holder of a life estate;
(3) The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more;
(4) The buyer in a contract for deed; and
(5) The mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property;
but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five (5) years.
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Plumbing fixtures. Gas pipes, water pipes, toilets, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage disposal
units, clothes washing machines, basins, washbasins, bathtubs, shower baths, sewer pipes, sewage system, septic
tanks, drainage, vents, traps, and other fuel-burning or water-using fixtures and appliances, together with all
connections to pipes.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
Property. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land.
Property manager. A person who for compensation has managing control of real property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/720
Public area. An unoccupied open space adjoining a building and on the same property, that is permanently
maintained accessible to the fire department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the
fire department.
Public sewer. A sewer operated by a public authority or public utility and available for public use.
Repair. The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not
including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change
required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or
that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term “repair” or “repairs” shall not apply to
any change of construction.
Residential buildings. Buildings in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are
provided, and all dormitories. Such buildings include, among others, dwellings, multiple dwellings, and rooming
houses.
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including the residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.
Sanitary. Any condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission.
Stairway. One (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a
continuous and uninterrupted passage from one (1) story to another in a building or structure.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or
roof next above.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Temporary housing. Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
Urban nuisance. Any premises or structure that:
(1) Is reasonably dangerous to the physical health or safety of an occupant or other persons; or
(2) Because of violations of this article, its state of disrepair, [is] such that it could reasonably
cause injury, damage, harm, or inconvenience to a considerable portion of the community and the use
and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the property use or comfort and enjoyment of
surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and
character of the community in which they are situated, which condition would be substantially
offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities, taste, and habits living in the community.
Valuation or value. As applied to a building, means the estimated cost to replace the building in kind.
Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
Yard. An unoccupied open space other than a court.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-182)
Sec. 21.04.003 Penalty; civil actions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/720
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of him by this
article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a
violation is committed, permitted, or continued. An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to
exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day.
(b) In addition to imposing a criminal penalty described in subsection (a), the city hereby implements chapter
54, subchapters B and C of the Texas Local Government Code and may bring a civil action against a person
violating a provision of this article. The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover a civil
penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day or portion of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
(c) The penalties provided for in subsections (a) and (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that
the city may have under city ordinances and state law.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-193)
Sec. 21.04.004 Inspections; search warrants
(a) The building official or a designated representative shall have the power to obtain search warrants
allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a health hazard or unsafe building
condition, including but not limited to any structural, property, or utility hazard, or a violation of any health or
building regulation, statute, or ordinance.
(b) For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article exist, the building official or designated
representative is authorized at reasonable times to inspect:
(1) The exterior of a structure and premises which contain no structure; and
(2) The interior of a structure, if the permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control is
given, or if a search warrant is issued.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-183)
Sec. 21.04.005 Board of adjustment to sit as buildings and standards commission
In accordance with chapter 54 of the Local Government Code, the board of adjustment of the city shall sit as a
building and standards commission, with the powers and duties imposed therein. Members of the board, when
serving in the capacity of a building and standards commission, must meet the same qualifications and serve for
the same terms of office as members of the board of adjustment. (1977 Code, sec. 6-184)
State law reference–Creation of building and standards commission by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.033
et seq.
Sec. 21.04.006 Powers and duties of board of adjustment
(a) The board, when hearing matters under this article, has the following powers and duties:
(1) To require the reduction in occupancy load of an overcrowded structure or vacation of a
structure that is reasonably dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants;
(2) To require, as an alternative to demolition of a structure found to be an urban nuisance, the
repair of the structure by the owner or by the city;
(3) To require the demolition of a structure found to be an urban nuisance;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/720
(4) To require the removal of personal property from a structure ordered vacated or demolished.
Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a private transfer company if the owner of the
personal property is not known, or the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained, or the owner
fails to remove the personal property. The board may cause any personal property removed to be
stored in the care and custody of a bonded warehouse facility. Such stored personal property shall be
held for sixty (60) days so that the owner may pay the costs of removal and storage and reclaim the
property. Should the owner fail to reclaim the property within sixty (60) days, the board shall give the
owner notice in writing and by publication one (1) time in the city official newspaper at least ten (10)
days prior to placing such property on sale at a public auction advertised for that purpose. The city
may auction such personal property at a sale called to auction abandoned personal property otherwise
acquired by the city. Should the owner fail to reclaim the property, it will be sold at the public auction
and the proceeds from its sale will be applied to pay the costs of removal and storage and for any
expenses incurred by the city in the demolition or removal of the structure from which it was
removed. Cost of removal and storage are the responsibility of the owner of the personal property. An
appeal by the owner for a judicial review of the board's decision shall not stay the proceedings, but
the district court, on application, on notice to the board and for due cause shown, may grant a
restraining order or injunction;
(5) To require a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure constituting a dangerous condition
or nuisance be securely closed and made safe;
(6) To require or cause the correction of a dangerous condition on the land. Correction of a
dangerous condition may be accomplished by city forces or private contract. The costs of correction
are the responsibility of the owner and may be a charge against the property if done at the expense of
the city;
(7) To grant a variance when, in the opinion of the board, a literal interpretation of this article
would result in the imposition of an unnecessary or unreasonable hardship;
(8) To assess a civil penalty, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) a day, against a
property owner for each day or part of a day that he fails to repair or demolish a structure in
compliance with a board order issued under this article;
(9) To require relocation of the occupants of a structure found to be an urban nuisance;
(10) To declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted by subchapter C of
chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, as amended;
(11) To issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable
or the chief of police of the city, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the board;
and
(12) To recommend to the city council that a cause of action be brought in a court of proper
jurisdiction to carry out the purposes and intent of this article and to enforce its provisions.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-185)
Sec. 21.04.007 Procedures of board of adjustment
(a) The board may adopt rules not inconsistent with this article. Meetings of the board will be held at the call
of the chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, or as the board may determine from time to time. The
chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer rolls [oaths] and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings are open to the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/720
(b) The building official or his designated representative may act as secretary to the board, but shall not be a
member. The secretary shall keep a record of the cases, activities, and actions of the board and its
determinations, give notice of the date and time of hearings, and perform such other duties as are consistent with
or may be necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(c) (1) Notice of all proceedings before the board shall be given:
(A) By certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected property,
sent to the last known address, and each mortgagee, lienholder and each holder of a recorded
lien against the affected property, as shown by the records of the county clerk of the county in
which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from
the deed of trust establishing lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the
county clerk; and
(B) To all unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each
improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front as practicable.
(2) The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day preceding the date of the hearing
before the board and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one (1) occasion before the tenth day
preceding the date fixed for the hearing.
(3) The notice shall contain the following:
(A) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(B) A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building;
and
(C) A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove, repair, or demolish the building or
relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable
time.
(4) If the notice sent to the last known address of the person being notified is returned undelivered,
the building official may serve the notice personally if the person to be notified can be found in
Dallas County, Texas. If notice sent to an owner is returned undelivered, and, after diligent search,
the building official is unable to discover a correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the
owner personally, then the building official shall give notice by publication in the official newspaper
of the city at least five (5) days before the hearing.
(d) At each hearing of the board, an owner, lessor, occupant, or lienholder may present witnesses in his own
behalf and is entitled to cross-examine any witnesses appearing against him.
(e) After a public hearing, the decision of the board is final as to the administrative remedies.
(f) Once the decision of the board has become final under this article, the person affected by the order may
appeal the decision to the state district court by filing a petition with the district court within thirty (30) calendar
days after the date a copy of the final decision of the board is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent. The board shall mail such copy promptly after the decision
becomes final. In addition, a copy shall be published one (1) time in the official newspaper of the city within ten
(10) calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy as herein provided, and a copy shall be filed in the
office of the city secretary. On presentation of the petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari pursuant to
subchapter C, chapter 54, Local Government Code of the state, as amended. If no appeals are taken from the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/720
decision of the board within the required period, the decision of the board shall, in all things, be final and
binding. The appeal in district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-186)
Sec. 21.04.008 Failure to comply with order
(a) A person commits an offense if he fails to correct a violation of this article in compliance with a board
order that has become final.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the board order has been appealed to the state
district court.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-187)
Sec. 21.04.009 Responsibilities of owner
(a) Property standards. An owner shall:
(1) Eliminate a hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, and any other object or condition that exists on
the land and is reasonably capable of causing injury to a person;
(2) Securely cover or close a well, cesspool, or cistern;
(3) Provide solid waste receptacles or containers when required by the city;
(4) Provide drainage to prevent standing water and flooding on the land;
(5) Remove dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person; and
(6) Keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure securely
closed to prevent unauthorized entry.
(b) Structural standards. An owner shall:
(1) Protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay by application of paint or
other coating;
(2) Fill hollow masonry supporting piers, if used, with concrete and anchor the piers to concrete
footings with a five-eighths-inch steel dowel;
(3) Provide and maintain railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in
the building code;
(4) Repair holes, cracks, and other defects reasonably capable of causing injury to a person in
stairs, porches, steps, and balconies;
(5) Maintain a structure intended for human occupancy and a structure used as an accessory to a
structure intended for human occupancy in a weathertight and watertight condition;
(6) Maintain floors, walls, ceilings, and all supporting structural members in a sound condition,
capable of bearing imposed loads safely;
(7) Provide cross-ventilation as prescribed in the building code;
(8) Repair or replace chimney flues and attachments that do not function properly;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/720
(9) Repair holes, cracks, breaks, and loose surface materials that are health or safety hazards in or
on floors, walls, and ceilings;
(10) Provide and maintain a moisture-resistant finish or material for the flooring or subflooring of
each bathroom, shower room, and toilet room;
(11) Provide every habitable room with at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall
be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures
face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three (3)
feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall
not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the
required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type
window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen
(15) percent of the total floor area of such room;
(12) Provide every habitable room with at least one (1) window or skylight which can be easily
opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window
area in every habitable room shall equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window
area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved equivalent
ventilation;
(13) Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows,
as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type airconditioning
units are not included in this exception;
(14) Provide every bathroom with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms,
except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped
with an approved ventilating system;
(15) When there is electric service available to the building structure, provide every habitable room
or space with at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Bedrooms shall have, in
addition, at least one (1) wall switch controlled lighting outlet. In kitchens, three (3) separate and
remote receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall
switch shall be provided. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace
room shall contain at least one (1) ceiling-mounted or wall-mounted lighting outlet. In bathrooms, the
lighting outlet shall be controlled by a wall switch. In addition to the lighting outlet in every
bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one (1) receptacle outlet. Any new
bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection;
(16) Provide every common hall and inside stairway in every building, other than one-family
dwellings, be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least one (1) footcandle
intensity at the floor in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways;
(17) Provide and maintain the building foundation system in a safe manner and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon;
(18) Provide every exterior wall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and
any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to
the occupied spaces of the building. All siding material shall be kept in repair;
(19) Provide roofs which are structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and which have
no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/720
(20) Provide and maintain all portions, additions or sections of a roof, including, but not limited to
fascia, eaves, soffit, sheathing, rafter tails, barge rafter, vent screening, gutters, downspouts, roof
jacks, and lead or metal flashing. They shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets,
braces and supports in accordance with common building practices. No item shall display signs of
deterioration, abuse or improper installation that could be construed to affect the purpose of that item
or cause damage to the immediate area or roof structure, that could allow dampness or admit rain to
the interior of that building;
(21) Provide and maintain every dwelling unit with safe, unobstructed means of egress with a
minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Stairs shall
have a minimum head room of six (6) feet, eight (8) inches;
(22) Provide and maintain every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto for
safe use. It shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair;
(23) Provide and maintain protective railings on any unenclosed structure over thirty (30) inches
from the ground level or on any steps containing four (4) risers or more;
(24) Provide and maintain every window substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof,
and keep in sound working condition and good repair;
(25) Provide and maintain every window sash to be fully supplied with glass window panes or an
approved substitute which is without open cracks or holes. Window sashes shall be properly fitted
and weathertight within the window frame;
(26) Provide every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms to be capable of
being easily opened and secured in position by window hardware;
(27) Provide every exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway to be substantially
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and keep in sound working condition and good repair;
(28) Provide every exterior door with properly installed hardware that is maintained to insure
reasonable ease of operation to open, close and secure in an open or closed position, as intended by
the manufacturer of the door and the attached hardware;
(29) Provide exterior door frames be properly maintained and affixed with weather-stripping and
thresholds as required to be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent and insect restrictive
when the door is in a closed position;
(30) Provide exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings securely attached to the structure,
maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration that would minimize the strength and
security of the door in a closed position;
(31) Provide dwelling units which do not have a properly working central air-conditioning system
with screens on all exterior openable windows and have a screen door with a self-closing device on
all exterior doors except for the main entrance door;
(32) Provide all exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All siding shall be weather
resistant and watertight. All masonry joints shall be sufficiently tuck pointed to insure water and air
tightness;
(33) Provide and maintain garages, storage buildings and all other accessory structures in good
repair and sound structural condition;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/720
(34) Provide every floor, interior wall and ceiling be substantially rodentproof, kept in sound
condition and good repair and safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may
cause to be placed thereon;
(35) Provide every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface be constructed and maintained so as
to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition;
(36) Maintain every structural element of the dwelling structurally sound and showing no evidence
of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads;
(37) Provide and maintain interior stairs and stairwells more than four (4) risers high with
handrails located in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective
railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition;
(38) Provide fire-stopping maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings both horizontal and
vertical and to form a fire barrier between floors and between the upper floor and the roof space.
Draft-stopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings in floor/ceiling assemblies
and in attics;
(39) Provide every existing interior door to fit reasonably well within its frame and be capable of
being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as
intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware;
(40) Provide every interior door with proper hardware, securely attached and maintained in good
condition. Hasp lock assemblies are not permitted on the exterior side of the door of habitable rooms;
(41) Provide and maintain the privacy of bathrooms afforded by doors complete with privacy
hardware intended by manufacturer for that purpose;
(42) Provide existing skirting maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross
members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside
perimeter of the structure. Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed of materials intended for
exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the structure.
Crawl space access grilles or door and ventilation grilles shall be sized according to local code
requirements;
(43) Provide every dwelling unit with at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for
the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per
additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of the habitable
rooms;
(44) Provide, in every dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1)
occupant with at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one (1) occupant with at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each
occupant thereof;
(45) Provide habitable (space) rooms other than kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms with a
ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches (or seven (7) feet to the lowest projection).
Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven (7) feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a building
has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the room
area. No portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished
ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum room area;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/720
(46) In the event the basement or cellar space is used as a habitable room or dwelling unit, provide
and maintain the following:
(A) The floor and walls impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and
insulated against dampness;
(B) The total window area in each room equal to at least the minimum required window area
size;
(C) The required minimum window area entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining
such window area; and
(D) The total of openable window area in each room shall be equal to at least the minimum
area as required by subsection (b)(12) of this section.
(c) Utility standards. An owner shall:
(1) Provide and maintain in operating condition connections to discharge sewage from a structure
or land into a public sewer system or approved on-site septic system;
(2) Provide and maintain in operating condition a toilet connected to a water source and to a public
sewer, or approved on-site septic system, in or within each structure intended for human habitation;
(3) Provide and maintain in operating condition connections and pipes to supply potable water at
adequate pressure to a structure intended for human occupancy;
(4) Provide and maintain in operating condition a device to supply hot water of a minimum
temperature of one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit within each structure intended for
human habitation;
(5) Provide and connect a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, and lavatory to a cold and hot water
source in each structure intended for human habitation;
(6) Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the owner supplies in accordance with
the plumbing and mechanical codes;
(7) If screens are not provided, provide and maintain in operating condition, from May 1 through
October 15, refrigeration equipment capable of maintaining a maximum inside temperature that is
twenty (20) degrees lower than the outside temperature or eighty-five (85) degrees Fahrenheit,
whichever is warmer, in each room of a structure intended for human occupancy;
(8) Provide and maintain in operating condition supply lines for electrical service to each structure
intended for human occupancy;
(9) Provide and maintain in operating condition electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely
carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixtures;
(10) Locate all required plumbing fixtures within the dwelling unit to be accessible to the
occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room affording
privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of thirty (30) square feet with no
dimension less than four (4) feet. Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways,
corridors or other protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other food preparation areas;
(11) Provide heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/720
bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees
Fahrenheit (twenty (20) degrees Celsius) at a distance three (3) feet above floor level;
(12) In the event a central heating system is not provided, provide each dwelling unit with facilities
whereby heating appliances may be connected;
(13) Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented
use and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than thirty (30) British thermal units per
hour per cubic feet of room content. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms
and bathrooms;
(14) Provide all cooking and heating equipment and facilities be installed in accordance with the
building, mechanical, gas and electrical codes and be maintained in a safe and good working
condition. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited for use indoors;
(15) Provide every dwelling unit with adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
containers, of a type and location approved by the city;
(16) Provide each dwelling unit with an approved listed smoke detector, installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an
audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217,
Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors;
(17) Provide every electrical outlet and fixture required by this code to be installed, maintained and
connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code of the
city;
(d) Health standards. An owner shall:
(1) Eliminate rodents and vermin in or on the land;
(2) Provide a structure intended for human habitation with a screen for keeping out insects at each
opening of the structure if the structure is not cooled with refrigerated air;
(3) Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and
garbage;
(4) Keep the interior of a structure free from insects, rodents, and vermin;
(5) Be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of
the dwelling and premises thereof;
(6) Keep the premises clean and remove from the premises abandoned items such as abandoned
motor vehicles, iceboxes, refrigerators, stoves, glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar
items, including but not limited to weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc.
(e) Provision of alternative housing. An owner shall provide a tenant with alternative housing that meets the
minimum standards required by this article when:
(1) After being issued a notice or citation for violation of this article, the owner fails to repair
heating equipment within seventy-two (72) hours after receiving such notice or citation and the
overnight low temperature, measured by the National Weather Service at Dallas Love Field, is below
forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit for three (3) consecutive days after receiving such notice or citation;
(2) After being issued a notice or citation for violation of this article, the owner fails to repair
refrigerated air equipment within seventy-two (72) hours after receiving such notice or citation and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/720
the daytime high temperature, as measured by the National Weather Service at Dallas Love Field, is
ninety-five (95) degrees Fahrenheit or above for three (3) consecutive days after receiving such
notice or citation; or
(3) Being forced to make other repairs which make the structure uninhabitable during the repair
period.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-188)
Sec. 21.04.010 Responsibilities of occupant
An occupant shall:
(1) Maintain those portions of the interior of a structure under his control free from rubbish,
garbage and other conditions that would encourage infestation of insects, rodents, or vermin;
(2) Remove an animal or animals from a structure if the presence of the animal or animals is a
health hazard to an occupant;
(3) Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the occupant supplies in accordance
with the city plumbing and mechanical codes;
(4) Provide solid waste receptacles or containers, when required by the city;
(5) Keep the interior of the structure free from insects, rodents and vermin;
(6) Keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof;
(7) Not occupy as owner-occupant, and shall not let or lease to another for occupancy, any building
or structure which does not comply with the applicable provisions of any code of the city;
(8) Keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies or which is provided for his particular use;
(9) Dispose of all garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents and
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or
rubbish storage containers.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-189)
Sec. 21.04.011 Urban nuisances; repair or demolition of structure; assessment of civil penalty
(a) The building official or other designated representative shall give notice of a hearing to consider repair or
demolition of a structure, or the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner, to the owner or owners, lessor,
and occupant of the structure, and any mortgagee or lienholder of record of the real property concerned. A
structure may be considered for repair, demolition, or civil penalty if the structure is not maintained in
compliance with one (1) or more of the minimum standards of this article, and the structure is an urban nuisance.
(b) A public hearing to consider repair or demolition of a structure, or the assessment of a civil penalty against
the owner, shall be before the board after notice has been given to the person set forth in subsection (a) above. At
the hearing, the building official or designated representative shall present evidence of the condition of a
structure, and an owner, lessor, occupant, mortgagee, and lienholder, as well as any interested person, may
present evidence on relevant issues.
(c) The board, after hearing evidence from each interested person present, may:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/720
(1) Find that the structure is not an urban nuisance and refer the matter to the building official for
further appropriate actions;
(2) Grant a variance in order to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable or unnecessary hardship;
(3) In the case of a single-family dwelling occupied by the owner where the health, safety, and
welfare of other persons will not be affected, grant an exception to any provision of this article to
avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship; or
(4) Find the structure is an urban nuisance and order:
(A) Demolition of the structure;
(B) Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time;
(C) Repair or correction of the structure within a specified period of time and demolition of
the structure if the repair or correction is not timely effected;
(D) Repair or correction of the structure by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder within a
specified period of time and repair or correction by the city if not timely accomplished by the
owner, mortgagee, or lienholder;
(E) Repair, correction, or demolition of the structure within a specified period of time and the
assessment of a civil penalty against the owner of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day for each day or part of a day that the owner fails to repair, correct or
demolish the structure;
(F) Vacation of the structure as necessary; and/or
(G) Closure of an open and vacant structure.
(d) Demolition of a structure may be accomplished by an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder as compliance with
this section or by the city. Repair of a structure may be accomplished by an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder as
compliance with this section, or by the city but only to the extent necessary to bring the structure into
compliance with minimum standards and only if the structure is a residential structure with not more than ten
(10) dwelling units. Vacation of a structure or relocation of the occupants of a structure may be accomplished by
an owner, mortgagee, or lienholder as compliance with this section or by the city.
(e) The expense of repair, vacation, removal, closure or demolition of a structure when performed under
contract with this city or by city forces, and any civil penalty assessed against the owner, constitutes a first and
nontransferable lien against the real property on which the structure stands or stood, and the lien runs with the
land. The city lien attaches when notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in
the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner, if
reasonably determinable, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city,
and the balance due. The city's lien for demolition, vacation, removal and closure expenses is a privileged lien
subordinate only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. A lien acquired by the city under this subsection
for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the structure upon which the repairs were made is the residential
homestead of a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older and is occupied by that person.
(f) The city may use any and all lawful means to recover and collect any repair, vacation, removal, closure and
demolition costs and civil penalties from an owner. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed by this
section accrues interest at the rate of ten percent per year from the date of payment of such costs by the city until
paid in full. In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of city rights under this article, the city is entitled
to recover reasonable attorney's fees from the other party. In no event shall any costs, expenses or attorney's fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/720
be awarded or assessed against the city or the board in any judicial proceeding relating to the enforcement of this
article.
(g) The building official or other designated representative shall give notice of demolition or repair by the city
or the assessment of the civil penalty, if the building official determines that the owner has not complied with an
order to repair.
(h) The building official or other designated representative shall give notice of an order of the board and
notice of demolition, repair by the city or the assessment of a civil penalty, at the time of issue, to each person
designated in subsection (a) hereof and may, at his option, file such notice or order with the deed records of
Dallas County. If compliance with an order to demolish or repair is timely accomplished, the building official or
designated representative shall, upon request and payment of the cost by the owner, file a notice of compliance
in the deed records.
(i) When an order of the board has been filed in the county deed records, compliance with the provisions of
the order is not affected by a sale or other transfer of the premises. Such filing shall also serve in the nature of a
lis pendens relating to the property. A person acquiring interest in property after an order has been so filed is
subject to the requirements of the order. The provisions of this subsection may be included as part of each order.
(j) The building official or designated representative shall serve notice required by this section by certified
mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the person being notified. If the certified mail is
returned undelivered, the building official or designated representative may serve the notice personally if the
person to be notified can be found in Dallas County, Texas. If the notice sent to an owner is returned
undelivered, and after diligent search the building official or designated representative is unable to discover a
correct address for the owner or is unable to serve the owner personally, then the building official or designated
representative shall give notice by publication of the order once in the official newspaper of the city at least five
(5) days before the hearing date.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-190)
Sec. 21.04.012 Vacation of structure
(a) When the building official or designated representative has given notice of a hearing to consider vacation
of a structure, the building official or designated representative shall place a sign on the structure or dwelling
unit. The sign shall serve as a warning of the unsafe, unsanitary, and dangerous condition of the structure. A
person commits an offense if he:
(1) Without authority from the building official, moves or destroys a sign placed by the building
official;
(2) Occupies a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the building official has placed such
sign;
(3) As the owner of a structure or dwelling unit, authorizes a person to occupy a vacant structure or
dwelling unit on which the building official has placed such sign.
(b) Each occupant of a structure or dwelling unit that has been ordered vacated shall vacate the structure or
dwelling unit within a specified time determined by the board. No person shall occupy a structure or dwelling
unit that has been ordered vacated.
(c) The owner shall provide alternative housing to all tenants as required in section 21.04.009(e).
(1977 Code, sec. 6-191)
Sec. 21.04.013 Closure of structure
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/720
(a) When the building official or designated representative gives notice of a hearing to consider closure of the
structure, the building official or designated representative may place a sign on the open and vacant structure or
portion of a structure warning of its condition.
(b) No person, without authority from the building official, shall remove such sign.
(c) No person shall occupy an open and vacant structure on which such sign has been placed.
(1977 Code, sec. 6-192)
ARTICLE 21.05 MOVING OF BUILDINGS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 21.05.001 Compliance with article
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move any building into or within the city unless such
building complies with this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to occupy a building which has been moved into or
within the city in violation of any of the requirements or provisions of this article.
(c) It shall be unlawful and an offense for the owner of any building which has been moved into or within the
city in violation of the provisions of this article to permit such building to be occupied.
Sec. 21.05.002 Police escort
No person shall move any building or structure across or along any street, public way or public place within the
city unless accompanied or escorted by a police officer designated by the chief of police.
Sec. 21.05.003 Flagmen
When more than fifty (50) percent of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by a building
being moved, or when, in the opinion of the building inspector, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic,
the owner or person moving such building shall employ, at his expense, two (2) flagmen, one at each street
intersection beyond the building. Such flagmen shall remain at these intersections, diverting or cautioning traffic
from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 21.05.004 Standing on public property
No building being moved pursuant to a permit granted under this article shall be allowed to remain stationary,
parked or standing upon the public streets or other public property, except in cases of emergency, in which event
the building must be removed from the public streets or other public property within forty-eight (48) hours after
the emergency has arisen. In such cases, there shall be paid to the city a fee established by resolution of the city
council for each day that such building remains upon public streets or other public property within the corporate
limits of the city. (Ordinance 25-15 adopted 12/14/15)
Sec. 21.05.005 Lights and flares required after sundown
Every building being moved, and which occupies any portion of public property after sundown, shall have
sufficient lights continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public. There shall be
a minimum of five (5) red lights placed on each street side of the building and such lights shall be attached to the
building in such a fashion as to indicate its extreme width, height and size. There shall be placed, in addition to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/720
the red lights on the building, flares at regular intervals for a distance of two hundred (200) feet up the street on
each side of the building.
Sec. 21.05.006 Clearance requirements; mover not to cut or handle utility lines
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in moving a building to operate or attempt to operate any vehicle
over, along or across any street, public way or public place, unless the length, width and height of such vehicle,
including the load, is less than the clearance of any structure, facility, appurtenance, power or communication
line, warning, instructive or protective device, mail box or other improvement on public property, the location
and condition of which complies with all legal requirements of state statutes or city ordinances. No person
moving a building shall cut or handle power or communication lines.
Sec. 21.05.007 Buildings moved into city to comply with electrical, plumbing and building codes and
zoning ordinances
Any building moved into the city shall comply with all of the requirements of the electrical code, plumbing
code, building code and zoning ordinance of the city and it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to
move into the city any building which does not comply with the requirements of such codes and ordinance.
Sec. 21.05.008 Cleaning, restoration of grade, etc., of lot from which building removed
Whenever a building is removed, the premises shall be left free from unsafe, unsanitary or hazardous conditions,
including the cleaning up of the lot, restoration of the established grade and the erection of any necessary wall or
fence.
Sec. 21.05.009 Painting and screening building after move
Any building moved to a location within the city shall be completely painted on all outside surfaces and
provided with adequate window screens and screen doors. Such painting requirements shall be waived, if the
building, when located, is veneered with brick or other building stone or is covered with asbestos or other
finished siding and all trim has been painted. Such painting or veneering shall be done within sixty (60) days
after moving the building.
Sec. 21.05.010 Water and sewer connections at new location
After any building has been moved to a new location within the city, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person to occupy such building until it has been connected to the sanitary sewer and water systems of the city or
a septic tank approved by the city.
Sec. 21.05.011 Building permit or certificate of occupancy not to be issued for building moved into city
in violation of article
No building permit or certificate of occupancy for any building to be occupied as a residence, apartment or
duplex, which has been moved into the city, shall be issued if such movement has been accomplished in
violation of the terms of this article.
Sec. 21.05.012 Removal of building moved into city in violation of article
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building which has been moved into the city in violation of this
article to permit the same to remain in the city after notice to remove the same has been received from the
building official.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land upon which there is located a building
which has been moved into the city in violation of this article to permit the same to remain in the city after
notice to remove the building has been received from the building official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/720
Secs. 21.05.013–21.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Mover's License
Sec. 21.05.051 Required; exception
(a) No person shall engage in the business of moving buildings or structures over, across, along or through
any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public way or public place within the corporate limits of the city,
unless he has a current license so to do issued under the provisions of this division.
(b) Nothing in this section shall require a license for the movement of super-heavy or over-size equipment for
the transportation of commodities over any state or federal highway within the city limits, when such movement
is with a valid permit from the state highway department, as required by the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, article
6701a, and when evidence of such permit is presented to the building official.
Sec. 21.05.052 Application
Application for a license required by this division shall be filed with the building official on a form provided for
that purpose.
Sec. 21.05.053 Applicant's bond and insurance
(a) Before a license required by this division is issued, the applicant shall file with the city secretary a surety
bond, with form approved by the city, in the sum of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) saving and
keeping the city harmless from any and all costs, damages and suits that it may incur or become liable on, in
consequence of any injury to any person or private property in any manner occasioned in or about the moving of
buildings or structures. Such bond shall be further conditioned that the principal shall pay for any and all
damages to public property that may arise from the use of any of the city's streets, alley, boulevards or other
public places in the moving of buildings or structures. Such bond shall contain a provision for a ten (10) day
written notice to the city of cancellation by the surety.
(b) In addition to the bond required by subsection (a), the applicant for a license under this division shall file
with the city secretary a public liability and property damage insurance policy certificate, naming the applicant
as the insured and providing for the payment of any liability imposed by law upon such applicant to the extent of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each person for bodily injury liability and ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for bodily injury liability for each accident and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) property damage
liability for each accident.
(c) The bond and insurance required by this section shall be maintained in full force and effect throughout the
terms of any license issued to the applicant under this division.
Sec. 21.05.054 Inspection of applicant's equipment and facilities
Upon filing of the bond and insurance certificate required by section 21.05.053 and their approval by the city,
the building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the equipment and facilities to be used by the license
applicant and shall determine that the size, design, safety features and equipment of the vehicles and
appurtenances are such that their operation on public property will not cause damage to the pavement or other
public improvements and that the knowledge and experience of the operators is such that the operation of such
equipment shall not create a hazard or inconvenience the public.
Sec. 21.05.055 Fee
The fee for a license required by this division shall be established by resolution of the city council and provided
in the city master fee schedule.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/720
Sec. 21.05.056 Issuance
Upon approval of the applicant's equipment and facilities, payment of the required fee and compliance with all
other provisions of this division, the building official shall issue the license applied for under this division.
Sec. 21.05.057 Transfer prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, rent, or transfer a license issued to him under this division, or any
rights therein contained, to any other person, or for any other person to make use of any such rights which are
not actually his own.
Sec. 21.05.058 Expiration
All licenses issued under this division shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next following the date of
issuance.
Sec. 21.05.059 Suspension or revocation
In addition to any other penalties should any person licensed under this division violate any of the provisions of
this article, the city manager, or such other person as he may designate, shall either revoke or suspend the license
issued to such person, for such length of time as he, in his discretion, shall deem necessary, and his decision
shall be final. Notification of such revocation or suspension shall be given in writing by the city manager to the
person holding the license.
Secs. 21.05.060–21.05.090 Reserved
Division 3. Permit
Sec. 21.05.091 Required; exception
(a) No person shall move any building or part of any building into the city or over, across, along or through
any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public way or public place within the corporate limits of the city,
without first obtaining a permit so to do.
(b) Nothing in this section shall require the securing of a permit from the city for the movement of superheavy
or over-size equipment for the transportation of commodities over any state or federal highway within the
city limits when such movement is with a valid permit from the state highway department as required by the
Texas Revised Civil Statutes, article 6701a, and when evidence of such permit is presented to the building
official.
Sec. 21.05.092 Application; applicant to arrange for removal or relocation of wires, poles, etc.
(a) Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the building official a written application for a
permit, setting forth the following information:
(1) The type and kind of building to be moved.
(2) The original cost of such building.
(3) The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of the building.
(4) The building's present location and proposed new location, by lot, block, subdivision and street
number.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/720
(5) The approximate time such building will be upon the streets and the contemplated route that
will be taken from the present to the new location.
(6) Such other information as may be required by the building official.
(b) Before such application is made, the mover shall make arrangements with public utilities, railroads and
other persons, firms or corporations whose facilities are involved in such movement, for the removal, relocation
and replacement of wires, poles or other improvements, to enable the building or structure to be moved with
proper clearance, as provided in section 6-108.
Sec. 21.05.093 Applicant's bond or cash deposit
(a) Each application for a permit to move into the city any building to be occupied as a residence, apartment
or duplex shall be accompanied by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) bond, or five hundred dollars ($500.00)
payable to the city and conditioned that the owner of such building will make such improvements thereto as may
be necessary to cause such building to be in complete compliance with all ordinances of the city and laws of the
state, and further conditioned that, should such improvements not be made within a period of ninety (90) days
after the movement of such building into the city limits, the city may forfeit such bond and use any or all of such
amount or any or all of such cash amount to cover the cost of removal or demolition of such building. Should
any of such amount not be necessary to cover the cost of removal or demolition of such building, the balance
will be refunded to the principal. Should the cost of removal or demolition exceed the amount of the bond or
cash deposit required herein, the city shall have the right to sue for and recover such additional cost from the
principal.
(b) The bond or cash deposit required by this section shall be in addition to any other bond or fee required by
this article.
Sec. 21.05.094 Inspection of building prior to issuance
(a) Prior to issuing a permit under this division, the building official or someone under his direction shall
make a personal inspection of the building sought to be moved. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of
determining whether the building may be moved under the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) In all cases where any person desires to move a building from outside the corporate limits of the city to
some point inside such corporate limits, in addition to other fees required, such person shall pay an inspection
fee established by resolution of the city council if the building to be moved is located with ten (10) miles from
the corporate limits of the city. If the building is located more than ten (10) miles from the corporate limits of the
city, such person shall pay a fee established by resolution of the city council plus a per mile charge for a distance
which exceeds ten (10) miles. Any person desiring to move a building from one place in the city to another place
in the city or from a point within the city to a point outside the city shall first pay an inspection fee established
by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance 25-15 adopted 12/14/15)
(c) The fee provided for in this section is levied to help defray the cost of inspecting a building prior to its
being moved into or within the city. In the event such fee has been paid and inspection reveals that the building
does not comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the city and may not be brought into or moved
within the city, no refund shall be made of such fee and the entire amount shall be retained by the city to help
defray the costs of inspection.
Sec. 21.05.095 Fee
The fees for moving of buildings or portions thereof shall be established by resolution of the city council and
provided in the city master fee schedule.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/720
Sec. 21.05.096 Issuance or refusal
(a) The application and other information furnished by the applicant for a permit under this division shall be
examined and the building or structure sought to be moved inspected, as provided in section 21.05.012, by the
building official, and if found to be in conformity with the requirements of this article and with all other laws
and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit upon receipt of the required fees;
provided, however, that such permit shall be issued only to a person who is currently licensed under the
provisions of division 2 of this article. No person who is so licensed shall allow his name to be used by any other
person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit under this division.
(b) If, in the opinion of the building official, the moving of any building will cause injury to persons or
property or damage to the streets or other public improvements, the permit shall not be issued and the building
shall not be moved over the streets of the city. If, in the opinion of the building official, the building to be moved
has deteriorated more than fifty (50) percent of its original value by virtue of fire, age, normal wear and tear or
other causes, or if the moving of the building will violate any of the requirements of this article or other
applicable regulations of the city, the permit shall not be issued and the building shall not be moved over the
streets of the city, except that a permit may be issued for the moving of such building outside the corporate limits
of the city or through the corporate limits, from one point outside the corporate limits to another point outside
the corporate limits.
Sec. 21.05.097 Police and fire departments, etc., to be notified of issuance
Upon the issuance of a permit under this division, the building official shall cause notice of such fact to be given
to the police and fire departments and the person to whom the permit is issued shall notify the railroads and any
others who may be affected by the temporary obstruction of the streets or rights-of-way.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.06 MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES*
Sec. 21.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
Manufactured home. A structure constructed after June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or,
when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation [sic] when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.
Mobile home. A structure constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty
(320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems.
Mobile home park. Any premises on which two (2) or more mobile homes/manufactured homes are parked or
situated and used for living or sleeping purposes, or any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying
to the public a parking space for one (1) or more mobile homes/manufactured homes, whether such vehicles
stand on wheels or on rigid supports. A trailer park is a mobile home park.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular portable structure designed to be transported over the highways and containing
living or sleeping accommodations, such structure being designed and actually used as a temporary dwelling
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/720
during travel for recreation and pleasure purposes and not exceeding eight (8) feet in width and not exceeding
forty (40) feet in length. Any portable vehicular structure with living or sleeping accommodations in excess of
the length and width herein stated, regardless of the design and use thereof, for the purposes of this article, shall
be classed as a mobile home/manufactured home. The term “recreational vehicle” may include the terms “travel
trailer,” “camper,” “motor home” or any other term given such vehicle if the same is within the definition of
recreational vehicle.
(1977 Code, sec. 13-1)
Sec. 21.06.002 Rendering vehicle immovable does not alter status
The fact that a mobile home, manufactured home or recreational vehicle or any other vehicle defined in section
21.06.001 is placed upon blocks or altered in such a way as to no longer be portable or movable without material
alteration or removal of the foundation or blocks shall not alter the status of such vehicle as a mobile home,
manufactured home or recreational vehicle for the purposes of this article. (1977 Code, sec. 13-2)
Sec. 21.06.003 Location; connection to utilities
Except as otherwise provided in section 21.06.004, it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any recreational
vehicle, mobile home or manufactured home within the city which is not then and there within an approved
mobile home park or an existing mobile home subdivision or which is not then and there connected to public or
private utilities under a permit issued by the city or other appropriate regulatory body. This section shall not
apply to recreational vehicles while they are being driven within the city. (1977 Code, sec. 13-3)
Sec. 21.06.004 Construction trailers
Placement of a mobile home or manufactured home, for office purposes only, shall be allowed in any district for
use as a temporary construction office or the temporary use, not to exceed the period of one (1) year, of a mobile
home, manufactured home or construction trailer as a highway construction office in any district. Application for
such permit shall be made to the building official, shall designate the period desired to be granted under such
permit, shall state the purpose for which the mobile home, manufactured home or construction trailer is to be
used and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as adopted by resolution of the city council. In no event shall any
person holding any permit under the provisions of this section permit the occupancy of such mobile home,
manufactured home or construction trailer at any time by any other person for other than office purposes. (1977
Code, sec. 13-4; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 21.06.005 Mobile home park license required; fee
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the city limits any mobile home park unless
such person shall first obtain a license therefor. The license fee for each mobile home park shall be as adopted by
resolution of the city council. (1977 Code, sec. 13-5; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 21.06.006 Permit duration
Each permit issued under these provisions shall begin on the 1st day of April and end on the 31st day of March
of each year and shall be renewed from year to year thereafter. (1977 Code, sec. 13-6)
Sec. 21.06.007 Inspection fee
After obtaining the necessary permits and hookups made, an inspection will be made by the building inspector
prior to release and notification to the electric and gas companies. The fee for this utility inspection shall be as
adopted by resolution of the city council. The inspection fee is in addition to the permit fee. (1977 Code, sec. 13-
7; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.07 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/720
Sec. 21.07.001 Statutory authorization
The Legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the city council does ordain as follows.
Sec. 21.07.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 21.07.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 21.07.004 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filing, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/720
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 21.07.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a
request for a variance.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equal to or exceeding in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/720
Elevated building. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by
foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or before January 1, 1975, for
flood insurance rate map's effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as existing
structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see flood elevation study and definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/720
Floodway functionally dependant use (see regulatory floodway). A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities,
port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/720
construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such a garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/720
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 21.07.006 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County, Texas and Incorporated Areas” dated August 23, 2001, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated August 23, 2001, and Kaufman County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas dated July 3, 2012, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated July 3,
2012, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(Ordinance 11-12 adopted 7/16/12)
(c) Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. No new construction of any structure
shall be constructed in an area prone to flooding as established by the “The Flood Insurance Study for the City
of Seagoville, Texas,” with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and FBFM). Any new construction within 100 feet of an area prone to flooding shall have the finish floor
elevated two (2) feet above the nearest BFE. Any ingress/egress route from the structure to a public street shall
be elevated to one (1) foot above the BFE.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article conflicts or overlaps with other
ordinances or codes, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/720
greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 21.07.007 Administration
(a) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The city manager or his/her designated representative is
hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site project, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 21.07.006 of
this article, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer
the provisions of section 21.07.008 of this article.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/720
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and
the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 21.07.008(a)(2) of this
article;
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development; and
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this
article.
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be
based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/720
(1) The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests
for variances from the requirements of this article.
(2) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person(s) aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvement to be erected on a
lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
and objectives of this article.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(C) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/720
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in article are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 21.07.008 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in section 21.07.007(b), section 21.07.007(b)(8), or section 21.07.008(c)(4), the following provisions
are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as provided in this article, is
satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic load and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/720
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures, New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A, on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame tie to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/720
(5) Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of this article, and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (b)(4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivisions proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with the requirements of this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of and the provisions of this
article.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than thirty (30)
lots or three (3) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this article.
(4) All subdivisions proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivisions proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in section 21.07.007(b), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2)
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/720
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section are satisfied as provided in this article.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(e) Floodways. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 21.07.006(b), are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.08 FENCES
Sec. 21.08.001 Purpose of article
The purpose of the article is to regulate the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration and maintenance of all
fences within the boundaries of the city in order to provide a practical safeguarding of life, health and property
from hazards that may arise from improper construction of such installations. However, the article and the
provisions of the article shall not apply to fences erected or maintained in districts within the city which are
zoned (AG) agricultural use, which has an agricultural exemption of said property and which is being used for
agricultural purposes, unless the provision is specifically made to apply to the agricultural zoning district.
Sec. 21.08.002 Definitions
For the purpose of the article, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings set
forth below.
Adjacent grade. The slope of property where it abuts to another property, alley or roadway.
Building lines. A building line established by the city's zoning ordinance for which a building setback is required
for front yards, side yards, rear yards and corner lots where there are two front yards.
Corner lot. A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more private or dedicated public streets.
Decorative. A fence designed and constructed so as to add beauty and adornment to the property to which is
attached and providing service only. Such term does not include a full-service fence designed to restrain or
contain house animals or designed for property protection or for other purposes (see decorative design in the
article).
Decorative design fence for residential. Wrought iron, vinyl, wood or a combination of wrought iron with rock,
brick or stone columns for accent purposes. Fence must be no higher than forty-two (42") inches in height and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/720
50% open. Fence must be of new material and be approved by the building official. A site plan may be required.
A four (4') foot gate minimum will be required for fire department access.
Decorative design fence for commercial properties. Wrought iron, vinyl, or a combination of wrought iron with
rock, brick, or stone columns for accent purposes. Fence must be no higher than five (5') feet in height and 50%
open. Fence must be of new material and be approved by the building official. A site plan and survey may be
required. A four (4') foot gate, and if a fire lane is required for the property, a twenty-four (24') foot wide gate
will be required to open the full width of the fire lane. A Knox Box or a Knox Lock will be required per the
International Fire Code section 506.1. Decorative design fence for commercial properties located on corner lots
shall comply with number (3) under visibility triangle herein to comply with traffic visibility requirements.
Decorative design fence for lots 1 acre or greater. Wrought iron, vinyl, wood or a combination of wrought iron
with rock, stone, columns for accent purposes. Fence must be no higher than six (6') feet in height and fifty
percent (50%) open. Fence must be of new material and approved by the city's building official. The decorative
gate may be allowed to be taller up to a height of ten (10') feet, if a cross bar is attached it must have height
clearance of fourteen (14') feet and twenty-four (24') feet in width for fire department access.
Fence. Any wall or structure more than eighteen inches (18") in height constructed for the purpose of enclosing,
screening, restricting access to, or decoration of any lot, building or structure.
Front yard. An open space extending in front of the building line unoccupied by the principal structure.
Interior and/or infield lots. A lot located within the interior of the block; not a corner lot.
Rear yard. A space unoccupied by the principal structure extending for the full width of the lot between a
principal structure and the rear lot line.
Reverse frontage corner lot. A corner lot where the rear lot line is adjacent to a side lot line of an adjoining lot or
across an alley from such a lot line.
Screening fence. A screening fence shall be six (6') feet in height and made of approved materials such as brick,
rock, stone, decorative block, block with stucco or cedar. Screening fences shall be used to separate commercial,
industrial and manufacturing from residential properties if within 150 feet and for screening of nonresidential
sanitary waste receptacles. See visual screening fence, section 21.08.007.
Side yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Street. For this purpose of the article, a street shall refer to a public or private street.
Visibility triangle.
(1) Residential developments or infield lots with rear or side entry access to a garage or a carport, a
visibility triangle shall be measured ten (10') feet from the corner of the property line, in both
directions, and shall be provided on both sides of the drive; in accordance with section 25.02.509(a)
(1) chapter 25 zoning ordinance.
(2) On commercial corner lot with a street to the front or the side, a visibility triangle shall be
measured at forty (40') feet from the corner of the property line in both directions.
(3) No fence shall be erected or maintained which obstructs traffic visibility at corners.
Sec. 21.08.003 Permitted types
(a) The following types of fences may be built, erected or constructed within the city provided they comply
with the definitions provided in section 21.08.002 and meet the following requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/720
(1) Wood privacy fence.
(2) Wood split rail fence.
(3) Vinyl fence.
(4) Brick or masonry fence.
(5) Rock or stone fence.
(6) Decorative fence.
(7) Cementitious fence panels.
(8) Wrought iron fence.
(9) Wrought iron combination fence with rock, stone or brick.
(10) Visual screening fence (items listed within this section).
(11) Pipe rail fence is only allowed on lots measuring (five (5) acres or more) and zoned AG, or for
which an AG exemption has been granted by the Dallas County Appraisal District or the Kaufman
County Appraisal District.
(12) Barbed wire fence is only allowed on lots zoned AG, or for which an AG exemption has been
granted by the Dallas County Appraisal District or the Kaufman County Appraisal District.
(13) Mesh wire fence may be used only with pipe rail or barbed wire fence on lots zoned AG, or
for which an AG exemption has been granted by the Dallas County Appraisal District or the
Kaufman County Appraisal District only.
(14) Chainlink fence will only be permitted in areas zoned light manufacturing, and can only be
installed to the rear of the front building line, for security purposes. The rear fence shall not exceed
eight (8') feet in height. Existing chainlink fences installed prior to March, 2017, may be replaced if
damaged, only if the replacement is made within ninety (90) days of the date the fence was damaged.
(b) Products manufactured for other uses, such as plywood, pallets, r-panels, corrugated steel or fiberglass
panels are prohibited as fencing materials. Any material to be used for fencing must be approved by the building
official.
Sec. 21.08.004 Locations
(a) No person shall build, erect or construct any fence in front of the required building line of any residence
located on a lot zoned for single-family, duplex, apartment, townhouse or mobile home subdivision uses listed
under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city, unless such fence design meets the decorative design
fence for residential as provided in section 21.08.002 above.
(b) Fences existing prior to March, 2017 and located within the required front yard of an improved or
unimproved lot located in a residential zoning district may be replaced or repaired by the property owner if
damaged if the replacement is made within ninety (90) days of the date the fence was damaged.
(c) No person shall build, erect or construct any fence in front of any structure zoned office, commercial, local
retail, light or heavy manufacturing property, unless such fence meets the decorative design fence for
commercial property as provided in section 21.08.002 above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/720
(d) Corner lots in residential districts, and commercial districts shall comply with the decorative design fence
as provided in section 21.08.002. Corner lots for commercial districts shall comply with the decorative fence
design for commercial properties.
(e) In a side yard on an interior lot, no fence shall be constructed at a height greater than eight (8') feet.
(f) In a rear yard for all property, no fence shall be constructed at a height greater than eight (8') feet.
Sec. 21.08.005 Prohibited in drainage easements
No fence shall be constructed within any drainage easement in the city limits unless the property owner submits
a certification under seal from a licensed engineer that such fence shall not interfere with or impair the natural
flow of water across the drainage easement. The certification must be reviewed and accepted by the city's
engineer. The applicant is responsible for 100% of the engineer's consultant fee as set forth in the city's master
fee schedule. Nothing herein shall absolve the property owner of responsibility should the fence interfere with or
impair the natural flow of water across the drainage easement, nor shall the city's review of the same subject the
city or its engineer to liability.
Sec. 21.08.006 Prohibited in utility easements
No fence shall be constructed within any utility easement in the city limits unless the property owner submits a
letter of approval from each of the public utility companies, including the city's utilities department, using or
having authority to use said easement for any line of appurtenance.
Sec. 21.08.007 Visual screening fence
Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the article, visual screening must be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Screening required in the article must be not less than six (6') feet in height;
(2) Required screening must be constructed of:
(A) Brick, stone, or concrete masonry, stucco, decorative block, or cedar;
(B) Earthen berm planted with turf grass or ground cover recommended for local use by the
directory of water-saving plants and trees for the state. The berm may not have a slope that
exceeds one (1') foot of height for every two (2') feet of width;
(C) Evergreen plant material recommended for local area use by the directory of watersaving
plants and trees for the state, published by the state water development board. The plant
material must be located in a bed that is at least three (3') feet wide with a minimum soil depth
of twenty-four (24") inches. Initial plantings must be capable of obtaining a solid appearance
within three (3) years. Plant material must be placed a maximum of twenty (24") inches on
center over the entire length of the bed unless the building official approves an alternative
planting density that a landscape authority certifies as being capable of providing a solid
appearance within three (3) years; or
(D) Any combination of the above.
(3) A required visual screening fence or wall may not have barbed wire at the top of the fence.
(4) A required visual screening fence or wall may not have more than ten (10") square inches of
openings in any given square foot of surface.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/720
(5) Access through required visual screening must be provided by a solid gate equaling the height
of the screening. The gate must remain closed at all times except when in actual use.
(6) Plant materials used for required screening must be maintained in a healthy growing condition
at all times. The property owner is responsible for the regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating,
fertilizing, pruning, and other maintenance of all plantings as needed. Any plant that dies must be
replaced with another living plant that complies with screening requirements within ninety (90) days
after notification by the city, per section 25.02.510 of the landscape ordinance.
(7) All required visual screening fencing of all types must be maintained in good repair and not
allowed to deteriorate or otherwise fail to serve the purpose it was designed to fulfill.
Sec. 21.08.008 Residential and commercial developments screening walls
(a) No screening wall, nor screening wall easement, shall be located on a public right-of-way. The developer
is required to provide a minimum three foot (3') “screening wall easement” for all screening walls, to be platted
to the property owner, HOA or PID prior to release to construction. A form board survey is required and shall be
submitted to the city engineer prior to installation.
(b) No landscape screening wall, nor landscaped screening wall easement, shall be located on a public rightof-
way. The developer is required to provide a minimum ten (10') feet “landscaped screening easement” for all
screening walls to be platted to the property owner, HOA or PID prior to release to construction. A survey is
required and shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to installation.
(c) A commercial property owner, including a nonresidential building (O) office, (LR) local retail, (C)
commercial, (LM) light manufacturing and or (MH) heavy manufacturing shall provide visual screening
complying with section 21.08.007 and this section for the rear and sides if it adjoins property lines with a
residential district.
Sec. 21.08.009 Fence requirements, restrictions and prohibitions
(a) Every fence constructed under the requirements of this article shall be required to have a four foot (4')
opening or a gate which provides access to all sides and rear yards to the fire department in the event of an
emergency.
(b) No privately owned fence or guide wires, braces or any other part of a privately owned fence shall be
constructed upon or caused to protrude over property owned by the city, state or any other property owners.
(c) 4x4 landscape timbers shall not be used as fence posts in any zoning district.
(d) All fences built, erected or constructed for “new construction” in an existing neighborhood or residential
district will require schedule 40 steel pipe “fence post(s)” and be buried to a depth of two feet (2') in concrete.
(e) All fences built, erected or constructed for “new subdivision development construction” will require
schedule 40 steel pipe fence post(s) and be buried to a depth of two feet (2') in concrete.
(f) Repair and replacement of fences, six (6) or more panels in an “existing” neighborhood or residential
district will require 4x4 treated wood, cedar or scheduled 40 steel pipe “fence post(s)” and be buried to a depth
of two feet (2') in concrete.
(g) No fence shall be constructed within the front yard or beyond the front building line unless it complies
with section 21.08.004.
(h) In areas where the topography significantly slopes towards an adjacent grade such that six (6') foot fence
as constructed does not equate to a six (6') foot fence, the building official may approve a waiver to the height
requirements such that the effective height six (6') feet and level, consistent with the surrounding properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/720
(i) Barbed wire, metal/wire livestock fencing not exceeding five (5') feet in height above adjacent grade shall
be permitted within a front yard and side yard in an agricultural (AG) zoning district only. Heavy-duty steel TPost
or steel pipe will be allowed, no wood post.
(j) (1) Electric fences may be constructed only on property zones agricultural (AG). Such fences
may only be constructed with copper or aluminum fence wire. The wire shall be no less than 16
gauge wire, properly stretched and attached to uniform, straight posts not over ten (10') feet apart.
Glass, plastic or porcelain insulators shall be used. Glass bottles shall not be used for insulation. Only
one (1) electric fence wire shall be installed not less than eighteen (18") inches nor more than thirtysix
(36") inches from the ground and shall be located within the interior of the fence.
(2) The charger unit for electric fences shall be factory design and manufactured with a ULApproved
seal designed for electric fence application only. The unit shall be attached in a secure
manner to a post not less than twenty-four (24") inches from the ground. The fence charger shall be
installed with a copper ground wire affixed to an approved ground rod. The charger may be either DC
powered or AC powered. If AC powered, an electrical permit will be required to run ENT conduit
underground to an approved location with a weather type box and a GFCI plug; extension cords are
not allowed. The electric fence charger unit shall operate on one hundred fifteen (115) volt AC only
with output power not to exceed twenty-four (24) volts DC current. The charger shall have a fuse
provision so as to break the fuse if an overload is maintained.
(3) On every one hundred (100') feet of an electric fence, a warning sign shall be affixed to the
fence post or fence wiring, clearly reading “electric fence.” The wording shall be in English and
Spanish with one inch white letters on a red background.
Sec. 21.08.010 Maintenance
(a) All fences shall be maintained in good condition by the owner of the property so as to comply with the
requirements of this article as adopted and as may be amended, and shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Fences, or any part thereof, shall not be out of vertical alignment.
(2) Damaged, removed, rotted, or missing portions of a fence shall be replaced or repaired with
comparable materials to the remaining portion of the fence within ten (10) days of the event causing
the noncompliance.
(3) Any and all vegetation shall be kept clear of fences and shall not be allowed to grow into a
fence.
(4) If replacing six (6) or more fence panels, a fence permit will be required.
(5) Upon receipt of permit to repair or replace six (6) or more fence panels, and upon new
installation in an existing neighborhood or residential district will require 4x4 treated wood, cedar or
schedule a 40 steel pipe “fence post(s)” and to be buried to a depth of two feet (2') in concrete.
Existing schedule 40 steel post(s) shall be replaced with schedule 40 steel post(s) if damaged or in
need of being replaced.
(6) The owner of any fence shall be responsible for the removal of all graffiti.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article to fail to maintain a fence in good condition by failing to meet one of
the above requirements, or by permitting a fence to continue to exist in a damaged, deteriorated or unaligned
condition.
Sec. 21.08.011 Dilapidated fence; notice of opportunity to cure
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/720
(a) It shall be a violation of this article to fail to maintain a fence in good condition, consistent with the
minimum standards as adopted herein.
(b) A notice shall be served to the property owner informing of the violation of minimum standards and
providing a written notice within ten (10) days from the date of the letter to correct the violation. Failure to
timely correct the violation may result in the code official issuing a citation and/or proceeding under chapter
214.001 of the Texas Local Government Code, relative to the repair or demolition of substandard structures.
(c) Nothing shall preclude the city from proceeding under both civil abatement and criminal proceedings.
Sec. 21.08.012 Inspection of new fences
When any fence for which a permit has been issued under the article is completed, it must be inspected. The
building inspection department shall be notified within ten (10) days of completion of the fence. The building
inspection department will issue a card of acceptance if the fence complies with the provisions of the article or
reject the fence if it does not comply and issue a notice to cure the deficiencies. Any deficiency noted must be
completed within thirty (30) days unless the building inspection department grants an extension of additional
thirty (30) days for good cause shown.
Sec. 21.08.013 Permits required; fee; application
(a) A fence permit shall be required as set forth herein and shall be valid for a period of no longer than 180
days.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to permit any person to install a
fence or to make any alterations, additions, or changes or a portion greater than five (5) panels, without first
having procured a permit to do so. Any repair or maintenance must be done with similar materials. The permit
fee required by this article shall be provided for in the fee schedule under the city's master fee schedule and shall
be paid for prior to the issuance of the permit.
(c) Should any person commence any work on the construction, erection or relocation of a fence for which a
permit is required under the terms of this section prior to obtaining such permit, such fee shall be doubled at the
time of application; provided, however, that the payment of such doubled fee shall not relieve any such person
from full compliance with the requirements of the article, nor shall it relieve such person from prosecution for
failure to comply with the article.
(d) A site plan may be required showing the lot size, all improvements on the lot, and the proposed location of
the fence to be constructed before a permit will be issued under the article.
(e) If a property owner elects to hire a fence contractor to erect a fence, the contractor will be required to be
registered with the city.
(f) Application: The following information (in addition to the basic information on the city required permit
form) must be included by the applicant when applying for a permit to erect a fence.
(1) Type of fence (i.e., style, material and design);
(2) Height of fence;
(3) Show easements (i.e., utility, drainage etc.) including the width and length of easement; and
(4) Any requirement specifically provided in any other portion of the article.
Sec. 21.08.014 Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/720
(a) Swimming pool fences and enclosures shall comply with all applicable local, federal, state regulations and
the International Swimming Pool Code as adopted and amended by the city.
(b) Pools owned, controlled or maintained by the owner of a multi-unit dwelling complex or a property
owners association, as it exists and as it may be defined by chapter 757 of the Texas Health & Safety Code, shall
be governed by the standards, rules, and regulations set forth thereunder, as it exists and as it may be amended.
However, should any new pools be built it would also need to comply with the International Swimming Pool
Code as adopted by the city.
(c) It shall be a violation to fail to meet the minimum standards required for maintaining a swimming pool
enclosure or safety device as set forth herein or the code adopted hereunder.
Sec. 21.08.015 Stop-work orders
Upon notice from the code official, any work that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the
conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person, who shall continue any work in or
about the fence structure after having been served with a stop-work order, shall be liable to a violation and
penalties in accordance with this section of the article.
Sec. 21.08.016 Work by homeowner
Nothing contained in the article shall prevent any person from actually building his own fence on his own
residentially zoned property or premises, provided the property is occupied by him/her, as his/her homestead,
that a permit is paid for and obtained, that the materials, equipment, and work be in strict accordance with the
fence rules and regulations of the article, and the building official's approval can be obtained upon inspection in
regular order. The property owner must actually perform the work; any person other than the property owner
who is working on the fence must hold a registration with the city as a fence contractor.
Sec. 21.08.017 Offense and penalties
(a) It shall be a violation of the article to:
(1) Fail to obtain a permit required herein;
(2) Conduct any activity in violation of the provisions herein;
(3) Fail to comply with any obligation to cure a deficiency or maintenance requirements set forth
herein;
(4) Use fencing materials other than as provided herein;
(5) Construct a fence prohibited by the article;
(6) Fail to maintain a fence in good condition;
(7) Fail to maintain a fence in proper alignment;
(8) Or otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this article.
(b) Any owner, person, firm, corporation or business entity violating the article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Unless otherwise specified, allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/720
not required for proof of an offense committed herein. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prelude the city from proceeding with civil abatement
of a dilapidated fence as provided herein.
Sec. 21.08.018 Application for appeal
Any person directly affected by a decision of the building official or code official, or a notice issued under this
code, shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals known as the board of adjustment, herein referred to
as the “board,” provided that written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the
decision, or notice was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code is
adequately satisfied by other means.
(1) Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the building or code official within
twenty (20) days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. Notice of any meeting shall
be given to the public in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall be
conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(2) Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant shall, be
given an opportunity to be heard.
(3) Board decision. The board shall, only by concurring vote of a majority of those present, either
modify the order of the official, enforce the recommendations of the building or code official, or
reverse the decision of the building or code official. Board decision is final.
(4) Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall
stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.
(Ordinance 07-2017 adopted 3/20/17)
ARTICLE 21.09 SIGNS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 21.09.001 Title, purpose and objectives
(a) Title. These regulations shall be known as the city sign ordinance or the city sign code, may be cited as
such, and may be referred to herein as “this article.”
(b) Purpose and objectives. Signs use private land near the public rights-of-way to inform and persuade the
general public by publishing a message. This article provides standards for the erection and maintenance of
private signs. All private signs that are not exempt as provided below shall be erected and maintained in
accordance with these standards. The general objectives of these standards are to promote and protect the health,
safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public, and in part, to achieve the following objectives:
(1) Safety. To promote and protect the safety of persons and property by providing that signs:
(A) Do not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment;
(B) Do not obstruct firefighting or police surveillance; and
(C) Do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists, or by impairing the
driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs, other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/720
traffic-control and safety devices, or emergency vehicles.
(2) Communication efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of information in sign messages
by providing that:
(A) Those signs which provide messages and information most needed and sought by the
public are given priorities;
(B) Businesses and services may identify themselves;
(C) Customers and other persons may locate a business or service;
(D) No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines from the public rightsof-
way; and
(E) Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented and
are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore said messages, according to the
observer's purpose.
(3) Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the
appearance and economic value of the cityscape, by providing that signs:
(A) Do not interfere with scenic views;
(B) Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
(C) Do not create a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous property by their
brightness, size, height or movement; and
(D) Are not detrimental to land or property values.
Sec. 21.09.002 Administration and jurisdiction
(a) Jurisdiction and applicability. This article shall be applied to all areas within the corporate limits of the
city, as such limits may be changed from time to time, and to those areas within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ), as such areas may also be changed from time to time, as allowed by law.
(1) All signs erected, constructed, installed or otherwise placed after the effective date of this
article shall be in full conformance with all standards and regulations herein.
(2) Signs which were in existence and in place on the effective date of this article, and which meet
all provisions of this article, shall be classified as conforming signs.
(3) Signs which were lawfully installed in compliance with all city codes and ordinances that were
applicable at the time of installation, but that do not comply with one or more provisions of this
article and/or other applicable codes or ordinances of the city (such as specific signage regulations in
the city zoning ordinance) that were adopted after such signs were installed shall be classified as
nonconforming signs (see section 21.09.015).
(b) Regulations not intended to permit violation. The regulations of this article are not intended to permit any
violation of the provisions of any other lawful ordinance or of any state law.
(c) Conflicting regulations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and any other
city code or ordinance the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/720
(d) Administrative official. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building
official (or designated representative) of the city. For such purposes, the building official (or designated
representative) shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
(e) Inspections.
(1) All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city.
(2) Footing inspections (as by a licensed structural engineer) may be required by the city for all
signs having footings.
(3) All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions as provided in this code,
and the electrical components used shall bear the label of, and shall comply with, the applicable
regulations. Any electrical signs or devices that are located within reach of persons shall be protected
by wire glass, safety glass, a metal locked box, or other approved safety method.
(4) The city may order the revocation of any sign permit and/or the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(5) The city has the authority to inspect annually, or at such other times as it deems necessary, each
sign regulated by this article for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is secure or insecure,
whether it still serves a useful purpose, and whether it is in need of removal or repair.
(f) Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article,
or whenever the building official (or his/her authorized representative) has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official (or his/her authorized representative) may enter
such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
building official by this article; provided that, if such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present
proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises are unoccupied he shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official (or his/her authorized representative) shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(g) Responsible parties. The permittee, owner, agent and/or person(s) having the beneficial use of any sign,
the owner(s) of the land or structure upon which any sign is located, the person(s) responding on behalf of such
advertising, and the person(s) in charge of erecting any sign are all subject to the provisions of, and compliance
with, this article. It is the responsibility of all such parties to be knowledgeable of, and to be in compliance with,
all provisions of this article.
(h) Signs not expressly permitted are prohibited. All signs not expressly defined, regulated and permitted
under this article are hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the city, and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city (if applicable by law).
Sec. 21.09.003 Variances
Requests for special exceptions from the strict administration of this article may be sought through the zoning
board of adjustment in the same manner as a variance to a zoning regulation. Any such request shall follow the
procedures set forth in this code. In order for the board to grant a variance it must find the following facts.
(1) The requested variance does not violate the intent of this chapter.
(2) The requested variance will not adversely affect surrounding properties.
(3) The requested variance will not adversely affect public safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/720
(4) Special conditions exist which are unique to this applicant or property.
(5) The sign has not been installed prior to obtaining a permit.
(6) A sign installed without a permit must be removed before a sign variance application can be
accepted.
Sec. 21.09.004 Definitions and regulations
Alter. To change the size, shape, outline, intent, footprint or type of sign.
Animation. Any type of mechanical movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect
or scene.
Area (of a sign). See “sign area.”
Attach. To stick, tack, nail, or otherwise affix a sign to any object; to paint, stencil, write or otherwise mark on
an object.
Attached sign. A sign that is attached to, applied to, applied on or supported by any part of a building (such as a
wall, window, canopy, awning, arcade, marquee, etc. and specifically) which encloses or covers usable space.
This does not include or apply to roof signs which are strictly prohibited.
Awning. A structure hung from the surface of a building, usually stretched over a frame and designed to provide
protection from sun, rain, wind and other climatological conditions or to provide decoration to the building
facade. An awning is typically composed of canvas, fabric or other similar lightweight material supported and
shaped by a metal or wood frame. An awning shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any
sidewalk/pedestrian travel surface, and fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular parking or circulation surface. It
shall be engineered and able to withstand the most recent revision of the latest adopted building code for wind
speeds. All awning signs four hundred (400) square feet or larger shall have a flame-retardant certificate.
Awning sign. The copy/artwork on an awning sign shall not exceed the area and size that are allowed for a wall
sign on the wall upon which it is attached, and the copy/artwork shall not be illuminated. However, the total area
of wall signs and awning signs on any wall surface shall not exceed the area and size allowed for a single wall
sign, and any awning sign shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the awning's surface area. An awning
and/or awning sign shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel
surface, and fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular parking or circulation surface. It shall be engineered and able
to withstand the most recent revision of the latest adopted building code for wind speeds. All awning signs four
hundred (400) square feet or larger shall have a flame-retardant certificate. All awning signs must comply with
the following regulations:
(1) Maximum height: Height of vertical face only of awning.
(2) Maximum size/area: Not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the awning's vertical surface
area.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: On the vertical face of an awning which provides weather protection,
identity, or decoration and is supported by the building the awning is attached to.
(5) Maximum number: Not applicable.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/720
Banner. A type of portable sign that is generally constructed of lightweight plastic, fabric, or a similar nonrigid
material, and that is mounted/tethered to a pole, building or other structure at one or more edges. A banner
typically (but not always) exhibits a text message and/or symbol(s) for the business located on the property, or
for a product or service provided by that business. Banner signs shall not be utilized as permanent wall signs.
National/state or local government flags are not considered banners (see “flag”).
(1) Maximum height: Six feet (6').
(2) Maximum size/area: Sixty (60) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential, multifamily, townhome and manufactured housing zoning
districts, and allowed for any nonresidential use (such as a church, school, day care center, etc.) that
is located in an agricultural, single-family or two-family zoning district.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Must be securely attached (such that the banner does not move, flap,
wave, flutter, twirl, etc.) to the vertical face only of a building or a canopy, not to a fence, screening
wall, tree, utility pole, permanent sign support, etc.
(5) Maximum number: One per dedicated street frontage per business.
(6) Duration: Establishments will be permitted for no more than one banner at a time per site.
(7) Banners shall advertise specific on-site products, commodity promotions or grand openings, or
shall provide leasing information. Banners will not be used for general advertising purposes.
(8) Banner permits will be valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days and additional
banner permits for the same location will not be issued for a period of sixty (60) calendar days from
the expiration date of the previous permit.
(9) Banners with expired permits must be removed within two (2) calendar days of the permit
expiration or be subject to citations.
(10) Special event/promotion: Any nonresidential premises or occupancy may display banner signs
containing a message directly relating to a special event/promotion, limited to four (4) special
events/promotions per calendar year. The size of a special event/promotion banner is limited to sixty
(60) square feet. Special event/promotion banners may be displayed no more than fourteen (14)
calendar days and must be removed within two (2) calendar days after the conclusion of the special
event/promotion. Only one (1) special event or promotion banner may be displayed on the premises
at any one (1) time. The banner shall be located on the face of the building of the business offering
the special event/promotion with property owner's written permission provided to the city at the time
the banner permit application is submitted for approval.
(11) Permit is required. The permit fee(s) may be waived for registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organizations.
Billboard sign. A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity,
event, place, service and/or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises
upon which the sign is located (i.e., off-premises). Billboard signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line and beyond which buildings may not be
erected.
Building official. For the purposes of this article, the building official, or other official duly authorized by the
city, has the authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/720
Canopy. A roof-like structure which is supported by freestanding columns or the building to which it is attached,
and which is generally open on two or more sides. A canopy shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet
above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel surface, and fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular parking or circulation
surface. It shall be engineered and able to withstand the most recent revision of the latest adopted building code
for wind speeds. All canopy signs four hundred (400) square feet or larger shall have a flame-retardant
certificate.
Canopy sign. A canopy sign may be placed, digitally printed, screen printed or has vinyl applied upon or is an
integral part of the face of a canopy. All canopy signs 400 square feet or larger shall have a flame-retardant
certificate.
(1) Maximum height: Not to exceed the height of the canopy.
(2) Maximum size/area: Not to exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the face of the canopy of
which it is a part or to which it is attached, or a maximum of twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever
is greater. The sign may consist of only the name and/or logo of the business at the location of the
canopy. An illuminated stripe may be incorporated into a canopy. The stripe may extend along the
entire length of the face of the canopy. The width or thickness of the stripe shall be limited to onethird
(1/3) of the vertical dimension of the face of the canopy. The internal illumination of a canopy is
limited to the portions of the canopy face upon which a sign or illuminated stripe is permitted.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: On the vertical face only of a canopy; minimum vertical clearance of eight
(8) feet above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel surface, and fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular
parking or circulation surface.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per canopy face.
(6) Duration: No limit.
Changeable message sign (also reader board sign). A wall-mounted or freestanding sign (or a portion of a larger
sign) that describes and advertises things such as movie listings, fuel pricing, dining and product or service
specials, welcome greetings, etc., with manually interchangeable letters and symbols; includes nonelectronic
bulletin boards and theater marquees; not a “message center.”
(1) Maximum height: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(2) Maximum size/area: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(3) Allowed: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon sign, wall
sign, etc.).
(4) Placement/setbacks: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Commercial message. Any type of copy that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or otherwise calls attention
to a business, product, service or other commercial or for-profit activity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/720
Conforming sign. A sign that was in existence and in place on the effective date of this article, and which meets
all provisions of this article.
Construction sign. A temporary, accessory sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer,
landscape architect, decorator and/or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction and/or improvement of the
premises upon which the sign is located. Construction signs may be erected in nonresidential and residential
zoning districts and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size and a maximum height of fifteen (15)
feet. The required setback for a construction sign shall be twenty (20) feet from the front property line, and
construction signs are limited to one (1) per street front. A construction sign may be erected and maintained only
during the duration of construction and shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or, in
the case of a residential dwelling, prior to the final building inspection.
Copy. Letters, characters, illustrations, logos, graphics, symbols, writing or any combination thereof, that is
intended to communicate information of any kind, or to advertise, announce or identify a person, entity,
business, business product or service, or to advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
Copy area. The area of the sign containing any copy, including the area between the separate lines and letters of
text and the area between text and any symbol, illustration, logo or graphic.
Damaged, dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Dilapidated or deteriorated condition shall include instances
where:
(1) Elements of the surface or background can be seen, as viewed from a normal viewing distance
(i.e., the intended viewing distance), to have portions of the finished material or paint flaked, broken
off, missing and/or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface;
(2) The structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented or torn;
(3) The sign panel is visibly cracked or, in the case of wood and similar products, splintered in
such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition;
(4) The sign and/or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was
originally erected (such as may result from being blown by high winds or from the failure of a
structural support);
(5) The message or wording can no longer be clearly read by a person with normal eyesight under
normal viewing conditions; or
(6) The sign and/or its elements are not in compliance with the requirements of this code of the
city.
Decorative display. See “promotional flags/pennants” and “promotional signage.”
Development signs. A temporary, accessory sign identifying the name and general nature of the development
project that is being constructed on the premises upon which the sign is located. Such signs must relate only to
the property on which they are located.
(1) Maximum height: Twenty feet (20').
(2) Maximum size/area: One hundred (100) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Thirty feet (30') from any property or right-of-way line.
(5) Maximum number: One per project or one (1) per fifty (50) acres of total project size.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/720
(6) Duration: Until project is ninety percent (90%) complete. In the case of a commercial project,
“ninety (90) percent complete” means when a certificate of compliance is issued for a shell building.
For a residential project, “ninety (90) percent complete” means when ninety (90) percent of the
subdivision is permitted.
(7) Permit is required.
Directional sign (on-site). A sign designated specifically for the purpose of directing or providing guidance to
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic on private property. The sign will be allowed to have names/logos and arrows
showing direction. Examples include, but are not limited to, signs with or without a directional arrow and
wording such as “entrance,” “exit,” “visitor parking,” “customer service department,” “one-way,” “leasing office
this way,” etc.
(1) Maximum height: Three feet (3').
(2) Maximum size/area: Eight (8) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all multifamily, single-family attached, manufactured home, and nonresidential
zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Five feet (5') from any property or right-of-way line.
(5) Maximum number: No limit.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is not required.
Directory sign (on-site). A sign used for the purpose of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to specific
occupants/businesses on private property (i.e., within shopping centers, industrial parks, retail districts, office
complexes and commercial sites). Sign will be allowed to advertise corporate logos other than the names of
occupants/businesses and arrows directing traffic to those locations. Can be freestanding or wall-mounted.
(1) Maximum height: Same as for monument sign if freestanding.
(2) Maximum size/area: Eighteen (18) square feet if freestanding; eight (8) square feet and placed
adjacent to the building's primary entrance at the ground level if wall-mounted.
(3) Allowed in all multifamily, single-family attached, manufactured home, and nonresidential
zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Ten feet (10') from any property or right-of-way line for freestanding or
monument-style.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot, or one (1) per twenty-five (25) acres (or portion
thereof) for a development that is over twenty-five (25) acres in size.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Easement. An area restricted on private property where the city or a public utility has the right to remove and
keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs and other improvements or growths which in any
way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems within said
easements. The city and public utilities have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon easements for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/720
the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or
part of their respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone.
Electronic message sign.
(1) Signs may be illuminated. Signs shall have no flashing copy or lights; revolving beacon lights;
chasing, blinking, or stroboscopic lights; or, fluttering, undulating, swinging, or otherwise moving
parts.
(2) Electronic message signs are allowed.
(A) A maximum of 70% of the sign face may be devoted to changeable sign copy.
(B) Changeable message copy signs may not be used to display commercial messages
relating to products or services that are not offered on the premises.
(C) Any marquee signs that are illuminated by artificial light or projects an electronic
message through a changeable copy sign that is within 400 feet of a residence, park,
playground, or scenic area as designated by a governmental agency having such authority shall
not be lighted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(D) Such signs shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3-foot candles above ambient light. In
all zoning districts such signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology, which
automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based on ambient light.
(E) A permit is required.
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of signs on
any surface, including the exterior surface of a building or structure.
Facade or elevation. Any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and any other part of a building
which encloses or covers usable space that is not classified as the roof. Where separate facades are oriented in
the same direction or in directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part of a single
facade.
Face panel or surface. A surface(s) of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or
illustrated on the sign.
Flag (official). A fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, words and/or insignia which is
used as a symbol for a government, political subdivision or some other professional, religious, educational or
nonprofit entity, provided that such device is displayed for noncommercial (i.e., not-for-profit) purposes.
Flyer. Any advertising circular or piece that is affixed, glued, nailed, stapled or otherwise attached to a pole,
fence, building or other structure.
For sale, rent or lease sign. See “real estate sign.”
Freestanding sign. Any type of sign that is placed on or anchored in the ground, and that is structurally
independent of any building or other structure. All types of freestanding signs require a permit (unless otherwise
provided in this article for a specific type of freestanding sign). All types of freestanding signs shall be located
entirely on private property and not within any public right-of-way or easement.
Garage sale sign. Any temporary, promotional sign for the occasional (i.e., not on-going) sale of personal
household goods, typically displayed in a residential area or on the property of a nonprofit organization. Offpremises
garage sale signs are permitted, provided they have the address of the sale upon them, they are self7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/720
supporting, and they are not placed within public rights-of-way or mounted upon public/utility structures (e.g.,
telephone poles, streetlight standards, street sign poles, public buildings, etc.) or on trees, fences, etc.
(1) Maximum height: Five (5) feet.
(2) Maximum size/area: Four (4) square feet.
(3) Zoning permitted: In all districts.
(4) Placement: On private property (off-premises signs require the property owner's permission);
cannot be mounted on public/utility structures or within public rights-of-way or easements.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) on the property having the sale; no more than five (5) off-site.
(6) Duration: From 5:00 p.m. the day before the sale, until 8:00 a.m. the day after the sale. A fine
will be assessed for each off-site garage sale sign left after 8:00 a.m. on the required removal date.
(7) Permit is required.
Gaseous tubing. Exposed tubes which contain inert luminescent gases including, but not limited to, neon, argon
and krypton.
Highway sign. A freestanding off-premises sign, or billboard, that is located within six hundred and sixty feet
(660') of any state or federal highway right-of-way, and that is visible from such highway, and that requires an
outdoor advertising license from the state department of transportation. New highway signs or billboards are
prohibited and shall not be allowed in any zoning district.
Human sign. A sign held by or attached to a human being who stands or walks on the ground, at a business
location (on-premises only). A human sign includes a person dressed in costume, for the purposes of advertising
or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product on the
premises where the human sign is located.
(1) No sign permit is required.
(2) Human signs may not be off-premises from where a promotion, sale, event or the like takes
place. Podiums, risers, stilts, vehicles, roofs, or other structures or devices shall not support a human
sign.
(3) Human signs may be displayed only during normal business hours each and every continuing
calendar day until the promotion, sale, special event, or the like has ended.
(4) Human signs shall at all times remain outside of the roadways at or about the premises where
the human sign is located, and shall refrain from interfering with, distracting or interfering with
traffic on and about the roadways as well as pedestrian traffic on and about the sidewalk(s), if any.
Identification sign. A sign which is used to identify the name of a retail shopping center, of a business park, or
an industrial, commercial or office center.
Illegal sign. A sign that was erected in violation of any regulation applicable at the time of erection of such sign,
including lack of a required permit.
(1) Illegal conforming sign. A sign erected within the city or its ETJ that meets all provisions of
this article but does not have a required permit.
(2) Illegal nonconforming sign. A sign erected within the city or its ETJ that does not meet all
provisions of this article and does not have a required permit (also deemed a “premature sign” or an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/720
“unauthorized sign” unless deemed by the city as an “illegal conforming sign”).
Illuminated sign. A sign which has characters, letters, figures and/or designs that are illuminated by electric
lights, luminous tubes or other means, and that are specifically placed to draw attention to, or to provide
nighttime viewing of, the subject matter on the sign face.
Incidental sign. A small sign of a noncommercial nature which is intended primarily for the convenience of the
public. Included are signs designating restrooms, address numbers, hours of operation, entrances to buildings,
public telephones, directions to locations, “help wanted” signs, civic organizations, and so forth. Also included
in this group of signs are those designed to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicular traffic to an area or place on
the premises of an office building or a business development by means of a directory designating names and
addresses only (see “directional sign”).
(1) Maximum height: Not applicable.
(2) Maximum size/area: Three (3) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all single-family attached, multifamily, manufactured home and nonresidential
zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: On the vertical face only of a building, in a window, or on a gate or fence.
(5) Maximum number: No limit.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is not required.
Inflatable sign. A portable, hollow sign expanded or enlarged by the use of air, gas or lighter-than-air gas.
(1) A permit is required and must be obtained prior to placement of an inflatable sign.
(2) The sign must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
(3) A permit holder will be allowed to place one sign for three, 10-day periods per calendar year.
Periods may not run consecutively.
(4) Placement of signs on city right-of-way is prohibited.
(5) Signs and their anchors or attachments shall not be placed in such a way as to create a traffic
hazard.
(6) Signs must be securely anchored to the pavement or ground.
Informational sign (on-site). A sign used for the purpose of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to
specific occupants/businesses on private property (i.e., within shopping centers, industrial parks, retail districts,
office complexes and commercial sites). Sign will be allowed to advertise corporate logos other than the names
of occupants/businesses and arrows directing traffic to those locations. Can be freestanding or wall-mounted.
(1) Maximum height: Same as for monument sign if freestanding.
(2) Maximum size/area: Eighteen (18) square feet if freestanding; eight (8) square feet and placed
adjacent to the building's primary entrance at the ground level if wall-mounted.
(3) Allowed in all multifamily, single-family attached, manufactured home, and nonresidential
zoning districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/720
(4) Placement/setbacks: Ten feet (10') from any property or right-of-way line; must be monumentstyle
only.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot, or one (1) per twenty-five (25) acres (or portion
thereof) for a development that is over twenty-five (25) acres in size.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Kiosk sign. Multi-user directional or location sign constructed in the right-of-way, on- or off-premises,
containing individual panels of a prescribed size for that particular kiosk, with each panel to contain an
individual business logo, name or message, and, when appropriate, a directional arrow and/or distance indicator
to the advertised business.
(1) Kiosk signs must be designed and constructed according to the specifications contained in the
license agreement approved by the city council.
(2) Prior to erecting any kiosk sign the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the building
department for approval.
(3) Kiosk signs shall include breakaway design features as required for traffic signs in the street
rights-of-way.
(4) Price information is prohibited on kiosk signs.
(5) No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention of other appurtenances shall be
attached to kiosk signs.
(6) Individual sign panels on kiosk signs shall have a uniform design and color.
(7) Kiosk signs shall not interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails; shall
not obstruct the visibility of motorist, pedestrians, or traffic-control signs; shall not be installed in the
immediate vicinity of street intersections and shall comply with the any visibility triangle as dictated
by the city.
(8) No kiosk sign plaza or sign panel shall be installed within the right-of-way of a state highway
without written authorization from the Texas Department of Transportation.
(9) All kiosk signs shall be maintained in “like new” condition and shall be free of grass and weeds
in surrounding vicinity.
(10) The agreed upon license shall be consistent and comply with this article.
Legal sign. A sign that, when erected, has met all city codes and ordinances pertaining to signs.
Logo. A formalized design or insignia (i.e., symbol) of a company or product, which is commonly used in
advertising to identify that company or product.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building and including such open spaces as
are required under this article and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.
Lot lines. The lines defining the limits of a parcel, lot, tract, or ownership.
Menu board. An on-site display of menu items, hours of operation, special upcoming events, and other businessspecific
information that is utilized by restaurant and entertainment establishments. Can be wall-mounted near
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/720
the establishment's primary entrance, or can be freestanding at a drive-in or drive-through food service
establishment, and may or may not have a speaker and/or an electronic visual order display board or panel that
verifies what the patron is ordering at the drive-through.
(1) Maximum height: Seven feet (7') if freestanding; top edge seven feet (7') above sidewalk grade
if wall-mounted.
(2) Maximum size/area: Thirty-two (32) square feet if freestanding; four (4) square feet if wallmounted.
(3) Allowed in retail, commercial and industrial zoning districts only.
(4) Placement/setbacks: If freestanding, near rear of main building, and outside of all front, side
and rear building setbacks; can be all changeable copy but only a maximum of four (4) square feet
can be animated (at the order placement/confirmation speaker board only); if wall-mounted, must be
placed near the primary entrance.
(5) Maximum number: If freestanding, two (2) allowed per establishment (only one of which may
have a speaker and/or an electronic visual order display board or panel), except for drive-in style
restaurants, which may have one menu board (with or without a speaker and/or an electronic visual
order display board or panel) per parking stall, plus up to two menu boards (only one of which with a
speaker and/or an electronic visual order display board or panel) for a drive-through lane; if wallmounted,
one (1) allowed per business.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Model home sign. A sign identifying model homes or a model home park, including home sales offices.
(1) Maximum height: Six feet (6').
(2) Maximum size/area: Sixteen (16) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all single-family and multifamily residential zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Ten feet (10') from any property or right-of-way line or fifty percent
(50%) of front setback. The sign shall be placed outside of any sight triangle on a corner lot.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per premises (each builder within a development may have one
model home sign on each model home lot).
(6) Duration: Until premises where sign is located are sold.
(7) Permit is required.
Monument sign. A freestanding sign having a low profile and made of stone, concrete, decorative metal, brick or
similar materials which is designed to complement the architecture of the building or complex on the premises
where the sign is located. A monument sign shall be solid from the ground up. All poles and supports shall be
concealed. The ground upon which a monument sign is located may be bermed up (or designed as a raised
planter with heavy evergreen landscaping to conceal the planter on all sides) a maximum of two feet (2') from
the top of the adjacent street curb.
(1) Properties with multiple tenants such as shopping centers and office buildings with multiple
tenants or businesses:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/720
(A) Maximum height: Ten (10) feet, including the monument base, as measured from the
average ground level at the base to the topmost portion of the sign.
(B) Maximum size/area: One hundred twenty-five (125) square feet.
(C) Allowed in all zoning districts.
(D) Placement/setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') from any property or right-of-way line; up to onehalf
(1/2) of a monument sign's allowable size/area can be devoted to a nonelectronic
changeable copy sign, or up to one-quarter (1/4) of its allowable size/area can be devoted to an
electronic message center that shows only time/temperature or motor fuel pricing and that does
not change message more frequently than once per five (5) seconds, provided the sign is located
in a nonresidential zoning district, is within twenty-five feet (25') of the street right-of-way line,
and outside of any sight triangle on a corner lot.
(E) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot, or two hundred fifty feet (250') from another
monument sign (measured along street right-of-way).
(F) Duration: No limit.
(G) Permit is required.
(2) Properties with single tenants such as businesses located on individually platted land, pad sites
within a shopping center, apartment buildings, schools, and other nonresidential uses:
(A) Maximum height: Eight (8) feet, including the monument base, as measured from the
average ground level at the base to the topmost portion of the sign.
(B) Maximum size/area: Eighty (80) square feet.
(C) Allowed in all zoning districts.
(D) Placement/setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') from any property or right-of-way line; up to onehalf
(1/2) of a monument sign's allowable size/area can be devoted to a nonelectronic
changeable copy sign, or up to one-quarter (1/4) of its allowable size/area can be devoted to an
electronic message center that shows only time/temperature or motor fuel pricing and that does
not change message more frequently than once per five (5) seconds, provided the sign is located
in a nonresidential zoning district, is within twenty-five feet (25') of the street right-of-way line,
and outside of any sight triangle on a corner lot.
(E) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot, or one hundred fifty feet (150') from another
monument sign (measured along street right-of-way) on the same property.
(F) Duration: No limit
(G) Permit is required.
Municipally owned sign. An official sign which identifies a park, an entrance into the city, a place of interest
within the city, a city-sponsored event, or any municipally owned site or facility. A municipally owned sign does
not include traffic or street identification/name signs.
Nameplate or occupational. An attached sign that displays only the name or occupation of the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which it is erected or placed, and no other information or copy pertaining to the
name of the building, business, resident, commercial operation or other activity that is conducted on the site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/720
Neon sign. A sign or advertising device formed from neon (or other gaseous tubing, such as argon) lamps and/or
tubing.
Noncombustible material. Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of twelve hundred
degrees (1200°) Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature, and which would have a
flame spread of twenty-five (25) feet or less.
Noncommercial sign. A sign that does not contain any type of commercial (i.e., “for profit”) message, and that is
not used to convey a commercial message.
Nonconforming sign. A sign that was lawfully installed in compliance with all city codes and ordinances that
were applicable at the time of installation, but that does not comply with the provisions of this article and/or
other codes or ordinances of the city that were adopted after the sign was installed.
Nonstructural trim. A retainer, molding, batten, capping, nailing strip, latticing, platform or other similar trim
component which is attached to the sign or its structure but is not necessary for support and is not part of the
sign support or framework.
Obsolete sign. A sign which no longer serves a bona fide use or purpose, including but not limited to signs
relating to a product or service no longer available for purchase by the public, and all signs relating to a business
which has been closed for at least six (6) months or has moved out of the city.
Obscenity. No person shall display on any sign any obscene or indecent matter as defined by the Texas Penal
Code, or any matter soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct. Any sign which does contain any obscene,
indecent or immoral matter must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours on notice. The owner or person in
control of the property on which the sign is located shall be responsible for compliance with this article.
Off-premises sign. A sign displaying copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place,
service and/or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises upon which the
sign is located.
Official sign. A sign erected by a governmental agency within its territorial jurisdiction for the purpose of
carrying out an official duty or responsibility, and including, but not limited to, traffic signs and signals, zoning
signs and street signs. Special lighting, banners and other promotional signage celebrating seasonal or civic
events that are sponsored and/or endorsed by the city council may be classified as “official signs” provided that
they are not for commercial (i.e., “for profit”) purpose.
On-premises sign. A sign identifying or advertising a business, person, organization, activity, event, place,
service and/or product on the same premises upon which the sign is located.
Owner. The owner of a sign, piece of land or structure, or the person or entity who is responsible for erecting,
altering, replacing, relocating, repairing or otherwise modifying a sign or sign structure.
Person. A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, entity, company or organization of any kind.
Permanent sign. An attached or detached sign affixed to a permanent structure, or placed in a fixed location, that
is intended to be displayed for a long period of time which is generally as long as the business, product, service,
etc., that the sign advertises is in business, on the site where the sign is located, etc.
Pole sign. A freestanding sign is one that independent of any structure or building, supported by one or more
poles, and having no additional guys, braces, supports, or anchors to the ground or to any other structure. Both
the pole and its foundation shall be engineered and constructed to withstand the most recent revision of the latest
adopted building code for wind speeds when the pole is over ten feet (10'-0") in height. The plans for the pole
and its foundation must be signed and stamped by a registered state structural engineer when submitted for the
city's review. Landscaping is required around the base of the sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/720
(1) Maximum height: Seventy-five feet (75').
(2) Maximum size/area: Two hundred (200) square feet for up to fifty feet (50') tall. Signs between
fifty-one (51') and seventy-five (75) feet may be three hundred (300) square feet.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts and planned developments located within fifty
feet (50') of the right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 175. A multi-tenant or multi-user shopping center
or business site/lot shall only be allowed one pole or pylon sign, not one sign for each individual
tenant and/or business.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Fifteen feet (15') from any curbline or a setback equal to one (1) foot for
each foot of the sign's overall height, whichever is greater; must be pylon style, not single-pole style,
for any sign that is forty feet (40') or less in height.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Political sign. A temporary sign containing a political message, which is erected only on private property (i.e.,
not in public rights-of-way or easements) with the property owner's consent, for the sole purpose of advertising a
candidate, a political party, or a ballot measure during a period of a public election.
(1) To the extent regulation of political signs by a municipality is preempted and controlled by
section 216.903 of the Texas Local Government Code, that section applies herein as if fully set forth.
To the extent political signs are not subject to such statutory regulation, they shall be regulated as any
other noncommercial sign as provided in this article.
(2) No person shall place, or cause to be placed, a political sign on any public right-of-way or
public property within the corporate limits of the city, except on the day of the election or early
voting days at designated early voting locations. Such signs may be located at the polling places
within the specified proximity as permitted by state election laws.
(3) No person shall place, or cause to be placed, a political sign on any utility pole or tower (e.g.,
telephone pole, streetlight standard, street sign pole, electric utility tower, etc.) or on trees or fences
within the corporate limits of the city.
(4) A political sign may not:
(A) Have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet;
(B) Be more than eight feet (8') high;
(C) Be illuminated; or
(D) Have any moving elements.
(5) Duration: Sign may be put up beginning the day after the filing deadline for political office and
must be removed within 10 days of election day.
Portable sign. Any type of sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, and
that is designed such that it can be moved from one location to another.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/720
Private premises. A dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited/vacant. A private
premises shall include any yard, ground, lawn, walk, driveway, porch, steps, or mailbox belonging to
appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
Projecting sign. A sign that projects from a building and has one end attached to a building or other permanent
structure. Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel
surface, and fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular parking or circulation surface.
Projecting structure. A covered structure of a permanent nature which is constructed of approved building
materials, specifically excluding canvas or fabric material (i.e., an awning), and where such structure is an
integral part of the main building or is permanently attached to a main building and does not extend over public
property. A projecting structure is defined to include marquee and fixed-canopy types of structures. A projecting
structure shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel surface, and
fourteen (14) feet above any vehicular parking or circulation surface. It shall be engineered and able to withstand
the most recent revision of the latest adopted building code for wind speeds.
Promotional flags/pennants. A type of temporary sign that is generally constructed of lightweight plastic, fabric
or a similar material; that is mounted and/or tethered to one or more poles, buildings or other structures by a
rope, wire, string or similar device; and that is designed to move in the wind (i.e., flutter) to attract attention.
Promotional flags/pennants shall not exhibit a text message, copy, logo or symbol of any kind, but may be a
single color or several colors. Promotional flags/pennants are permitted only in conjunction with a special
promotion permit and shall be used as supplemental signs only. Permanent signs are required prior to issuance of
a pennant permit.
(1) Pennants may be displayed a total of four (4) fifteen-day periods per year.
(2) Permit is required. The permit fee for pennants shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per display
period or any part thereof and shall be paid in addition to any special promotions permit fee.
(3) Only four (4) pennants allowed per promotion.
(4) Promotional banner shall be same size, and height allowed per the banner [definition of this]
section.
Promotional signage. A type of temporary signage that is used for special events and promotions or for special
events, business grand openings or anniversaries. Promotional signage may include banners, flags, pennants,
streamers, balloons, inflatable signs/devices, and any other legal types of signs allowed by this article. A
searchlight may be used if it complies with all other provisions of this article.
(1) Promotional signage is allowed on-premises only, for a maximum period of thirty (30) calendar
days, and no more often than once per calendar quarter in any given year with at least a thirty-day
separation between periods of display, and is only allowed for a legally operating business on the
premises. A display period will commence on the first day promotional signage is displayed. A
legally operating business shall include any retail, commercial, industrial or institutional use for
which the city building official has issued a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Any device described as promotional signage shall not exceed an overall height than the
maximum building height allowed in that zoning district, or thirty-five feet (35'), whichever is
smaller.
(3) A separate permit is required for each display period promotional signage will be used. If any
device described as promotional signage is installed prior to issuance of a permit, additional fees
and/or fines for noncompliance with this article may be assessed in addition to the permit fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/720
(4) Promotional signage shall be fully contained on the property of the business which it
advertises, and shall not extend into, onto, or over a public right-of-way or adjacent property. Signage
shall not be located in any sight visibility triangle/area, nor shall any combustible materials be placed
in contact with lighted signs or any electrical fixtures.
Property line. The line denoting the limits of legal ownership of property. Also called a lot line.
Public place. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
Pylon sign. A freestanding sign supported by a solid, ground up, tall monumental structure that is compatible
with the main building on the premises. See “pole sign” for similar regulations.
Reader board sign. A wall-mounted or freestanding sign (or a portion of a larger sign) that describes and
advertises things such as movie listings, fuel pricing, dining and product or service specials, welcome greetings,
etc., with manually interchangeable letters and symbols; includes nonelectronic bulletin boards and theater
marquees.
(1) Maximum height: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(2) Maximum size/area: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(3) Allowed: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon sign, wall
sign, etc.).
(4) Placement/setbacks: See standard for the type of sign it is part of (monument sign, pole/pylon
sign, wall sign, etc.).
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per property/lot.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Real estate sign. A temporary accessory sign that advertises the availability for sale or rental of the premises
upon which the sign in located, and which advertises property only for a use for which it is legally zoned. A real
estate sign shall be promptly removed when the property is sold or rented (as applicable).
(1) Maximum height: Five feet (5') in any residential zoning district; eight feet (8') in any
nonresidential zoning district.
(2) Maximum size/area: Eight (8) square feet in any residential zoning district; thirty-two (32)
square feet in any nonresidential zoning district.
(3) Allowed in all zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Five feet (5') from any property or right-of-way line.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per street frontage.
(6) Duration: Until property is sold or rented (as applicable).
(7) Permit is not required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/720
Rear wall. A wall with no main entrances or store fronts, and which does not face the front of the lot (i.e., the
street). A building may have a maximum of one rear wall (either in a single wall segment or in several segments
which are more or less parallel to one another or which follow the curvature of the overall building).
Roofline. The height which is defined by the intersection of the roof of the building and the wall of the building
with the following exception: for mansard-type roofs having two (2) slopes, the “roofline” shall be defined as
the top of the lower slope of the roof. For mansard-type roofs having parapet walls, the “roofline” shall be the
top of the parapet.
Roof sign. A sign affixed to, applied on, or erected upon or above a roof or parapet or the eave line of a building
or structure. This type of sign is not allowed within the city limits or the ETJ of the city.
Sandwich board sign. A self-supporting A-, T-, or V-shaped portable sign with two visible sides that is selfsupporting
and placed in front of a business, generally on a sidewalk, to attract patrons into the establishment.
(1) Maximum height: Three feet (3').
(2) Maximum size/area: Eight (8) square feet; one per business.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts and shall be taken inside every night and during
nonopen hours.
(4) Placement/setbacks: On sidewalks in front of the advertised store, but a four-foot (4') walkway
shall be kept open to pedestrians.
(5) Maximum number: One (1) per street frontage.
(6) Duration: Only during hours of operation.
(7) Permit is required.
Searchlight. A source, classified as a temporary portable sign, of high-intensity light with one or more beams
directed into the atmosphere or any type of light with one or more beams that rotate or move. Searchlights may
be permitted in accordance with any other applicable city regulations and may include traditional searchlight
devices or laser-type devices. A permit for use is required, and may be granted for use within a nonresidential
zoning district only under the following additional regulations:
(1) A searchlight shall be located a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from any public right-ofway
and from side or rear property lines and shall be positioned so as to project all beams at a
minimum angle of thirty (30) degrees upward from grade level. No searchlight beam may project
onto any street, onto any adjacent property, or onto property or buildings not owned/operated by the
business utilizing the searchlight.
(2) The maximum light intensity generated by searchlights on any premises may not exceed a total
of one thousand six hundred (1,600) million footcandle power. No more than four (4) beams of light
may be projected from any premises at any point in time.
(3) All searchlights must be designed and maintained so as to prevent rays of light (or laser beams)
from being directed at any portion of traveled ways, and no light shall be of such intensity or
brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle, or to create any other
type of traffic hazard (i.e., cannot be such an unusual, eye-catching display that would distract the
attention of motorists).
(4) No advertising searchlight may be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Searchlights shall be operated in accordance with the city noise ordinance and with any other
applicable ordinance designed to minimize public nuisances or disturbances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/720
(5) No advertising searchlight may be operated on any premises for more than seven (7)
consecutive days or for more than a total of fourteen (14) days within any calendar year. No permit
for an advertising searchlight may be issued for any business entity for which a permit has been
issued for a searchlight on the same premises within the last four (4) months preceding the date of the
permit application. Searchlights shall be allowed (with a permit) for business “grand openings” and
special events only such as “Seagofest,” special performances, and special holiday events.
Seasonal decorations. Noncommercial signs, structures or other materials (e.g., air-filled figures, strings of
holiday or twinkle lights, ornaments, cut-out figures, etc.) that are temporarily displayed. Seasonal decorations
shall not be placed in any way that affects traffic safety or visibility. They shall not pose a hazard or threat to
public safety, and shall not negatively affect surrounding properties, neighbors, etc. They shall not advertise any
type of business sales, marketing, grand opening or other commercial event.
(1) Maximum height: Height of main structure on the property/lot. If located on the roof of a
structure in an agricultural or residential zoning district, decorations shall not extend more than eight
feet (8') above the top of the roof.
(2) Maximum size/area: No limit.
(3) Allowed in all zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Completely on private property (not in public right-of-way); can be
erected or affixed to the roof, trees, fences and other fixtures on the property; can be illuminated
and/or animated; can be mounted on the roof of a structure only within agricultural and residential
zoning districts, only if securely tethered or secured to minimize movement of decorations, and only
if decorations do not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
(5) Maximum number: No limit.
(6) Duration: Can be installed/displayed not more than fifty-nine (59) days.
(7) Permit is not required.
Setback. The horizontal distance between a sign and the front, rear or side property line, as measured from that
part of the sign, including its extremities and supports, nearest to any point on any imaginary vertical plane
projecting vertically from the front, rear or side property line.
Side wall. A wall with no main entrances or store fronts, and which does not face the front of the lot.
Sight visibility triangle/area. The areas of property on both sides of the intersection of an alley or driveway with
a public street, or the intersection of two public rights-of-way, where visibility must be maintained. The
triangular visibility area is defined as being formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public street rights-of
way with two (2) sides of each triangle being a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') in length from the point of the
intersection (as measured along the property line, not the curbline), and the third side being a line connecting the
ends of the other two (2) sides.
Sign (general). A name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device,
display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same,
affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building, window, door, outdoor structure or vehicle, or erected or
maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, product, service, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business. Any interior illuminated or moving sign or light which is visible from the
exterior may be determined as being erected on the exterior of the building or structure. Signs may not have sign
panels in three or more different directions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/720
Sign area. The area (i.e., square footage) of a sign made up of letters, words or symbols within a frame shall be
determined from the outside edge of the frame itself. The square footage of a sign composed of only letters,
words or symbols shall be determined from imaginary straight lines drawn around the entire copy or grouping of
such letters, words or symbols. Double-faced signs shall be calculated as the area of one side only. Threedimensional
or multi-faceted signs shall be calculated as the largest area visible from any single direction at any
point in time. When a sign is irregularly-shaped, the area shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of
the sign and all of its projections by no more than six (6) nonoverlapping triangles and/or rectangles. The sum of
all combined areas shall be no greater than the allowable area for that type of sign.
Sign height. The vertical distance of a sign from the average grade of the property where the sign will be located
(as measured on a straight line projected between the main building, through the center of the sign, and to the
nearest property line) to the highest point of the sign or its structure, whichever is highest.
Structural trim. Any retainer, molding, batten, capping, nailing strip, latticing, platform or other similar trim
component which is attached to the sign or its structure, and which is necessary for support and is considered
part of the sign support or framework.
Temporary sign. Any type of sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure,
and that is intended to be displayed for a short period of time only (i.e., changeable) and that must be removed
within a specified period of time unless otherwise provided in this article. Includes the following examples:
banners, any type of portable sign, real estate signs, garage sale signs, development/construction signs, model
home signs, political signs, promotional flags/pennants, and other similar signs.
Unified lot sign. Unified lot sign must meet all requirements of a monument sign, and may be placed on a
premises consisting of two (2) or more contiguous lots where each lot owner has entered into a binding
agreement through an easement to treat their separate lots as one (1) lot for the limited purpose of signage. The
agreement shall contain a legal description of the properties subject to the agreement; the agreement is a
covenant running with the land to be filed and made a part of the Deed Records of Dallas or Kaufman County,
Texas; and that the agreement cannot be amended or terminated without the consent of city.
Vehicle. For the purpose of this article, the term “vehicle” shall mean any automobile, truck, camper, tractor, van,
trailer or any other device capable of being transported, and shall be considered a “vehicle” in both moving and
stationary modes, irrespective of its state or repair or its physical condition.
Vertical clearance bar. A structure, usually comprised of two posts with a horizontal fixed or free-swinging
cross-bar, that is installed to limit the height of vehicles at driveway openings, in drive-through lanes, under
canopies and overhangs, and in other areas where vehicles may not go if they exceed the designated height;
vertical clearance bars shall not bear any type of advertising signage or message or they shall be considered a
“pylon sign” and regulated as such.
(1) Minimum height: Fourteen feet (14') unless warning of a low clearance of an overhead
structure.
(2) Maximum size/area: Not applicable.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential, multifamily, townhome and manufactured housing zoning
districts, and allowed for any nonresidential use (such as a church, school, day care center, etc.) that
is located in an agricultural, single-family or two-family zoning district.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Where needed; not within front yard setback unless approved as a special
exception during site plan review and approval by the planning and zoning commission.
(5) Must display the clearance height on the sign in six (6") inch numbers.
(6) Maximum number: No limit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/720
(7) Duration: No limit.
(8) Permit is required.
Wall sign. A sign attached to, affixed upon, or painted upon a wall surface with the sign facing parallel to and
projecting not more than six (6) inches out from the wall surface. A sign attached to or painted upon an awning
or a canopy and visible to the exterior shall be considered in the allowable calculations for wall signs. Luminous
gaseous tubing attached directly to a wall surface shall be considered a “wall sign” when forming a border for
the subject matter, when directing attention to the subject matter, or when forming letters, logos, symbols or
pictorial designs of any kind.
(1) Maximum height: Height of wall surface (cannot extend above top of wall or roofline).
(2) Maximum size/area: Ten (10) percent of wall surface in aggregate (i.e., all wall signs
combined), exclusive of areas of the wall surface that are comprised of doors, windows, breezeways,
etc. or two hundred fifty (250) square feet, whichever is smaller.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts and similarly zoned property in planned
developments.
(4) Placement/setbacks: On the vertical face only of a building; must be comprised of individual
letters/characters; must be attractively designed in colors that are not visually intrusive, and must be
professionally designed, constructed and applied by an experienced sign contractor.
(5) Maximum number: Limited by allowable area.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Window sign. A sign, any portion of which is painted or affixed to the exterior (or interior) surface of a window
and visible from outside of the building (e.g., it is visible from the street or parking lot). The covering of a
window for privacy, shading, or security reasons shall not be regulated provided there is no text or other
advertising on it.
(1) Maximum height: Height of window surface.
(2) Maximum size/area: Forty percent (40%) of total window surface area for all building facades
that are visible from a public street, but shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the surface area of any
individual window on any building facade.
(3) Allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts.
(4) Placement/setbacks: Affixed to window surface and must be professionally designed,
constructed and applied by an experienced window sign painter/contractor. A window sign that only
displays information such as “open,” “closed,” hours of operation, credit cards accepted and similar
information may be comprised of gaseous tubing, LED or other means of internal illumination, and
of any color.
(5) Maximum number: Limited by allowable area.
(6) Duration: No limit.
(7) Permit is required.
Sec. 21.09.005 Removal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/720
(a) Obsolete signs. Any sign which the building official determines no longer serves a bona fide use
conforming to this article, shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the land,
buildings or structure upon which such sign is located within fifteen (15) days after written notification to do so
from the building official. Painted wall signs shall be immediately painted over with a color that resembles or
matches the wall. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the building official is hereby authorized to cause the
removal of such sign, and any expense incurred thereto shall be paid by the owner of the land, building or
structure to which such sign is attached or upon which it is erected.
(b) Illegal signs. Any illegal sign is subject to removal, upon notice per subsection (d) of this section (or
immediately in the case of a hazardous sign, per subsection (c) of this section).
(c) Unsafe signs. If the building official shall determine that any sign is unsafe or unsecure, or is a menace to
the public, he shall give written notice to the person or persons responsible for such sign. If the sign permit
holder, owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises and/or the sign fails to remove or repair
the sign within (15) days after such notice, such sign may be removed by the building official at the expense of
the permit holder, sign owner, or owner of the property upon which the sign is located. The building official may
cause any sign which is deemed to be an immediate hazard to persons to be removed summarily and without
notice.
(d) Notice to remove sign or to correct noncompliance.
(1) Upon a determination that a sign must be removed, or that a sign is not in compliance with one
or more provisions of this article, the building official shall give written notice to the sign owner (or
the owner of the premises upon which the sign is located, as applicable) to remove such sign, or to
bring such sign into compliance, within fifteen (15) days after notice is served. Notice shall be served
by sending it via certified mail to the sign owner (or property owner), or by publication at least two
(2) times in the official newspaper of the city if the owner cannot be served personally or if the
owner's address is unknown. The sign owner (or property owner) shall then remove the sign (or
correct any noncompliance, as applicable) within the fifteen-day period, and failure to do so shall
cause the sign to be deemed a nuisance and the owner shall be subject to penalties for violation of
this article.
(2) The notice period, and removal/compliance period, for all temporary and portable signs that are
not in compliance with this article shall be seventy-two (72) hours rather than fifteen (15) days.
(e) Removal expenses. Upon failure of the sign permit holder, owner, agent or person responsible for a sign to
remove it following a fifteen (15) day notice to do so, the building official is hereby authorized to enter the
property upon which such sign is located, and to cause the removal of such sign. The owner of the land, building
or structure to which such sign is attached and upon which it is erected and/or the owner/permit holder of such
sign are jointly and severally liable for any expense incurred in removal of the sign.
Sec. 21.09.006 Maintenance
(a) All signs and sign support structures, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be
kept in good repair and in a proper state of appearance and preservation.
(b) No sign will be allowed to be kept in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Any sign which the building
official determines is in an unacceptable deteriorated condition shall be removed by the owner, agent or person
having the beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon which such sign is located within fifteen (15)
days after written notification to do so from the building official. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the
building official is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign, and any expense incurred thereto shall
be paid by the owner of the land, building or structure to which such sign is attached or upon which it is erected.
(c) All signs within the fire limits or zones of the city shall be of noncombustible materials or approved
combustible materials, as outlined in the building code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/720
(d) Every sign erected after February 21, 1974, shall have applied and maintained, in a legible format, in a
conspicuous place thereon, and in letters not less than one inch (1") in height, all of the following information
(or a copy of the sign permit shall be displayed, and accessible for inspection at all times, inside the business
establishment for signs that cannot have the information placed directly on them):
(1) Date of erection of the sign;
(2) The sign permit number;
(3) Voltages and electrical information (if electrical); and
(4) The name, address, phone number and license number (if applicable, for certain types of signs)
of the erector of the sign.
Sec. 21.09.007 Signs in a planned development district
In a PD district, the sign standards shall be as specified in the planned development's ordinance. It shall be part
of the planned development to identify the type and number of signs. They shall comply with the regulations in
the sign ordinance, unless a variance has been granted.
Sec. 21.09.008 Sign heights and setbacks
(a) Unless otherwise stipulated in section 21.09.004 for the specific sign type or in the amending ordinance
establishing a PD zoning district, no sign shall be constructed to exceed the maximum building height permitted
except within shopping centers or similar commercial/office centers. Within local retail, commercial or industrial
districts located adjacent to a highway, a pylon or major identification sign shall not to exceed fifty feet (50') in
height may be erected when set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the sign. All such
high-rise signs shall comply with the most recent revision of the latest adopted building code and with other
applicable codes/ordinances of the city which pertain to design and construction. All signs twenty-five (25) feet
in height and greater shall be set back a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet, plus one (1) foot for each
foot the sign exceeds 25 feet, from all property lines.
(b) Unless otherwise specified, the minimum distance between signs means the horizontal distance as
measured from all points on the sign, as if each sign touched the ground.
Sec. 21.09.009 Interference with traffic
No sign shall be located or constructed as to interfere with or confuse the flow or control of traffic on the public
streets, and no sign shall use a rotating beacon, beam or flashing illumination resembling an emergency signal. It
shall be unlawful to erect, relocate or maintain any sign in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision at
any location whereby, by reason of position, size, movement, shape, color, flashing, manner or intensity of
illumination, such sign may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Further, it shall be unlawful to erect or
maintain any sign in such a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign shall make use of the words, “stop,” “go,” “look,” “slow,”
“danger,” or any other similar word, phrase, symbol or character or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or
other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to cause confusion to or otherwise interfere with, vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
Sec. 21.09.010 Signs projecting into rights-of-way
No sign shall be erected so as to project into the public right-of-way of any street or alley. Projecting signs shall
have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any sidewalk/pedestrian travel surface, and fourteen (14) feet
above any vehicular parking or circulation surface.
Sec. 21.09.011 Number of sign face panels/surfaces
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/720
No sign structure shall contain more than two (2) sign face panels facing (i.e., exposed; readable) in the same
direction.
Sec. 21.09.012 Government flags
Flags, emblems and insignia of the United States and governmental agencies and offices, emblems and insignia
of any state or local governmental body shall be exempt from this article. Only one (1) of each type shall be
permitted per tract/lot or business. Any flag over sixty (60) square feet shall be classified as a general business
sign.
Sec. 21.09.013 Wind pressure and dead load requirements
All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a 135-mile-per-hour lateral wind load and to withstand
a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area and the most recent revision of the
latest adopted building code for dead loads. Plans may, at the building official's discretion, require a statelicensed
professional structural engineer's seal.
Sec. 21.09.014 Illegal signs
Owners with/of illegal (either conforming or nonconforming) signs must obtain a permit from the building
department of the city prior to any expansion of an existing sign.
Sec. 21.09.015 Nonconforming signs
A sign which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in this article and which existed lawfully on the
date of adoption (i.e., on the effective date) of this Section, or amendment hereto, shall be deemed a
nonconforming sign. A nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain as is in the same location wherein it
existed on the effective date of this article unless/until one or more of the conditions stated in subsection (1)
below exists/occurs.
(1) The right to continue all nonconforming signs shall cease and such sign shall be removed
within fifteen (15) days whenever:
(A) A change of property ownership and/or business occupancy occurs;
(B) A sign is altered, moved or relocated without a permit pursuant to the provisions of this
article;
(C) A sign is damaged, defaced or destroyed and the cost to repair it exceeds sixty percent
(60%) of the replacement/repair cost of the sign on the date of damage (if an existing
nonconforming sign is already in a dilapidated/deteriorated condition or if it represents a public
safety hazard as of the effective date of this Article, then it must either be repaired/refinished to
a reasonable state of repair or removed at the owner's expense);
(D) A sign's angle to the ground decreases by fifteen (15) degrees or more; no sign,
regardless of its original installation angle, shall be allowed to exist at less than a forty-five (45)
degree angle to the ground for public safety reasons; or
(E) A property ownership and/or business occupancy change occurs, and an off-premises or
on-premises wall sign is on the property.
(2) Any sign designated by official action of the city as having special historic or architectural
significance is exempt from the provisions of this article.
(3) A nonconforming sign situated on a property acquisition initiated by the city may be
temporarily relocated on-site provided the sign is later removed or rebuilt to conform to this section
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/720
(and any other applicable codes/ordinances) within twenty-four (24) months following relocation of
the sign. Relocation is limited to the same physical sign with no increase in height, area or change in
other physical attributes. For the purposes of this provision, “a property acquisition initiated by the
city” does not include right-of-way dedicated in the subdivision platting process.
(4) Illegal nonconforming signs:
(A) Owners with/of illegal nonconforming signs which require a permit and which have been
in place less than (3) months prior to notification of violation must apply for a permit and must
upgrade the sign to conforming within thirty (30) days of original notification. If a permit is not
granted, then the sign must be removed within sixty (60) days of original notification.
(B) Owners with/of illegal nonconforming signs which require a permit and which have been
in place for longer than three (3) months prior to notification of violation must apply for a
permit and upgrade the sign to conforming within thirty (30) days of original notification. If a
permit is not granted, then the sign must be removed within three (3) months of original
notification.
(C) In the case of painted wall signs, such signs shall be removed or painted over within
thirty (30) days of original notification of violation.
Sec. 21.09.016 Signs exempt from permitting
A permit shall not be required for the following signs provided, however, such signs shall otherwise comply
with all other applicable provisions of this article and with any other applicable city code/ordinance:
(1) Address signs;
(2) Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building cornerstones when cut or carved
into the masonry, surface or when made of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the
building or structure. These signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area;
(3) Nameplate or occupational signs;
(4) On-site directional and directory/informational signs behind the front building line;
(5) Flags (official);
(6) One (1) temporary wall sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, which advertises the
sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which such sign is located;
(7) Political sign in or upon a motor vehicle if such sign does not exceed six (6) square feet in area
and does not project from the front, side, rear or top surfaces of such vehicle. Said sign shall not be
illuminated;
(8) Protective/security signs;
(9) Traffic or other municipal signs, official signs, legal notices, danger and such emergency,
temporary or nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the city, or as may be placed in compliance
with the Uniform Manual of Traffic-Control Devices and with applicable city codes/ordinances;
(10) Temporary special occasion announcement signs on residential lots (e.g., “It's a Boy/Girl,”
etc.) for a maximum time limit of five (5) days;
(11) Seasonal decorations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/720
(12) Interior signs (i.e., fully within a building) that are not visible from the outside of the building;
(13) On-site municipal park signage (including scoreboards and other sports field signs);
(14) Unlighted and unanimated on-site signs at a public school or athletic facility operated by an
applicable school district or other public governmental entity;
(15) Street pole banners that are placed by nonprofit civic service organizations (such as the
Chamber of Commerce), or by another organization that the city supports (e.g., promotional banners
telling of special civic events, holidays, etc.);
(16) Religious emblems when installed in compliance with this article and with other applicable
codes/ordinances.
Sec. 21.09.017 Prohibited signs and activities
(a) Traffic obstruction. No sign shall be erected in a manner that would confuse or distract motorists, or that
would obstruct the view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal or device.
(b) Billboard signs. All billboards and signs advertising off-premises sale service or activity.
(c) Handbills, placards, etc. Miscellaneous advertising matter scattered or placed on or suspended from
buildings, poles, sidewalks, fences and the like:
(1) No person, firm, corporation, association or person shall paste, stick, stack, nail, affix, place or
otherwise suspend from any building, light pole, utility pole, structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway
or parking area, any goods, wares, merchandise or other advertising or display of such items other
than a sign, as defined, regulated and permitted by this article.
(2) No sign, cloth, paper, banner, flag, flyer, device or other similar advertising matter shall be
permitted to be attached to, be suspended from or be allowed to hang from any sign, building or
structure when the same shall create a public menace or danger.
(3) No advertising matter of any sort (including flyers, handbills, bulletins, coupons, menus, etc.)
may be affixed to parked cars or scattered on streets, sidewalks or parking areas.
(d) Inscriptions on streets, utility poles, etc. Painting, marking, etching or otherwise inscribing streets,
sidewalks, utility poles, and the like is prohibited. No person shall attach any sign, paper, other material, paint,
stencil or write any name, number (except address numbers) or otherwise mark, on any sidewalk, curb, gutter,
street, utility pole, public building, fence or structure except as otherwise allowed by ordinance.
(e) Certain illuminated and animated signs.
(1) No sign shall be illuminated to such an intensity or in such a manner as to cause a glare of
brightness to a degree that constitutes a hazard or nuisance to traffic or to adjacent properties.
(2) No lighted sign shall be erected within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of a residential district
unless the light source is completely shielded from view of the residential district with no light
overspill or glare onto the residential property.
(f) Roof signs. Roof signs of all types are prohibited.
(g) Unsecured banners or balloons. No person shall erect, maintain or permit the erection of any type of
banner, balloon, inflatable or other similar inflatable/floating device anchored to the ground or to any other
structure within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/720
(h) Vehicle signs.
(1) No signs attached to a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure, where the primary use of such
structure is for sign purposes, will be permitted. This provision does not restrict the identification
signing on vehicles used for delivery, service, interstate commerce, or any bona fide transportation
activity.
(2) Signs attached to or upon any vehicle shall be prohibited where any such vehicle is allowed to
remain parked in the same location, or in the same vicinity, at frequent or extended periods of time
where the intent is apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for purposes of advertising an
establishment, service or product. Vehicles parked at the location of the business or activity or
operating under a city franchise shall be excluded from this provision. Catering vehicles for that
restaurant are allowed to be parked on site.
(i) Location to be outside of easements and visibility areas; clearance from utility lines. All signs allowed by
this article shall be placed completely outside of any public easement, outside of any required or necessary
visibility area, and shall maintain a vertical and horizontal clearance of at least ten feet (10') from any overhead
or underground power line, utility pole, telephone wire or cable, electrical streetlight standard or other above- or
below-ground utility equipment or structure, or as required by the city electrical code (whichever is more
stringent), except that such clearance is not required from the electrical feeder line to the sign itself, or to feeder
electrical or telephone wires or cables that serve the building(s) on the same premises where the sign is to be
located.
(j) Blocking fire lane, fire hydrant, door, window or fire escape. No sign shall be erected, installed, located or
maintained in a manner that blocks any fire lane, fire hydrant or other fire hose connection, or any building
entrance or door, window or fire escape (except official signs).
(k) Blocking view of preexisting sign. No permanent, temporary, portable or other type of sign shall be
erected, installed, located or maintained in a manner that blocks or hides the viewing of another preexisting sign
as viewed from adjacent roadways in a normal line of sight of a motorist on the roadway (i.e., a sign may have to
be a smaller size and/or shorter height in order to not block the view of a preexisting sign).
(l) Signs advertising alcoholic beverages. Signs that advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages by use of the
terms “beer” or “wine” or any combination thereof shall be in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission regulations.
(m) Signs not specifically permitted are prohibited. Any type of sign not specifically addressed in this article
shall be prohibited.
(Ordinance 27-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
Secs. 21.09.018–21.09.060 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 21.09.061 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, place, replace, enlarge, repair or relocate any sign
regulated by this article within the city or its ETJ (as applicable by law) without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the building official, except as may be herein provided. All sign construction shall conform to the city's
adopted building code, electrical code, zoning ordinance, and any other applicable codes and ordinances.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(a), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.062 Permit for multiple signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/720
A single sign permit may be issued for more than one sign, provided that all signs to be covered by the permit
are properly and accurately reported and depicted on, or with, the sign permit application that is submitted for
review and approval by the city. A sign permit shall, however, apply to only one applicant and to one physical
location (i.e., cannot apply to more than one entity or physical location or address). (Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-
3(b), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.063 Application
All applications for sign permits shall include all of the following information and materials:
(1) A written application on a form provided by the city, which shall include the following
information:
(A) Name and notarized signature and complete address, telephone number, fax number and
e-mail address of the applicant (i.e., the person or entity who will be responsible for erecting,
constructing, placing, replacing, enlarging, repairing or relocating the sign);
(B) The full legal name, address, phone number, e-mail address, etc. of the business entity for
whom the sign advertises;
(C) The street address and legal description of the site/property where the proposed sign will
be placed, together with the complete name, address, phone number, e-mail address, etc., of the
owner of the site/property; and
(D) The current zoning of the site/property where the proposed sign will be placed (including
the adopting ordinance number if the property is zoned as a planned development), and the
current zoning of all adjacent property(s) within 200 feet of the subject site/property;
(2) A drawing to scale of each proposed sign and its supporting structure (including accurate size,
dimensions, colors, design, type copy, lettering size/dimensions, lighting, electrical and structural
specifications, and other details as may be required by the building official);
(3) A drawing to scale clearly showing the proposed placement of the sign, including the locations
of all existing buildings, property lines, building setback lines, and all other existing signs on the
premises, showing accurate distances between the proposed sign and any other existing sign within
200 feet (including signs on adjacent property);
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(c), adopted 4/5/07)
(4) A drawing to scale of the site plan (for all signs), and the exterior building facades (for any
wall-attached, building-attached or window sign), and the interior wall elevations (for any interior
illuminated visible sign) clearly showing to scale the proposed location of the sign (if site plan
approval is required for a development or building, the proposed location for all proposed
freestanding signs shall be clearly shown for reference on the site plan drawing, but site plan
approval by the city as may be required in the zoning ordinance shall not be construed as approval for
any type of sign - all signs must be approved and permitted by the building official in accordance
with this article); (Ordinance 03-10 adopted 4/15/10)
(5) Plans, details and specifications for any electrical wiring needed for the sign, as determined by
the building official, which demonstrates compliance with the city electrical code (the building
official may require a licensed electrician's seal, if deemed necessary to ensure compliance and safety
of the installation);
(6) Plans, details and specifications for any sign that is required by this article, or by the city
building official, to be designed and sealed by a licensed professional structural engineer (if
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/720
applicable);
(7) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the sign and its structure are designed for
dead load and wind loads, as required by this article and as may be required by the city building
official (if applicable);
(8) Copy of the state permit for any highway sign (if applicable);
(9) Information on the location of any overhead or underground utilities in the vicinity of the sign's
proposed location, and the acknowledgement of the applicable entity (such as the city or county) or
utility provider concerning vertical and horizontal clearance requirements, and the presence of any
utility or drainage easements near the proposed sign's location;
(10) Any other information or documentation that the building official may require, including
certification by a licensed professional engineer and/or electrician, if deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with this article and to ensure protection of public safety and welfare; and
(11) The appropriate sign permit fee (and investigation fee, if applicable), per section 21.09.071. If
a sign permit application is withdrawn during the review period or denied, the sign permit fee shall
be nonrefundable.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(c), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.064 Issuance or denial; appeals
The review and approval process for sign permit applications shall be as follows:
(1) Within fourteen (14) calendar days after determining that the application for a sign permit is
complete, the building official shall examine all materials submitted with the application. Also within
this time frame, he/she shall either approve the application or deny the application if it is not in
compliance with these regulations, unless the application is submitted in conjunction with an
application for a building permit, in which case the building official must render his/her decision no
later than the date of final action on such building permit application.
(2) If a sign permit application is denied, the building official shall notify the applicant of such
denial, and shall cite which section(s) of these regulations are not in compliance. The applicant shall
then be given an opportunity to correct such deficiencies and resubmit the sign permit application for
re-review provided that such resubmission occurs within seven (7) calendar days following notice of
denial. Failure to resubmit the corrected sign permit application (or an appeal) within this time frame
shall be deemed acceptance by the applicant of the building official's decision, and any subsequent
resubmission of a sign permit application shall be deemed an entirely new application and shall be
accompanied by a new signed application form and the required drawings, specifications, fees, etc.
(3) The applicant may appeal the denial of a sign permit application to the city council, provided
that such appeal is submitted in writing to the city secretary within seven (7) calendar days following
notice of denial. The city council shall consider such appeal at a regular meeting within forty-five
(45) calendar days after the appeal is filed with the city secretary, and shall render a decision on the
appeal within that time frame. The city council shall determine whether the decision of the building
official shall be sustained, reversed or modified. The city council's decision on an appeal shall be
final.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(d), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.065 Ineligibility to receive permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/720
(a) The building official shall not issue a sign permit to any person or entity who has previously failed or
refused to pay any fees or costs assessed against him/her under the provisions of this article until all such fees
are paid.
(b) The building official shall not issue a permit for any type of sign to any entity or business that does not
have a valid certificate of occupancy, or that has not submitted a valid and complete application for a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(e), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.066 Expiration
(a) Sign permits are valid for a period of up to one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days after issuance,
except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The permit shall expire if work on the sign has not
commenced within sixty (60) days after issuance of the permit, or if the sign is not completely installed within
one hundred and twenty (120) days after work is commenced. If the sign authorized by a permit issued under
this article has not been delivered and installed on the site within this time period, the permit shall expire and
shall be deemed null and void unless a time extension is granted by the building official. A request for such a
time extension must be submitted to the building official in writing prior to expiration of the sign permit. The
building official shall have the authority, at his/her discretion and upon reviewing the circumstances involved, to
approve or deny a time extension of up to sixty (60) calendar days if he/she determines it is appropriate to do so,
and if such time extension will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to any other nearby
property or owner.
(b) Sign permits for all types of temporary and portable signs automatically expire on the last day of
December in any given calendar year, and they must be renewed on or after January 1st of each year by
submitting a new application and paying a new permit fee. If a temporary or portable sign is legally being
displayed on the last day of December and its approved time frame has not been completed, its permit will
expire on the last day it was authorized to be displayed pursuant to its city-issued permit, and thereafter the
permit will have to be renewed for the new calendar year.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(f), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.067 Suspension or revocation
The building official may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article whenever
he/she determines that the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or false information supplied, or
whenever such permit was issued in violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of
the city or the laws of this state or of the federal government. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective
immediately when communicated in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued, to the owner or
benefactor of the sign, or to the owner of the premises upon which the sign is located. Any sign installed under a
revoked permit shall be removed by the permit holder, sign owner or property owner within fifteen (15) calendar
days following written notice of the revocation. (Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(g), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.068 Transfer
Sign permits are not transferable from one owner to another. (Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(h), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.069 Commencing work without permit; special investigation fee
(a) Whenever any work on a sign for which a permit is required by this article has commenced by any person
or entity without first applying for a sign permit and receiving a sign permit from the city, a special investigation
by the city shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work, and any such premature and unauthorized
work on a sign shall nullify the time frames within which the city must make decisions on sign permit
applications cited in all subsections of section 21.09.064.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/720
(b) A special investigation into premature and unauthorized work on a sign shall impose an investigation fee
that is double, and in addition to, the sign permit fee (see section 21.09.071). A valid sign permit shall be
obtained, and the investigation fee as well as the regular sign permit fee shall both be paid, before any further
work is performed on the sign or the sign owner and/or erector shall be in violation of this article and subject to
penalties.
(c) A special investigation into premature and unauthorized work on a sign, and its corresponding
investigation fee, does not excuse full compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(i), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.070 Electrical permit
Prior to issuance of a sign permit for a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used, an
electrical permit must be applied for and obtained according to the city's electrical permitting procedures and
according to the city's fee schedule. (Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(j), adopted 4/5/07)
Sec. 21.09.071 Fee
For each sign that requires a permit, the fee established by resolution of the city council shall be assessed.
(Ordinance 04-07, sec. 17-3(k), adopted 4/5/07)
ARTICLE 21.10 ADDRESS NUMBERING
Sec. 21.10.001 Front and rear numbering of buildings; size of the official number
The owner or occupant of each building within the city limits shall place and maintain an official building
number of at least four (4) inches in height, composed of a durable material and a color which provides a
contrast to the building's background, in a conspicuous place on the front of the building, on a yard ornament,
outdoor mail box, or driveway entrance if the building is located over one hundred fifty (150) feet from the
street or is not visible from the street. Houses with rear entry shall maintain numbers visible from the alley.
Numbers should be in such a manner as to be plainly visible and legible from the public street. Every building
complex composed of multiple structures within the city must have an official number assigned to each building.
Each unit within a building complex must also be assigned an official number. If there is sufficient street
frontage, each unit or building may be assigned an official street address number. The official number must be
prominently posted on the building so that it is visible, where possible, from the nearest vehicular access. The
official number for each unit within a building complex must be conspicuously posted on the unit. This official
numbering requirement does not apply to accessory buildings as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance
of the city.
Sec. 21.10.002 Directional signs within building complexes
In the event a unit within a building complex is situated in such a way that it is not visible to vehicular access,
then the owner of the business complex shall post and maintain directional signs along the nearest vehicular
access indicating the location of the building by building number and unit numbers. A building complex
composed of multiple structures within the city which contains internal vehicular accesses and each office
building number is not visible from the public street, then the owner of the building complex shall post
directional signs at each entrance to the building complex and at each intersection of vehicular access, other than
public streets, within the building complex. The directional signs must indicate the direction to the buildings and
units by number, must be visible from the vehicular access, and must be painted with a color which is in contrast
to the background. For purposes of this section, “entrance” to a building complex is a point at which vehicular
access to the building complex, other than a public street, intersects with a public street.
Sec. 21.10.003 Responsibility for posting building number; compliance with thirty days
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/720
(a) The address numbering of buildings shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or occupant of each
building within the city limits.
(b) Buildings must be numbered in compliance with this section and in accordance with the plan delineating
and prescribing the method of numbering buildings which is on file in the office of the building official. The
building official shall designate the official number which is to be placed on each building.
(c) An official building number must be placed within ten (10) days after a new building is completed.
(d) The requirements for the posting of an official building number on each building shall be fully complied
with on or about thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section. After such date, any failure of any such
owner or occupant of a building within the city limits to post and display an official-building number so as to be
plainly visible and legible from the public street, if any, at all times shall constitute violation of this section and
be subject to the general penalty provided in this code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 21.11.001 Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by code
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting
the validity of any ordinance:
(1) Dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or
vacating any street or other public way in the city;
(2) Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state;
(3) Establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; or
(4) Relating in any manner to street improvements and assessments therefor;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein.
(1977 Code, sec. 19-1)
Secs. 21.11.002–21.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations or Embankments in Street, Alley or Easement*
Sec. 21.11.031 Permit required; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or embankment in any street, avenue, alley or
public easement in the city, other than for the purpose of erecting utility poles, towers and fixtures, without first
applying for and obtaining a written permit from the building official.
(b) Public utility companies may perform emergency work during the nighttime or at times during which the
city hall is closed, without the permit required by this section, but it will be necessary for any such public utility
company to obtain the permit the next day following such work, or the next day the city hall is open for
business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/720
(1977 Code, sec. 19-2)
Sec. 21.11.032 Restoration of surface
When any part of any street, avenue, alley or public easement shall be excavated, torn, dug or taken up for any
purpose, or when an embankment is placed thereon, the person doing the same shall, immediately upon the
completion of such work, and within ten (10) days after the completion thereof, repair or replace such street,
avenue, alley or public easement to the same condition in which it existed prior to any such excavation or work,
and such replacement or repair shall be done in a skillful and permanent manner to the satisfaction of the
building official and in accordance with the codes, specifications and ordinances of the city. (1977 Code, secs.
19-3)
Sec. 21.11.033 Guardrails, signal lights and other protective devices
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation of whatsoever kind in the city in, along or near any
street, sidewalk, alley or highway without placing proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or
around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation and to protect all persons using reasonable care
from accident on account of the same. (1977 Code, secs. 19-4)
Secs. 21.11.034–21.11.070 Reserved
Division 3. Work Requiring Closing or Blocking of Streets, Sidewalks or Alleys
Sec. 21.11.071 Definitions
Contractor. Any person or group of persons entering into an agreement with the city.
Detour. An alternate route in which vehicular traffic is directed around a street which is closed.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action.
Manual. The Manual on Uniform Barricading Standards.
Permit. A written letter of approval from the city manager or his appointed representative.
Public right-of-way. Any public street, highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk.
Responsible person. The city manager or any appointed representative.
Shall, should and may. The word “shall” is a mandatory condition, the word “should” is an advisory condition to
ensure safe operation conditions, and the word “may” is a permissive condition.
Streets and alleys. The term “street” shall mean a traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise
designated.
(1) Major thoroughfares or arterial streets. Principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across
the city which are intended to connect remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast
or heavy volume traffic, and shall include but not be limited to each street designated as a major
street on the major street plan.
(2) Collector streets. Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial
streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/720
(3) Minor streets. Those which are used primarily for access of abutting residential properties
which are intended to serve traffic within a limited residential district.
(4) Alleys. Minor traveled ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back
or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
(1977 Code, sec. 19-17)
Sec. 21.11.072 Traffic control and protective devices
(a) Any person who undertakes to perform any work upon, in, under, above or about any public street,
highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk, hereafter collectively called “public right-of-way,” which requires that the
street be partially or completely closed for construction and/or maintenance operations which work shall require
excavation within or occupancy of the whole or portion of the width of any such public right-of-way by
equipment, materials, debris or workmen, shall use barricades, signals, flags, flares, and all other traffic-control
and warning devices and procedures about the work area during the duration of the work within the public rightof-
way of the type and in the manner required by the city standards adopted herein. Such persons shall also be
required to obtain a permit from the city if the specifications stated in section 21.11.073(b)(1) through (3) are
applicable, with the exception of the state department of transportation conducting work on any state designated
system. In such cases no permit is required. This permit must be acquired before construction is begun. The
purpose of the permit is to ensure that ample consideration has been given to the effect of said construction work
on the flow of traffic.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to provide, erect, place and maintain all warning signs,
traffic-control devices and barricades required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or the
city manager. All such signs, devices and barricades should be in good condition, clean and legible and shall be
of the type required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. When additional regulatory signs
are deemed necessary by the city manager, such signing will be installed as directed by the city manager along
with such regulatory signs as are required to be provided by the city as required by the manual.
(1977 Code, sec. 19-16)
Sec. 21.11.073 Permit
(a) Application; issuance.
(1) Application. When a permit is required, the permit application shall, unless otherwise
authorized by the city manager for good cause shown, be filed with the city manager at least five (5)
days prior to the day the applicant seeks to first close or block any part of the roadway and shall
contain the following information:
(A) The name, telephone number, local address and principal place of business of the
applicant;
(B) The name and day and night telephone number of the engineer, foreman or other person
who will be in charge of the construction or repairs for which the application is requested;
(C) The times of the day and total number of calendar days the applicant seeks to block the
roadway;
(D) A statement signed by the applicant, or a person authorized to bind the applicant, that the
applicant will indemnify and forever hold the city harmless against each and every claim,
demand or cause of action that may be made or come against it by reason of or in any way
arising out of the closing or blocking of the roadway by the applicant under a permit from the
city, if such permit is granted;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/720
(E) A standard barricading layout showing placement of barricades, cones and informational
signs used on the project;
(F) An explanation as to the nature or type of work that is to be performed, along with its
location;
(G) Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager.
(2) Approval or disapproval.
(A) The city manager shall either approve or disapprove the application in five (5) business
days after it is submitted. The city manager may approve an application either as applied for or
subject to special requirements, as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section, which special
requirements shall be endorsed on the permit when issued and become a part thereof. If an
application is not approved, the city manager shall so notify the applicant, in writing, stating the
reasons for disapproval. An applicant may, if he so desires, undertake the revision of the
unapproved application and resubmit it to the city manager, who shall approve, approve subject
to special requirements, or disapprove the amended application within two (2) business days.
(B) The city manager may disapprove applications for permits under this division only for
the following reasons:
(i) The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic-control
procedures or the equipment therefor do not comply with the requirements of the manual;
(ii) The nature of the work to be performed or its location is such that the work may,
without imposing any undue hardship on the applicant, be performed without the
necessity of blocking or closing the roadway;
(iii) The work or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a city ordinance
or a state statute;
(iv) Failure to furnish all of the information required by this division, or, except for
good cause shown, to file the application within the time prescribed by this division;
(v) Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the application.
(3) Special requirements. The city manager may, at the time he approves an application, or any
time after a permit is issued, require:
(A) The use of specific location of additional barricades, signals, signs or other traffic-control
or safety devices or the pursuance of special traffic-control or safety procedures;
(B) That the work be performed only at certain hours during the day or night, or during
specified days of the week;
(C) That only a specified area or not more than a specified number of lanes shall be blocked
at the same time or at specified times of the day;
(D) That materials and equipment used in the work site and dirt removed from any
excavation be located other than in the vehicle traffic lanes of such roadway;
(E) That all equipment be moved from the traffic lanes and any excavation in the traffic lanes
be covered or filled with materials of sufficient strength and construction to permit vehicular
traffic to pass over such excavation during all or part of the peak traffic periods or at night.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/720
When such requirements are deemed necessary by the city manager in the interest of
public safety and to avoid traffic congestion, any such special requirements shall be
endorsed on the permit and shall be part thereof.
(4) Revocation. The city manager or his authorized representatives may revoke a permit issued
hereunder if any of the permit holder's barricading, signing, channelizing, warning or other trafficcontrol
procedures or the equipment at the work site do not comply with the requirements of the
manual, or with any special requirements imposed by the city manager. After notification of the
violation, the permit holder shall have such time, not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, to correct
same before the permit is revoked. In the event a permit issued under this division is revoked, it shall
be unlawful to continue to block the roadway, except to restore the site to its proper condition as
required herein.
(5) Restoration of work area upon revocation. In the event a permit is revoked, the permit holder
shall immediately commence operations to restore the work area within the roadway to its proper
condition, such work to be completed within twenty-four (24) hours. In addition, except as required
to restore the work area to its proper condition, the permit holder shall remove all equipment, men,
materials and debris from the roadway. In the event such restoration is not done, the city shall be
authorized, at its election, to take charge of the work and restore the premises to their proper
condition and shall be entitled to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual expenses
incurred by the city in restoring the premises, including, but not limited to, cost of labor, materials,
overhead, rental of any equipment used by the city in restoring the site and attorney's fees, and for
such purposes the city shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from the holder
of the permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the ordinances the city may have.
(b) Work requiring permit.
(1) Contractors.
(A) Any contractor undertaking any work, whether of his own or under contract for any other
person, and such work is within a city street and requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to
the extensive and/or complex nature of the work, will be subject to the provisions set forth in
this subsection (b)(1) and must file for a permit before beginning construction. Proof must also
be shown that he has obtained approval by other affected agencies of the city to actually
perform the work.
(B) A plan must be prepared by the contracting agency showing where work is to be
performed. The plan will include a standard barricading layout showing placement of
barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project. In most cases, layouts will be
similar to those shown in the latter part of the manual. Deviation from the manual will be
allowed only with approval of the city manager or his appointed representative.
(C) The plan as mentioned in subsection (B) above must be submitted a minimum of (5)
business days prior to actual beginning of the construction work. This time period will allow the
city manager the opportunity to survey the construction site in an attempt to uncover any traffic
problems which might develop as a result of the barricading.
(D) Each contractor or construction agency will provide with his barricading plan a listing of
all persons directly responsible for the safety on each project, to include an address or a
telephone listing at which said person can be reached at any hour of the day if a hazardous
condition develops.
(2) Contract work on city-prepared construction plans.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/720
(A) In the event the contractor undertakes work based on plans prepared by the designated
department, all detour and barricading requirements will be inserted as part of the construction
plans.
(B) In this situation, the contractor's acceptance of the construction project will serve as
indication that he understands the layout and is responsible subject to the penalties established
in this division.
(3) City forces and public utility companies.
(A) All city forces, as well as public utility companies, performing construction work within
a street which requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to the extensive and/or complex
nature of work will be subject to the same requirements established in subsection (b)(1) above.
Such work would include major street construction (street cuts, street widening, etc.) water and
sewer line laying or relocation or off-street construction which requires that a portion of the
adjacent roadway be barricaded.
(B) Construction work performed by city forces or utility companies, minor enough such that
a set of plans need not be drawn up, will not be subject to the same requirements established in
subsection (b)(1) above. Such work includes minor street construction (resurfacing, patching,
striping), minor utility work (usage of manholes such that a lane must be barricaded), etc. These
forces will be required, however, to comply with all other provisions set forth in the manual as
to the construction site barricade layout and signing. In addition, the city manager or his
authorized representative shall be contacted before said construction work is begun and be
informed of the location and nature of construction. This work shall not be performed during
the peak hour congestion periods of 7:00 through 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 through 6:00 p.m., unless
approved by the city manager.
(c) Emergency situations. The requirements as mentioned above are to be used for all planned construction
projects. In the event of an emergency type situation, notification of work to be done can be made by telephone
directly to the city manager or his appointed representative, thereby bypassing the requirements mentioned
above. Under these conditions the contractor or agency will still be required to follow the basic barricading
standards as outlined in the manual.
(1977 Code, sec. 19-18)
Secs. 21.11.074–21.11.100 Reserved
Division 4. Construction or Repair of Sidewalks
Sec. 21.11.101 Definitions
The term “sidewalk,” as used in this article, shall include curbs, combination curb and gutter, driveway
approaches and head-in parking; providing, in such case, that the article shall state the kind of curb, or curb and
gutter, and sidewalk to be constructed, reconstructed, or repaired, or may merely direct the construction,
reconstruction or repair of a curb or curb and gutter or sidewalk alone.
Sec. 21.11.102 Council to determine nature and extent of improvements
The city council shall, from time to time, fix and determine the nature and extent of sidewalk improvements and
the kind of material and construction in such improvement.
Sec. 21.11.103 Construction required in new development
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/720
Sidewalks shall be constructed in conjunction with all new streets and in conjunction with all development that
abuts an existing street or portion thereof that does not have an existing sidewalk abutting the development.
Sec. 21.11.104 Permit
(a) No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any sidewalk on any public property
within the city limits, without first obtaining a permit to do so.
(b) No such permit shall be granted unless all requirements contained in this article are met and in full effect
at the time of request for such permit and the doing of the work. No person other than the holder of the permit
shall perform the work authorized under the permit.
Sec. 21.11.105 Permit fee
The fee for a sidewalk permit under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council.
Sec. 21.11.106 Bond required
(a) No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk in the city without executing and delivering
to the city a bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) payable to the city with two (2) or more good
and sufficient sureties thereon, one of who shall be an approved surety company, unless the cost of the
construction is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, in which no bond will be required.
(b) Such bond shall be conditioned that all work done in the construction, reconstruction or repair of any
sidewalk shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and that such person shall faithfully and strictly
comply with the specifications and with the terms of this code and all other applicable ordinances, resolution and
regulations that may be passed by the city council governing and relating to the construction, reconstruction or
repair of sidewalks, and that the city shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and harmless from any and all
costs, expenses or damages, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done to any person or property in
the prosecution of such work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such work. Such
bond shall be conditioned further that the principal shall, without additional cost to the person for whom the
work was done, maintain all sidewalks so constructed, reconstructed or repaired by the principal for a period of
two (2) years from the date of such construction, reconstruction or repair to the satisfaction of the city, and shall
reconstruct or repair such sidewalk to the satisfaction of the city at any time two (2) years after the construction,
reconstruction or repair of such sidewalk and after ten (10) days notice from the city to construct or repair the
same, and that the opinion of the city as to the necessity of such reconstruction or repair shall be binding on the
parties thereto.
(c) Such bond shall, for the purposes mentioned above, be in force for two (2) years after any sidewalk is
constructed, reconstructed or repaired and one recovery shall not exhaust the bond, but such bond shall be a
continuing obligation against the sureties thereon until the entire amount therein provided for shall have been
exhausted. In case the bond shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be obtained, arising out of
the violation of any condition of the same, the city may require, upon notice of such fact, an additional bond to
be given in accordance with this section in an amount sufficient, when added to the non-exhausted amount of the
original bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(d) The city may, for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of any
defective construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk by an person, maintain suit on such bond in any
court having jurisdiction thereof, or suit may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason
of the failure of any person who shall construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk in the city to observe the
conditions of such bond.
Sec. 21.11.107 Specifications
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/720
Sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance and
technical construction standards and specifications (TCSS).
Sec. 21.11.108 Supervision and approval of work
All work done in the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or replacement of sidewalks shall
be done under the supervision and subject to the direction and approval of the city, whose decision shall be final.
Sec. 21.11.109 Approval of materials
Upon request of the city, no materials of any kind shall be used in the construction, alteration or repair of any
sidewalks until they have been examined and approved, and the person performing such work shall furnish such
samples as may be required for making tests and examinations in sufficient time prior to the use of same.
Sec. 21.11.110 Contractors to have necessary labor and equipment
Contractors performing work authorized by a permit under this article shall supply themselves with the
necessary labor, tools and equipment to diligently perform all work in a good and workmanlike manner.
Sec. 21.11.111 Traffic-control and warning devices required for protection of traffic
During construction for which a permit is required by this article, the holder of the permit shall see that the
necessary traffic-control and warning devices are placed so that pedestrian or vehicle traffic shall not be
endangered. All traffic-control and warning devices shall conform to the provision of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices.
Sec. 21.11.112 Protection and resetting of property corners
Adjacent property corners shall be identified and marked prior to the commencement of work. Any property
corners disturbed by construction shall be reset by a registered professional land surveyor licensed in the state.
Sec. 21.11.113 Duty to construct curb when driveway abandoned
Whenever any curb is removed or when no curb has been constructed, in order to provide a driveway and the use
of such driveway is at any time abandoned and not used for ingress and egress to the abutting property, it shall
be the duty of the property owner of such abutting property to restore or construct the proper and necessary curb
according to the standard plans and specifications of the city.
Sec. 21.11.114 Removal of debris upon completion of work
Immediately upon completion of work authorized by a permit under this article, the permit holder shall remove
all unused materials, dirt and debris, and shall see that the street and sidewalk are clean and usable by the public.
Sec. 21.11.115 Duty to keep sidewalks in safe condition
It shall be the duty of any abutting property owner to keep the sidewalk, parkway, curb and driveway abutting
such property in a good and safe condition, free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character.
By way of example and not of limitation, a sidewalk has the potential to be hazardous if it contains a separation
of line in excess of two (2) inches and grade difference in excess of two (2) inches between adjacent sections of
sidewalk or if it contains surface deterioration to such an extent that it may not be safely negotiated.
Sec. 21.11.116 Liability for damages resulting from defective sidewalks
The abutting property owner or person making a special use of a sidewalk or enjoying the use of any property
abutting on a sidewalk or curb that has become defective or hazardous and has resulted in causing damage or
injury as a result of such defective or hazardous condition shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/720
damage sustained as a result of such defective or hazardous condition. The city shall not be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of inspection of any sidewalk or providing notice as authorized in this article.
Sec. 21.11.117 Notice to reconstruct or repair
Any sidewalk, parkway, driveway approach or curb which has become defective or hazardous is hereby declared
a nuisance and it shall be the duty of the owner of property abutting such sidewalk, parkway, curb or driveway to
reconstruct or repair such sidewalk, parkway, curb or driveway in accordance with the standard specifications of
the city and such expense shall be borne by the abutting property owner. The failure of any owner or the agent of
any owner to reconstruct or repair any such sidewalk, parkway, curb or driveway within thirty (30) days from
receipt of a notice to repair from the city shall constitute an offense.
Sec. 21.11.118 Repair by city; costs to be a lien against abutting property and owner personally liable
for costs
(a) If any person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of section 21.11.117 within the time limits
specified therein, the city may in its discretion, but assumes no duty to, enter upon such property and do or cause
to be done the work necessary to obtain compliance with this article. The expense so incurred by city in
correcting the condition shall be a personal obligation of the owner of the abutting property. In the event the
owner fails or refuses to pay such expense within thirty (30) days after the work was done, the city shall file with
the clerk of the county where the property is located a statement of the expense incurred in correcting the
condition of the property. When such statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on such property,
second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to secure the payment of the amount so expended.
Such amount shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the city incurs the expense. For any
such expenditure and interest and reasonable attorneys fees, suit may be instituted and recover and foreclosure
had by the city.
(b) Nothing herein shall inhibit the right of the city to make immediate repair of any condition considered to
be of unusual and immediate danger to persons or property. In such instance, the city shall send an invoice for
expenses incurred in the repair of such condition to the owner of the abutting property. The owner shall pay the
reasonable expenses as determined by the city.
(c) In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses within thirty (30) days after notice of the
reasonable charge by the city, the city shall follow the procedure written above to perfect a lien on such property,
which lien shall have the same character as written above.
Sec. 21.11.119 City participation in sidewalk, driveway approach, curb and gutter reconstruction
The city may participate in the reconstruction provided monies are available for this program. If monies are
available, city participation in the cost of improvements will be on a 50/50 basis with the abutting property
owner. If the property owner's share of the cost of improvements is equal to or less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), payment may be made in not more than twelve (12) equal monthly payments at an interest rate not
to exceed the maximum interest rate allowed by state law and each equal monthly payment will be installed on
the customer's monthly water bill or if the property owner's share of cost is greater than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), payment may be made in not more than thirty-six (36) equal monthly payments at an interest rate
not to exceed the maximum interest rate allowed by state law and each equal monthly payment will be installed
on the customer's monthly water bill.
(Ordinance 07-09 adopted 5/21/09)
ARTICLE 21.12 CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION PROGRAM*
Sec. 21.12.001 Scope
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/720
The city's cross-connection control and backflow prevention program is implemented to meet the requirements
of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality's “Rules and Regulations of Public Water Systems,” 30
TAC 290.44(h) et. seq., as amended, the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 341.033 et. seq., as amended.
Sec. 21.12.002 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this program is to:
(1) Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private
water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system;
(2) Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between
the customer's water system(s) and non-potable water system(s), plumbing fixtures, and industrial
piping systems; and
(3) Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control that will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(b) The department of public works shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water
distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through
any water service connection. If, in the judgment of the director of public works, an approved backflowprevention
assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection; or, within the customer's private
water system) for the safety of the public water system, the director of public works or designated agent shall
give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow-prevention assembly(s) at specific
location(s) on his/her premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at his/her
own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested, and maintain
said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements
have been satisfactorily met.
Sec. 21.12.003 Definitions
Air gap. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved airgap
separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim
of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, in no case less than one inch.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB). A device used to prevent backsiphonage. This device cannot be tested and
cannot prevent back-pressure backflow.
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property, including ground water or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other
purpose.
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow, or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases,
or substances into the water system.
Backflow prevention assembly. An assembly to counteract or prevent backsiphonage.
Back-pressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/720
Boresight (boresight to daylight). Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in
vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainpipe.
City. The City of Seagoville or its designated representative.
Commercial establishment. Property or location which is used primarily for the manufacture, production,
storage, wholesaling or retailing of services which is, or may be placed, in the flow of commerce or any property
or location which is used primarily for the provision of any service.
Contaminants. Any foreign material, solid, liquid or gaseous, that is not common to the potable water supply,
which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption.
Cross-connection. Any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any
plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any non-potable,
used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable
water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Cross-connection control device. Any approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or
otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment
or device, which is designed to prevent non-potable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or their
substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Customer service inspection. An inspection designed to detect any actual or potential cross-connection hazards
and/or exceedance of the lead action level in solder or flux pipe or pipe fittings.
Degree of hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential crossconnections:
(1) Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to
the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to
health.
(2) High hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water
supply.
(3) Low hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to
backflow into the potable water supply.
(4) Pollution hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or
the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system, but which would not constitute a
health or system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable
water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances.
(5) System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the
public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a
detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Director. The city manager, his designate director of public works or his designee who is vested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
Double check assembly (DCA). An assembly, which consists of two independently acting, approved check
valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/720
with properly located resilient seated test cocks.
Double check detector assembly (DCDA). An assembly composed of a line-size approved double check
assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The
meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Fire line tester. A tester who is employed by a state approved fire line contractor and is qualified to test
backflow prevention assemblies on fire lines.
General tester. A tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial,
industrial or irrigation service except fire lines.
Manual of cross-connection control. The latest edition as published by the University of Southern California
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC FCCCHR).
Mobile unit. Any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system
from a mobile source. These include, but are limited to; carpet cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, streetcleaning
vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations, and pest control vehicles.
Nonresidential use. Water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes
all uses not specifically included in residential uses.
Person. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm, club, trustee, receiver, and bodies political
and corporate.
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and
structures located on it.
Premises isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB). An assembly, which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not
provide adequate protection against back-pressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check
valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly
has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks, which allows for the full testing of the
assembly.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system includes all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of
producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption.
Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP). An assembly containing two independently acting approved check
valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly
located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at each end of the assembly.
Reduced pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA). An assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced
pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/720
Regulatory authority. Any municipal officer or department of the city, appointed by the director of public works
to administer this article.
Representative of the water system. A person designated by the city to perform cross-connection control duties
that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys.
Residential use. Water used by any residential customer of the water supply, including single family dwellings,
duplexes, multiplexes, housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter or in
cases where two or more units are served by one meter; the units are full-time dwellings.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which the water purveyor loses control of the water.
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SPVB). An assembly containing an independently operating, internally
loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check
valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing
resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Tester. A person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the
city and the TCEQ.
Thermal expansion. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
Used water. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the
service connection.
Water use survey. A survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the local authority designed to identify
possible sources of pollution and/or contamination of the potable water supply.
Sec. 21.12.004 Right-of-way encroachment
No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way unless
authorized by the city manager or his designee, provided as follows:
(1) The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth of enclosure, and other
requisites, or the assembly prior to its installation.
(2) All permits and inspections required by the city shall be obtained.
(3) The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not
practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly that extends above
ground shall be located no closer than eighteen (18) inches to the face of the curb.
(4) The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a
right-of-way.
(5) A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's expense, relocate a
backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is
necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety.
(6) A person commits an offense if, after receiving a written order from the regulatory authority, he
or she fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any city right-of-way.
Sec. 21.12.005 Multiple connections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/720
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be
required to install a backflow assembly on each of the service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be
determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnection between any of the water
systems on the premises.
Sec. 21.12.006 Protection required installation
(a) The backflow prevention assembly protection, which is required under this program, shall be any of the
University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control Hydraulic Research (USC
FCCCHR) recognized and approved backflow prevention assemblies, or others as approved by the regulatory
authority. Prior to installation, the regulatory authority must approve each backflow assembly. Failure to obtain
such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention
assembly failing to meet final approval by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall determine the
type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. An assembly will be
required in each of the following circumstances, but the customer is in no way limited to the following
circumstances:
(1) The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with
any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premises, if said activity or material could
contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.
(2) Premises having one or more cross-connections that are identified as present.
(3) Premises having one or more cross-connections, and the cross-connection(s) are protected by
an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB).
(4) Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.
(5) Intricate plumbing arrangements are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross-connections exist.
(6) There is a repeated history of cross-connections being established and reestablished.
(7) There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with
sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist.
(8) Materials are being used such that if backflow should occur a health hazard could result.
(9) Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to
accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city.
(10) An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the public works
department of the city upon request of the city.
(11) A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system.
(12) All new construction, if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of
assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard.
(13) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be
installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use.
(14) Any used water return system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/720
(15) In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this
article, a premises isolation assembly will be required.
(16) If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system
without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required.
(17) All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(18) Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city deems
necessary to meet the intent of this article.
(b) All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of this program shall be installed in a
manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection and testing by the regulatory authority of the city or its chosen
representative. Any current installed backflow prevention assemblies, which are located in inaccessible locations
or where the tester is subject to physical danger, shall be relocated to approved locations.
Sec. 21.12.007 Testing of assemblies
(a) The regulatory authority shall require all backflow prevention assemblies to be inspected and tested in
each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation.
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved.
(3) A minimum of once a year.
(4) For premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to re-occupancy.
(5) Immediately after repairs.
(b) A state certified backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the regulatory authority, shall perform
all assembly testing.
(c) Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter
any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. Persons and
occupants of premises which are provided water service by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the
city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of its duties. Where persons or occupants
of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before
entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with
their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(d) The city is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing.
(e) The regulatory authority may cause a water use survey to be conducted at any establishment located in the
city which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by the
regulatory authority that the establishment falls under the provisions of this article and requires a backflow
prevention assembly, the regulatory authority shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the
establishment to install the proper backflow prevention assembly.
(f) It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested annually
in accordance with this article. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory
authority deems necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/720
(g) All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a
form that has been approved by the regulatory authority.
Sec. 21.12.008 Thermal expansion
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal
expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly.
Sec. 21.12.009 Pressure loss
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the
city.
Sec. 21.12.010 Residential service connections
Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or
potential cross-connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an
approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with this article.
Sec. 21.12.011 Rental properties
Any person who owns or controls rental property is responsible for the installation, test and repair of all
backflow assemblies on their property.
Sec. 21.12.012 Water system connections
Water distribution infrastructure:
(1) All water distribution infrastructure must be constructed, installed and tested in accordance
with TCEQ rules and regulations, as amended, for public water systems.
(2) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until
after the city has received the results of the bacteriological test(s) and the results show that no
bacteria are present.
(3) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until an
inspection is completed by the regulatory authority or representative to insure that all state
regulations and local codes have been met.
Sec. 21.12.013 Customer service inspection
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ rules and regulations for public water systems, a customer service inspection for crossconnection
control shall be completed by the regulatory authority prior to providing continuous water service in
each of the following circumstances:
(1) Newly constructed facility or previously non-existent premises.
(2) After any material improvement to building(s) or premises.
(3) Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises.
(4) The regulatory authority deems it necessary.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a newly constructed facility until after the customer
service inspection is completed by the regulatory authority or its representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/720
Sec. 21.12.014 Installation guidelines and requirements
(a) General. To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the following
shall be required:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the current TCEQ rules
and these regulations. The assembly installer must obtain the required plumbing permits and have the
installation inspected by a representative of the regulatory authority.
(2) At those facilities where the regulatory authority requires a backflow prevention assembly be
installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, such installation of the assembly must be before
any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary between the city rightof-
way and the landowner's property and on the service line side of the city meter. The regulatory
authority may specify other areas for installation of the assembly. Assemblies that must be installed
or are located on city rights-of-way are the responsibility of the business or entity that the water line
is serving.
(3) The assembly must be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(4) All premises that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a
backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type
so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
(5) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the regulatory
authority.
(6) All vertical installations of backflow assemblies must have prior approval by the regulatory
authority.
(7) The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage resulting from installation,
operations, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping
all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris.
(8) Upon completion of installation, the regulatory authority shall be notified and all assemblies
must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the regulatory authority and
shall provide the date of installation, manufacture, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow
assembly, physical location and initial test report.
(9) Assemblies must be sized and flow characteristics must be sufficient to provide an adequate
supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
(10) Assemblies must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an
area where water damage to buildings or furnishings would not occur from water discharge. The
property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an
assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RPs.
(11) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in
water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in welldrained
areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight is
provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and
shall be screened on both sides.
(b) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPs) may be utilized at premises where a
substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The RP is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/720
normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RP is effective against both backsiphonage and
back-pressure.
(1) RPs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure of the premises being
served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific
performance data.
(2) The assembly must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an
area where water damage to buildings or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The
property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge for an RP
assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air
gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically
above the top rim of the drain, and in no case less than one (1) inch. An approved air-gap funnel
assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not
control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines to accommodate full relief valve discharge
flow should be considered.
(3) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies.
Daylight drain ports must be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
(4) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inches clearance on both sides
and on top of the assembly, and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies
larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four
(24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus
nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet
zero (0) inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of
thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids.
(5) Vertical installation is prohibited.
(6) All RP assemblies must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of
the assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any
backflow prevention assembly.
(7) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(c) Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDA) may be utilized in all
installations requiring a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering.
(1) RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure
principal backflow assemblies.
(2) The line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested. The certified tester
must complete a separate test report for each assembly.
(3) Lines should be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may
be required ahead of the assembly.
(4) All facilities that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a
backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type
so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/720
(5) Upon completion of installation, the regulatory authority shall be notified and all assemblies
must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the regulatory authority and
shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow
assembly, and initial test report.
(d) Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DCs) may be utilized at premises where a substance
is handled that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(1) DCs must be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being
served.
(2) Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2)
assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies should be sized in such a manner that either assembly
will provide the minimum water requirements while the two (2) together will provide the maximum
flow required.
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs
may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall
be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below.
(4) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inches clearance below and on
both sides of the assembly and, if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more
than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a
minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the backside, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock
side, and twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet zero (0) inches is required
in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is
required on all vault lids. “Y” pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the
checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. Theses clearance standards apply to all
assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes.
(5) All DCs must be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow
prevention assembly.
(6) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(7) Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches (4") that
meet all of the following requirements:
(A) Internally spring-loaded check valves.
(B) Flow is upward through assembly.
(C) Approved for vertical installation by the USC FCCCHR.
(D) Approved by the regulatory authority.
(e) Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA) may be utilized in all installations
requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering.
(1) DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve
assemblies (DCs).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/720
(2) The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. The certified
tester must complete a separate test report for each assembly.
(f) Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVB) may be utilized as point-of-use protection
only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, if introduced
into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is
potential for back-pressure.
(1) PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from
water discharge.
(2) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest
downstream piping.
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum
clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly.
(4) All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner must notify the regulatory authority of installation of any backflow
prevention assembly.
(5) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
must have prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(g) Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVB) may be utilized in all
installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements
applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies.
Sec. 21.12.015 Air gap separation
(a) Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where
hazardous substances are at risk of entering the potable water system.
(1) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured
vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch (1"). If splashing
is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a forty-five degree
(45°) angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed.
(2) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory
authority and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(3) Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge
of the spout opening a distance greater than three (3) times the diameter of the effective opening for a
single, or a distance greater than four (4) times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
(4) Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the
horizontal plane of the spout opening other than specified in subsection 3 above. The effect of three
(3) or more such side walls or ribs has not been determined. In such cases, the air gap shall be
measured from the top of the well.
(5) The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve
or the supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two (2) or more lines supply one
(1) outlet, the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply
lines or the area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller.
Sec. 21.12.016 Fire suppression systems
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/720
(a) All new installations of fire suppression systems, which utilize the city's potable water supply, shall have
installed an approved backflow prevention device according to the degree of hazard.
(b) An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector
assemblies (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not
approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each twenty-fourhour
period, unless a variance has been issued in writing from the regulatory authority. A (RPDA) must be
installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.
(c) It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the
conditions of this article. In the event of any changes to the fire suppression system, it is the responsibility of the
property owner(s) to notify the regulatory authority. All costs associated with this article and the purchase,
installation, testing and repair of (DCDA) or (RPDA) devices is the responsibility of the property owner and
persons in charge of any premises.
(d) Upon the approved installation of the (DCDA) or (RPDA) device, a device test report completed by a
licensed fire line tester must be sent to the attention of the regulatory authority or its representative and include
the information.
Sec. 21.12.017 Fire hydrant protection
An air gap separation shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a
temporary water supply during any construction or other times, which would pose a potential hazard to the
public water supply.
(1) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use of a fire hydrant water meter to abide
by the conditions of this article.
(2) Only city fire hydrant water meters will be allowed within the potable water system.
(3) A refundable deposit is required to insure the return of all fire hydrant water meter to the public
works department. Failure to return or misuse of the meters can result in the forfeiture of deposit
and/or enforcement action being taken against the responsible party.
(4) All non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be
confiscated and enforcement action taken against the responsible party.
Sec. 21.12.018 Responsibilities
(a) It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to abide by the
conditions of this article and to comply with the following:
(1) Payment of all costs associated with this article and the purchase, installation, testing and repair
of backflow prevention assemblies.
(2) To install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this article and
acceptable industry practice.
(3) All commercial establishments shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their
premises tested annually. A certified tester who is registered with the city must conduct such testing.
(4) Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including
repairs as required.
(5) Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner that allows them to be tested by a
method that has been approved by the regulatory authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/720
(6) All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation testing and repair shall be
maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years.
(b) Certified backflow prevention assembly testers shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Annually register with the regulatory authority and pay the required fee.
(2) Maintain testing equipment in proper work condition/calibration.
(3) Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly.
(4) Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TCEQ rules and
regulations.
(5) Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on backflow prevention device
test forms that have been approved by the regulatory authority.
(6) Report test results to the regulatory authority within thirty (30) days of testing.
(7) Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of
any premises.
(8) Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three (3) years.
(c) Regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall ensure the inspection and testing of all backflow
prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this article. For new facilities, permanent water
service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational.
Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of
internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of occupancy
until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The city shall not be liable for
damage caused by any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing.
Sec. 21.12.019 Backflow prevention assembly tester certification and registration
To be an approved backflow prevention assembly tester within the city, an individual must register annually with
the regulatory authority, provide proof of TCEQ certification, provide proof that testing equipment is able to
maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2 psid accuracy and pay an annual, non-refundable tester registration
fee as stated in the city master fee schedule. The regulatory authority will maintain a current list of licensed
testers, which will be made available to facilities, which may need testers to perform their annual testing.
Sec. 21.12.020 Fees
All fees and/or deposits referred to in this article are established by resolution of the city council and are
provided in the city master fee schedule.
Sec. 21.12.021 Lawn irrigation systems
(a) All lawn irrigation system installations shall obtain a permit issued by the building official for such
installations. Installation requirements must comply with the current city plumbing code and guidelines for the
appropriate device found in this article. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water
source are prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed.
(b) All lawn irrigations systems shall have a freeze sensor device or switch installed which will override the
irrigation cycle of the sprinkler system whenever the outside temperature is at or below 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
The freeze sensor or device shall be installed on any new lawn irrigation system and on existing lawn irrigation
systems no later than December 31, 2008.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/720
(c) All lawn irrigation systems shall have a rain sensor device or switch which will override the irrigation
cycle of the sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred. The rain sensor or device shall be installed on
any new lawn irrigation system and on existing lawn irrigation systems no later than December 31, 2008.
Sec. 21.12.022 Mobile units
The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless an air gap or an approved
backflow prevention assembly protects such connection. Prior approval and annual device testing of any
backflow prevention assembly must be received from the regulatory authority before connecting any potable
water system.
Sec. 21.12.023 Enforcement
(a) An offense is considered committed if:
(1) There has been a failure to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this
section.
(2) There has been failure to comply with a repair order issued by the regulatory authority.
(3) Backflow from premises owned, operated or managed enters the public water supply system.
(4) There has been a failure to pay fees required by this article.
(5) There is violation of any section of this article.
(6) Water service is reinstated to premises discontinued or disconnected under this article, except
as directed by the regulatory authority.
(7) An unregistered tester is allowed to perform testing work at an establishment.
(8) A backflow prevention assembly is tested within the city without being registered with the
regulatory authority.
(9) A backflow prevention assembly is tested within the city without being certified by the TCEQ.
(b) A certified tester's registration may be reviewed and revoked by the city if the regulatory authority
determines that the tester has:
(1) Falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly reports;
(2) Used inaccurate gauges;
(3) Used improper testing procedures; or
(4) Created a threat to public health or the environment.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 21.13 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Division 1. Standards
Sec. 21.13.001 Thoroughfare and circulation design standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/720
Ordinances concerning the establishment of engineering design standards and construction design requirements
in effect at the time of adoption of this code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 21.13.002 Construction standards for paving and drainage facilities
Ordinances concerning general construction standards for paving and drainage facilities, in effect at the time of
adoption of this code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 21.13.003 Exclusive control of streets
No entity, including other political subdivisions of the state, may extend a street into the city's corporate limits or
connect a street to an existing city street without the prior written approval of the city council.
Secs. 21.13.004–21.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Right-of-Way Management
Sec. 21.13.031 Administration
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall appoint a right-of-way manager, who is the principal city official
responsible for the administration of the right-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and
ordinances related thereto. The right-of-way manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. The rightof-
way manager shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the right-of-way manager
stated herein.
Sec. 21.13.032 Definitions
The following definitions apply in this article. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations
shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context words used in the present tense
include the future; words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the
plural. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely permissive.
Abandoned facilities. Facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or
from any other facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service.
Administration fee. The fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management;
including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right-of-way permit applications; inspecting jobsites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of
the right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing
the provisions of this article.
Applicant. An owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under the
provisions of this article.
Area of influence. That area around a utility excavation where the pavement and sub-grade is impacted by the
excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation.
Backfill. The following:
(1) The placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an excavation; or
(2) The return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an excavation.
Certificated telecommunications provider or “CTP”. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience
and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/720
Texas Public Utility Commission or “PUC” to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides
voice service as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 or “the act.”
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas and the city's officers and employees.
City project. The construction, location, maintenance, relocation, alteration, improvement, repair, removal or
other work performed by the city, or its designee, in the public right-of-way or on any city utilities or city
facilities.
City utilities. Any water, sewer or drainage line or services owned and operated by the city.
Compaction. Refers to consolidating backfill material in a trench to prevent future settlement.
Comprehensive plan. The city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be amended.
Construction. Boring, the breaking of pavement, or the installation, modification, upgrade, maintenance,
removal, or similar activities, within the right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing
primary service, restoration, or maintenance of existing facilities within the right-of-way.
Contractor. Any public or private person, subcontractor or organization, other than the city.
Day. Business day unless otherwise specified.
Department. The city department of public works or a successor department that is responsible for management
of the right-of-way and roadway infrastructure.
Emergency operations. Are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the
health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an immediate service
interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not
emergency operations.
Excavation. Any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in
the right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved
portion of the right-of-way.
Facilities. The equipment, and property, including but not limited to, lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts,
cables, valves, manholes, handholes and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the
right-of-way, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Governing body. The mayor and the city council of the City of Seagoville, Texas.
Governmental entity. Any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district,
drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasimunicipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state or of any other state of the United States and any
agency or instrumentality of the state or of any other state of the United States.
Holiday. Refers to days in which city offices are closed in observance of a holiday.
Main line. Refers to lines other than service connections used to convey the right-of-way user's product.
Major project. Any project, which includes 300 or more linear feet of excavation or any excavation under
pavement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/720
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communication network.
Network provider. A wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not
an electric utility but builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support
poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node.
Pavement. Refers to streets containing Portland cement, asphalt, brick or other rigid or semi-rigid material that
covers the surface of a street and their underlying subgrade and base.
Permit. A permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way.
Permittee. Any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way.
Perpendicular excavations. Any trench with a centerline that when projected toward the centerline of the street,
the two lines intersect at an angle of 90 degrees.
Person. Any person, company, partnership, contractor, subcontractor, agency or other public or private entity,
excepting the city.
Public inconvenience penalty. Refers to a penalty assessed to the right-of-way user who denies the public the use
of public property for a time period greater than allowed by this article.
PUCT. The Public Utility Commission of Texas.
Registration. The annual application process of the right-of-way user to use any portion of the right-of-way.
Registration certificate. Refers to the document provided by the city, annually, upon approval of the application
for registration.
Repair. The temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable.
Repair area. That area around excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation.
Restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including, but not limited
to, pavement and foundation structures, ground cover, landscaping, and monuments are returned to the same
condition, or better than that which existed before the commencement of the work.
Resurfacing. Any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the entire
width of the street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs.
Right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager of the city, or his designee.
Right-of-way or public right-of-way. The surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway,
freeway, tollway, lane, path, drainageway, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard,
parkway, drive, fire lane or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any
rights of management or control and shall include, but not be limited to, all easements now held, or hereafter
held, by the city, but shall specifically excludes private property.
Right-of-way user. A person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work,
excavation, provision of services, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities thereon,
including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers.
Routine service operation. A work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt
traffic.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/720
Service. A commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located
or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, Internet
services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum
pipelines, or sanitary sewage.
Service connection. Refers to the line that serves no more than two individual customers or two meter banks.
Street. The paved portion of the right-of-way, whether fee or easement, that has been constructed, reconstructed,
or resurfaced with concrete or asphalt or some other surface.
Surface mounted markers. Refers to any sign, post or other marker, which rises above the surface of the ground
to show the location of an underground utility.
Thoroughfare. All roadways and streets classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be
amended, including but not limited to as a highway, tollway, major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare, major
collector, minor collector or local collector.
TMUTCD. The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as it exists or may be amended.
Traffic-control representative. Refers to the designated representative of the right-of-way user who is responsible
for work zone safety and compliance with TMUTCD. The right-of-way user shall ensure such person has
adequate training, knowledge and authority to perform the responsibilities listed above.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
Trench. Refers to excavation deeper than 12 inches. This shall include linear trenches, holes, pits and etc.
Underground Facility Damage Protection Safety Act. Refers to the V.T.C.A., Utilities Code section 251.001 et
seq. as it exists or may be amended.
Utility. Any privately or publicly owned entity which uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general public
service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products,
telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to
such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth
in this article.
White lining. Marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility
location in order to further identify the site.
Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether
at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless services to the public.
Sec. 21.13.033 Utility coordinator
Each utility and right-of-way user shall name a utility coordinator who shall be the representative and point of
contact for all communications from the city and who shall meet with the right-of-way manager when so
requested.
Sec. 21.13.034 Field utility coordination
(a) The right-of-way user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project:
(1) Forty-eight hours before the start of construction;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/720
(2) Upon completion of the initial backfill; and
(3) Upon completion of the project.
The right-of-way user shall make a request for a utility locate in compliance with the Underground Facility
Damage Prevention and Safety Act.
(b) The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage
to adjoining property. The use of “nonwashable” markers is prohibited.
(c) Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, is required at all times.
(d) All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment and all other traffic-control devices owned,
leased or used by the right-of-way user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked
with the name of the permittee and/or right-of-way user or subcontractor, as applicable, at all times such
equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An exception to the marking requirement may be made in the sole
discretion of the right-of-way manager in the event the traffic-control equipment is not owned by the permittee
or right-of-way user.
Sec. 21.13.035 Maps and records of registrants
(a) Within 30 days of passage of this article, each right-of-way user shall provide the city an accurate map of
their service area. The map shall be in electronic format overlaid over the Dallas County, Kaufman County and
North Central Texas Council of Governments digital map, as applicable. In dual coverage areas, the city may
request additional information to enable identification of right-of-way users.
(b) Each right-of-way user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. If available, the city's
road network may be provided in digital format upon request. The right-of-way user is encouraged to maintain
their system maps geo-referenced to the city's geodetic network, which is on the Dallas County and Kaufman
County digital map or the North Central Texas Council of Governments digital map, as applicable. The map
should include true bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments, which
shall be accurately described on the map. The right-of-way user will provide the city with digital information
within 90 days of a request for maps from the city for any user with less than 50 miles of utilities within the city.
All other right-of-way users shall provide the digital information within one year of the request. Thereafter, the
data is to be provided to the city on an annual basis by January 1st.
(c) If the maps and records submitted in response to any request by or requirement of the city include
information expressly designated by the right-of-way user as a trade secret or other confidential information
protected from disclosure by state law, the city and its agents, employees, or other representatives may not
disclose that information to the public without the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled
by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court
having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a
right-of-way user to designate all matters in its maps and records as confidential or as trade secrets.
Sec. 21.13.036 Notice
Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to the city via electronic message (e-mail), overnight courier
(generally used carrier with tracing available) or hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile to the department,
or United States mail return receipt required.
Sec. 21.13.037 Registration
(a) Nothing in this section relieves a right-of-way user and/or utility from obtaining a permit under this article
to perform work in the right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/720
(b) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, a utility maintaining or operating existing
facilities in the right-of-way must register with the right-of-way manager in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The registration must be on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager and made in the
name of the right-of-way user that owns the facilities.
(2) Registration expires December 31st of the following year after the first registration occurs. If
the utility fails to renew registration by that date, the city will send by certified mail a notice of
noncompliance to the address listed on the registration. If the utility fails to renew registration within
30 calendar days after the date of sending the notification, the facilities of the utility will be deemed
to have been legally abandoned.
(3) If information provided as part of the registration changes, the utility must inform the right-ofway
manager, in writing, not more than 30 days after the date the change occurs.
(4) The utility shall also include the following registration:
(A) The name of the utility using the right-of-way, including any business name, assumed
name, or trade name the utility operates under or has operated under in the city within the past
five years.
(B) If the utility is a CTP, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility
Commission.
(C) The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the city that authorizes the
utility to use the right-of-way.
(D) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons who will be general,
day-to-day contacts for the utility. At least one of the addresses must be within the Dallas/Fort
Worth metropolitan area.
(E) The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated as the person authorized
to receive service of process on behalf of the utility.
(F) The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, who will be
working in the right-of-way on behalf of the utility. This list may be amended as needed by the
utility; however, no work shall be performed in the right-of-way by a contractor or
subcontractor that is not on the list, regardless of whether a permit is required.
(G) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts
who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The telephone numbers
should be accessible without the city having to pay long distance telephone or toll charge.
(H) Proof of existing insurance that complies with division 4.
(c) Upon completion of registration, the city will provide the right-of-way user a registration certificate valid
until the end of the calendar year during which the registration was completed. The right-of-way user may make
as many photocopies of the registration certificate as necessary. The right-of-way user is responsible for
ensuring that all contractors, listed in accordance with subsection (b)(4)(F) above have a copy of the registration
certificate on site when work is being conducted under the provisions of the registration certificate.
Sec. 21.13.038 Traffic handling training
The right-of-way user is responsible for work zone safety including, but not limited to, traffic-control through
the designated traffic-control representative. The representative is responsible for compliance with the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/720
TMUTCD and the traffic-control plan (if required) at all work zone sites. The traffic-control representative shall
ensure employees on the jobsite have adequate training.
Sec. 21.13.039 Reporting obligations
All right-of-way users shall, upon request, provide proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but
not limited to, the city, state, or federal government, or railroad or pipeline company, including a description of
the right-of-way user's intended use of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the right-ofway
user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the right-of-way
user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUCT. The information provided
shall be sufficient enough to determine whether the right-of-way user has applied for and received any permit or
other approvals required by the FCC. Right-of-way user shall provide all such other information as may be
reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement.
Sec. 21.13.040 Surface mounted markers
Where surface mounted markers are needed, curb mounted medallions shall be used whenever possible.
Sec. 21.13.041 Relocation of facilities for city projects and public improvements
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all uses of the right-of-way. The
city reserves the right to, among other things, lay water, sewer, drainage, and other pipelines or cables and
conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in street
facilities in across, along, over, or under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by an agency or right-ofway
user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets.
(b) The right-of-way user must relocate its facilities, at its own expense and in accordance with section
21.13.076, prior to the start of construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject
the right-of-way user to the enforcement provisions contained herein.
(c) A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects.
Sec. 21.13.042 Permit required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore,
tunnel, excavate or close lanes on a thoroughfare without first having made application and obtained a permit
therefor in compliance with the Public Right-of-Way Permitting and Construction Manual, promulgated and
amended by the right-of-way manager, except for as allowed by this section. It is unlawful for any person, its
agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any rightof-
way for the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first obtaining
from the right-of-way manager a permit in compliance with this article.
(1) Before issuing a permit, the right-of-way manager shall have been provided a written
application, on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager, setting forth the name and residence or
business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its
approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse
to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall
include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. Plans shall be drawn at a reasonable
scale that legibly and accurately show all existing improvements and proposed work. All proposed
work must be shown in heavy or bold type lines and fonts. If proposed work is in phases or part of
another overall drawing, show all existing and future work in lighter or faded out lines and fonts. If
right-of-way user cannot show distinctive line weights, the plans shall clearly label the above
information using text. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans
must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/720
(2) At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee
in an amount as provided for in the master fee schedule of the city.
(3) The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is
issued shall be subject to approval of the right-of-way manager, and all backfilling, compaction and
pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article.
(4) No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect
or alter in any way any obligation of public and/or private utilities with facilities installed in any
right-of-way to relocate the facilities, at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the
event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the rightof-
way.
(5) Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the right-of-way manager.
Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted.
(6) Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations
in the right-of-way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article.
Sec. 21.13.043 Exceptions to required permit
(a) The right-of-way manager reserves the right in his discretion to require a right-of-way permit on service
connections. Unless otherwise required by the right-of-way manager, service connections do not require a permit
if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The service connection excavation shall not exceed four feet inside the right-of-way to property
line;
(2) All excavation shall be in accordance with service connection drawings;
(3) The address for the service connection is on the city provided form, which is submitted to the
right-of-way manager via e-mail. Work shall not begin until the electronic form is transmitted to the
right-of-way manager;
(4) The excavation required is less than 12 inches in depth;
(5) The excavation is no wider than two inches or is hand dug; and
(6) The service connection does not require boring.
(b) Irrigation system installation requires a permit per existing city codes.
Sec. 21.13.044 Permit application
(a) Application for a permit shall be addressed to the right-of-way manager and made on a form furnished for
that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the
location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be
completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent
available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and
completion dates. When the work includes excavating, which will exceed five feet in depth, a trench safety
design sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall also accompany the application, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(b) A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may
cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/720
who determines that an area is greater than that which is specified in the permit must apply for and receive a new
right-of-way permit.
(c) Fees shall apply to all right-of-way users unless governed by an existing agreement with the city.
Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants
who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact.
(d) Permits will be issued or denied within ten (10) days of the city receiving a complete application. Permits
shall be valid for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request but is not guaranteed the permit be
valid for such longer period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the application. The
city may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may commence work
before the permit start date and, except as provided herein, no permittee may continue working after the end
date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for and may
receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary application
must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. Applicants are encouraged to request a pre-submission
meeting for large projects.
(e) An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued or denied within five (5) days of application
upon a showing of good cause, as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
Sec. 21.13.045 Issuance of permit
Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, and having
complied with such provisions, shall be entitled thereto, and, upon filing such application with the right-of-way
manager, it shall be his duty to issue the permit, when the provisions of this article have been complied with.
(1) Upon receiving a written application for a permit and a plan prepared in accordance with the
city specifications, the right-of-way manager's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or
disapprove the application, sign and return it to applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at
least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the start of work, the applicant shall notify the right-of-way
manager the date the work will commence when traffic-control devices are necessary on a
thoroughfare.
(2) No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made
pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed.
(3) Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done hereunder. The
right-of-way manager may in his sole discretion, grant extensions of time.
(4) No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit,
nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued a permit on the person's behalf, until the
outstanding violation is/are corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the right-of-way
manager. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be
imposed or sought by the city at law or equity.
(5) No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit.
If the permit is allowed to expire, the right-of-way user shall procure a new permit, paying the
applicable fee, prior to proceeding with any such work.
Sec. 21.13.046 Posting of signs
The right-of-way user and contractor (if used) shall be identified by three feet by three feet information signs on
all work requiring a permit. The signs shall state the name and phone number of the right-of-way user and
contractor (if used). The signs shall be placed in the right-of-way on each approach to the location where
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/720
construction is occurring from the time of the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be
posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring.
Sec. 21.13.047 Excavation to be under supervision of the right-of-way manager
(a) Any right-of-way user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall, at all
times while such work is in progress, keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall provide of
the same, when requested by any authorized city employee. At all times while the work is in progress, the rightof-
way user shall also maintain, at the job location, a sign, barricade or other device bearing the right-of-way
user's name.
(b) The right-of-way user shall protect from damage, utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns,
shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, irrigation, sidewalks, streets, signs, street lights, or other property at, near or
encountered in its work. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way.
(c) All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as
practicable with the use of right-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and
reasonable direction given by or under the authority of the governing body of the city pursuant to the policy and
regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public convenience. The right-of-way user shall not
trespass upon private property. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary between right-of-way and
private property and place stakes/markers indicating the boundary to remain in place for the duration of the
work.
(d) The city reserves the right to among others, lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and
other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes, and channels and streets, and to perform, and
allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed
necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public
place occupied by a right-of-way user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to
maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to
a right-of-way user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third
party from responsibility for damages caused to a right-of-way user by such third party.
(e) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a right-of-way user
within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the right-of-way, and
to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of
said streets. No pole may be placed in an area prohibited by another section of this article or which interferes
with the public's unimpeded use of the right-of-way.
(f) If the city requires a right-of-way user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter,
relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with
greater convenience, any right-of-way or public place, the right-of-way user shall not be required to make any
such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a
right-of-way user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change,
adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a right-of-way user's facilities; provided, however, that the
city shall never be liable for such reimbursement.
Sec. 21.13.048 Registration certificate required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to perform construction in the right-of-way
without first having made either application and obtained a permit therefor or have in possession a valid
registration certificate. A registration certificate may only be used for construction activities not requiring a
permit in accordance with this article. These activities include tree trimming, general maintenance, line work
and providing a service connection from the property line to a customer provided the activity complies with
section 21.13.064.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/720
Sec. 21.13.049 Hours of operation for nonemergency work
(a) Excavation and boring shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and thirty (30) minutes before sundown on
Monday through Friday, except on holidays. No excavation or boring shall be performed on holidays.
(b) All other work requiring an inspection shall be done between 7:00 a.m. and thirty (30) minutes before
sundown on Monday through Friday, except on holidays. No work shall be performed on holidays. A right-ofway
user may work on Saturday subject to the approval of the right-of-way manager and a notification no later
than noon on Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. The Saturday inspection fee
must be paid prior to noon on Thursday prior to the Saturday in which the work is to be performed.
Sec. 21.13.050 Denial of permit
A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city or notice
of termination of the same.
(2) Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license.
(3) Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(4) The excavation would be in a street and not otherwise permitted by this article.
(5) The proposed warning or other traffic-control procedures or equipment do not comply with the
requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the right-of-way manager.
(6) The proposed activity would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, regulation
or statute.
(7) The permit application contains false or misleading information.
(8) The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard.
(9) The right-of-way user is not authorized within the city.
(10) The right-of-way user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress.
(11) The right-of-way user has not compensated the city, unless the user is not legally obligated to
compensate the city by contract, by agreement or by law, for using the public property; or the rightof-
way user has failed to timely make required payments.
Sec. 21.13.051 Appeal
A right-of-way user that:
(1) Has been denied registration;
(2) Has been denied a permit;
(3) Has had a permit revoked; or
(4) Believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
reviewed, upon written request as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/720
(A) If an applicant desires to appeal a decision, the applicant may file a written notice of
appeal with the right-of-way manager within five business days of the date the decision was
rendered. The notice must state the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship
encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant
factors. The right-of-way manager shall provide a written decision within five business days.
Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(B) If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to
the city manager within five business days of receipt of the right-of-way manager's written
decision. The city manager shall provide a written decision within five business days of receipt
of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five business
days shall constitute a denial.
Secs. 21.13.052–21.13.060 Reserved
Division 3. Technical Specifications
Sec. 21.13.061 Lawful use of right-of-way
(a) The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes,
ordinances and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental
protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory
evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city.
(b) The permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by
permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. Temporary storage of material
may be placed in a pile no higher than 30 inches.
(c) If a permittee excavates any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, such
permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation and disposal of
that material in accordance with applicable law. The permittee shall promptly notify the city, orally, of the
condition within two hours of discovery of any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-ofway,
and within eight hours provide the aforementioned information to the city in writing. The permittee must
consult with and receive written authorization from the city before undertaking any of the steps/actions set forth
in this subsection.
Sec. 21.13.062 Compliance with safety regulations
The permittee and right-of-way user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations
and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the
construction industry.
Sec. 21.13.063 Conformance with the thoroughfare plan
A right-of-way user should consult the city's thoroughfare plan prior to the acquisition of any interest in real
property in the city for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or
adjacent to any street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, right-of-way, highway or
thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All right-of-way
users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the thoroughfare plan. The city shall, at a minimum,
have no liability for the value of or loss by a right-of-way user of any improvements constructed in the area
shown on the thoroughfare plan, except as provided herein. Typical locations of city facilities are depicted in the
city standard details.
Sec. 21.13.064 Tree trimming and graffiti abatement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/720
Permission is granted to a right-of-way user, subject to the requirements of this code, as it exists or may be
amended from time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the right-of-way, so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with a right-of-way user's facilities. When so directed by the city, the tree
trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The right-of-way user shall make the
necessary repairs or restoration, including, but not limited to, cleaning of graffiti, as soon as practicable but not
to exceed seven days after the right-of-way user discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage or
vandalism to its facilities.
Sec. 21.13.065 Employee communication
The right-of-way user shall ensure that there is at least one employee on the jobsite, during any type of work
activity, who can read, write and speak English fluently.
Sec. 21.13.066 Routing and spatial assignment
The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial
location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-ofway.
The city reserves the right to reserve space for future utilities.
Sec. 21.13.067 Commencement and completion
After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way
manager, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit, unless an extension
of time is granted by the right-of-way manager. No work shall commence until erosion control measures (e.g.
silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades are in place.
Sec. 21.13.068 Notification of affected property owners
Except in the case of an emergency, whenever excavation is required in the right-of-way adjacent to an occupied
property, the right-of-way user shall notify the property owner of the activity through use of a door hanger,
which shall include the following information:
(1) Permit number;
(2) Identity of the contractor and the right-of-way user, including a contact name and phone
number by which more information regarding the project could be obtained and a 24-hour a day
emergency phone number; and
(3) The anticipated duration of the construction work.
Sec. 21.13.069 Safe conduct of work
Every permittee and right-of-way user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike
manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public, using the street or right-of-way where the work is being
performed, from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts,
openings and excavation, in accordance with TMUTCD. All material, implements and tools stored upon the
premises and used in connection with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and nonhazardous manner.
Sec. 21.13.070 Revocation or suspension of permit
(a) The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke or suspend any permit, without refund of the
permit fee, in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, this article
and/or any other city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the permit shall include, but not be limited to any of
the following:
(1) The violation of any provision of the permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/720
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens.
(3) Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application.
(4) The failure to meet insurance, surety bond or indemnification requirements.
(5) The failure to complete the work as specified in the permit.
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article.
(7) Repeated traffic-control violation(s).
(8) Failure to protect facilities or repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way.
(9) Violation of any part of this article.
(10) Recognition by the right-of-way manager that a permit was issued in error.
(11) Failing to comply with an order of the right-of-way manager on the permit and any other valid
permit held by the right-of-way user.
(12) Any safety violation or other action that threatens the health, welfare and/or safety of the
public as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
(b) If the right-of-way manager determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition
of the right-of-way permit, the right-of-way manager shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy
such violation. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit or legal action, or both. The rightof-
way manager may, in his discretion, revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both.
Within two business days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the right-of-way
manager with a plan, acceptable to the right-of-way manager, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to
do so or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
Sec. 21.13.071 Work not in accordance with permit declared unlawful
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause
or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under
the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that
described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the right-of-way manager, and in
accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is
commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the right-of-way manager may, in his sole discretion,
grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account.
(b) Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or on any permit shall be cause for revocation
of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been
corrected or the right-of-way manager has approved alternative requirements.
Sec. 21.13.072 Work done without a permit
No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way or wires on poles, in any way, shall be made, other
than excavations necessary for emergency work, without first securing a permit. No person or right-of-way user
shall, at any time, open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a
project in the most expeditious manner.
Sec. 21.13.073 Cessation of work
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/720
At any time, the right-of-way manager may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a threat to the
health, safety or well-being of the public. The right-of-way manager may revoke the permit of any permittee in
any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public.
Sec. 21.13.074 Violations of standards; notice
The right-of-way manager may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to
the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, codes or other applicable regulation. Within five days
after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the right-of-way manager that the violation
has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the right-of-way manager may
revoke the permit.
Sec. 21.13.075 Location and relocation of facilities
Subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws, the right-of-way user shall, upon the request of the city,
which shall be in writing, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to
the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate any city project. The written request provided by the
city shall state the date by which the relocation by the right-of-way user shall be completed and a reasonable
amount of time shall be provided by the city. When relocation is necessitated by federal government
requirements, which includes reimbursements of costs, the city will reimburse applicant for its proportionate
share from funds provided to the city in such reimbursements.
Sec. 21.13.076 Relocation facilities for the city
In the event the city finds it necessary to move a right-of-way user's facilities to protect the right-of-way, any
city utilities and/or street, the city shall notify the local representative of the right-of-way user. Right-of-way
user shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at right-of-way user's sole expense.
Sec. 21.13.077 Abandoned facilities
(a) A right-of-way user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall:
(1) Remove its facilities and repair, at its sole expense, any damage caused by the removal. The
right-of-way manager may allow some or all facilities to remain if the right-of-way manager
determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or
(2) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the right-of-way user's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized right-of-way user.
(b) The facilities of the right-of-way user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which
remain unused for two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the
city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence, as solely determined by city, that the right-of-way
user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies and/or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the
facilities by the right-of-way user at the right-of-way user's sole expense.
Sec. 21.13.078 Underground service requirements
Placement of new utility support structures (poles) shall be prohibited for electrical distribution lines with
60,000 volts and less and all communication utilities, unless otherwise allowed by other law or an existing
franchise agreement between the right-of-way user and the city or a PUCT tariff. This does not prohibit
replacing existing poles for maintenance purposes.
Sec. 21.13.079 Location of poles and conduits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/720
All poles in the right-of-way shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of
water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to interfere with vehicular and pedestrian travel. The
location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, utilities and facilities placed and constructed by a right-of-way
user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper
control, direction and approval of the city. Placement of poles and anchor guys along curvilinear streets shall
comply with city ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 21.13.080 Size and location of aboveground facilities
The maximum dimensions for ground mounted utility structures above the ground in the right-of-way adjacent
to streets are seven feet long (parallel to the road), two feet wide (perpendicular to the road) and six feet in
height. For structures three feet or less in height, the width may be 44 inches. This does not include poles. The
height of utility structures shall be measured from the lowest grade at any point 18 inches or less from the side of
the structure that faces the street to the highest point of the structure. Utility structures exceeding those
dimensions shall not be located in the right-of-way adjacent to streets, unless otherwise approved in writing by
the right-of-way manager. All aboveground facilities shall be located outside of the corner visibility triangle at
all intersections, future intersections and all driveways. No aboveground facilities may be placed in a parkway
that is across from a median opening.
Sec. 21.13.081 Height of overhead line
The user shall ensure all overhead lines are constructed and maintained so that the minimum clearances are in
compliance with the National Electrical Code as it exists or may be amended.
Sec. 21.13.082 Attachments to poles
(a) Nothing shall obligate or restrict a right-of-way user from exercising its rights to enter into pole
attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power
companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city.
(b) A right-of-way user shall utilize existing pole space, conduit, and other facilities whenever reasonably
and/or economically possible.
(c) Antennas must be mounted to the top of the pole, or flush to the pole near the top, in a screen that is coated
or painted an approved color to match the pole to camouflage the installation.
(d) Equipment, other than antennas, must be in an underground vault. Vaults must be flush to the ground.
(e) If the existing pole already has more than two existing risers/drops, the pole must be replaced with a metal
pole and all wires and cables must be run in conduit inside the pole. The existing drops will also be relocated
inside the new pole and underground entry into the pole through the foundation is required. When installation
will result in two or fewer risers/drops on the pole, the wires and cable may be installed as a riser/drop in conduit
painted an approved color.
Sec. 21.13.083 Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires
The right-of-way user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of
houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall, pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such
temporary rearrangements. The right-of-way user shall in a reasonable time frame and reasonable cost, remove
its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered
demolitions at no cost to the city. The right-of-way user may invoice the requesting parties for the cost of this
work, where applicable.
Sec. 21.13.084 Street closures
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/720
(a) All lane closures on any thoroughfare shall comply with TMUTCD, and shall include a lane closure
exhibit to be submitted with the permit to the right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager may require a
traffic-control plan. Arrow boards and message boards may be required for lane closures on thoroughfares.
(b) Except in an emergency, no thoroughfare shall be closed on weekdays during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. or outside normal working hours of the city. Every day of the week, all
roadways shall be open to traffic by sunset on the same day as the construction.
(c) All lane closures require 24-hour notification of the police and fire departments prior to closing.
Sec. 21.13.085 Site maintenance during construction and prior to full restoration
(a) Erosion control and stormwater management. The right-of-way user shall be responsible for stormwater
management, erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal guidelines.
Requirements shall include, but not limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left
overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open
holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request of right-of-way manager, the
right-of-way user may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state
government.
(b) Dust control. The right-of-way user shall ensure that the work is conducted and site maintained to
minimize blowing dust. At any time dust leaves the jobsite so that it is a nuisance, the work will stop until
measures can be taken to eliminate the dust.
(c) Traffic-control safety. In the event of noncompliance with the TMUTCD, the right-of-way user shall be
notified of the violation. In the event of continued noncompliance, the right-of-way manager may revoke the
permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. At any time the right-of-way manager determines
the work threatens public safety, he may take immediate action as necessary including but not limited to,
stopping all work, or have a third party make the repairs at the expense of the applicant.
(d) Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. The right-of-way user working in any right-ofway
is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area.
The right-of-way user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic-control as specified in the
TMUTCD.
(1) Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic-control
practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and
regulations, including without limitation, those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the trafficcontrol
devices in a construction area.
(2) The right-of-way user must either: (A) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in
traffic-control; or (B) submit the qualifications and name of employees to the right-of-way user
manager for approval prior to the work commencing. The right-of-way user must also submit a
traffic-control plan for review when required by this article. All signs and barricades must conform to
the requirements of the TMUTCD.
(3) All barricades, plates, and other traffic-control equipment must conform to TMUTCD
specifications and must be inspected and maintained by the traffic-control representative.
(4) All barricades, plates and other traffic-control equipment must display accurate and sufficient
information including without limitation, the name of the right-of-way user.
(5) Noncompliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of noncompliance
after citation, the right-of-way manager may place the necessary devices as required, and the right-of7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/720
way user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for noncompliance. Failure
to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits.
(6) All traffic-control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work.
(e) Duty to barricade. At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or right-of-way user, as
applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including without
limitation, watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon
and around the work and for the prevention of accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep
suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD.
Sec. 21.13.086 Inspection
The permittee shall make the work site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at
all reasonable times during performance of the work.
Sec. 21.13.087 Materials testing
The city will require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine
conformance with city construction specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill
materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible
pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the city. The right-of-way user shall, at his
expense, hire a testing laboratory with current accreditation by the American Association for Laboratory
Accreditation, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or another
nationally recognized accreditation agency that verifies compliance with ASTM E 329 and that demonstrates the
laboratory's capabilities to perform applicable ASTM or AASHTO test procedures, as may be required.
Sec. 21.13.088 Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions
Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way shall not
allow the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or
removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street and/or right-of-way so as to restore
the same to its condition previous to the making of such excavation or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such
excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the
street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation.
Sec. 21.13.089 Emergency excavations
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit or duct in or under
any street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, article or permit, from making such excavation as may be
necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided
that the person making the excavation shall notify the right-of-way manager within 24 hours. Except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article for excavations authorized by this section, permittee shall be
subject to all fees and requirements of this article.
Sec. 21.13.090 Excavation in streets
Except in case of an emergency there shall be no excavation in any street without the prior written approval of
the right-of-way manager. Any request for a permit to excavate a street shall include a description of the
proposed work and proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement of clear and convincing evidence is
provided to the right-of-way manager as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of
excavating a street. All pavement cuts and repairs shall be performed by a contractor with experience in street
repair work. Any damage to pavement outside the removal area shall also be repaired subject to approval of the
right-of-way manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/720
(1) Excavation in Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is
PCC, the concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full the thickness of the concrete or
6", whichever is greater, and the full width of the trench, which shall also cut any reinforcing steel. A
second cut shall be 12 inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to
undisturbed soil. Further criteria is set forth in the city's standard details.
(2) Excavation in hot-mix asphalt concrete (HMAC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is
HMAC, the HMAC shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full thickness of the pavement or 6",
whichever is greater, and the full width of the trench, which shall also cut any reinforcing steel. A
second cut shall be 12 inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the pavement and excavated
to undisturbed soil. Further criteria is set forth in the city's standard details.
(3) Jacking and boring. A permittee or right-of-way user shall perform all work in conformance
with methods approved by the city and in such a manner as to not interfere or disturb existing or
planned infrastructure.
(4) Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or right-of-way user shall warrant
and be responsible for its repairs in the right-of-way for two years from the completion date of any
repair.
Sec. 21.13.091 Backfill of excavated area
(a) Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety.
Traffic bearing plates can be used temporarily in conformance with city requirements. At least one hour prior to
beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way manager of the time the
backfill will begin.
(b) All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during
a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be
considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base
that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. Compaction of all backfill shall be 95 percent of
maximum density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum moisture
content as determined by ASTM D698 under or near paved surfaces, future paved surfaces or otherwise as
determined by right-of-way manager. Outside of pavement surfaces, compaction of all backfill shall be 95
percent of maximum density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum
moisture content as determined by ASTM D698, and be smoothed, raked, and topsoil and grass or other
landscaping installed to match the surrounding conditions.
Sec. 21.13.092 Right-of-way restoration requirements
(a) The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and/or subsequent restoration of the right-ofway
must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the right-of-way
manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for
a permit extension.
(b) All earth, materials, sidewalk, pavement, utilities, conduits, crossing, irrigation, landscaping, monuments,
manhole covers, valve covers, meter box lids or improvements of any kind, which are owned or possessed by the
city, and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a right-of-way user shall be fully repaired promptly by the right-ofway
user, at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the right-of-way manager with material approved
by the city.
(c) After any excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope,
pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/720
The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth herein, and the repair shall be covered
by a maintenance bond for two years from the completion date of any repair.
(d) In the event the right-of-way user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition
required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and/or timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve
written notice upon the right-of-way user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory
arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way by the right-of-way user, the city may
take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the sole expense of the rightof-
way user, and right-of-way user, and its surety, shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the
city by reason of such prosecution an completion including, without limitation, the applicable public
inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city.
(e) If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the right-of-way user shall securely and adequately
cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of
the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel.
(f) In all right-of-way restoration, the right-of-way user guarantees its work and shall maintain it two years
from the date of completion of any restoration. During the period following completion, the right-of-way user
shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, and upon notification from the right-of-way manager,
reimburse the city for pavement restoration costs as provided for in this article. Additionally, the right-of-way
user, in the event of such failure, shall within 48 hours of notice from the city, repair the subject trench envelope.
(g) The two-year guarantee period shall be applicable to, among others, failure of the pavement surface as
well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by the city, the
right-of-way user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. In
locations where two or more right-of-way users have made repairs in the exact same location, the last right-ofway
user to excavate shall be responsible for the two-year guarantee in that location, unless the right-of-way
manager determines, in his sole discretion, that a failure was most likely a result of work performed by another
right-of-way user. That right-of-way user shall be responsible for the two-year maintenance period.
(h) All street excavations shall be perpendicular excavations, as possible, unless otherwise approved by the
right-of-way manager. Excavations in streets, which are not perpendicular excavations require block-to-block
and curb-to-curb pavement reconstruction, or other method of repair approved by the right-of-way manager. All
repairs shall be equal or better than that which existed prior to the commencement of any work.
(i) No trench shall be opened for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts for a distance greater than can
be backfilled on the same workday before sunset. Any variance from this requirement must be granted in writing
from the right-of-way manager prior to work beginning.
Sec. 21.13.093 Restoration of pavement
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the pavement of any street, alley, right-of-way or other
public place shall be performed by the permittee.
(1) No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more
than 200 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the
prior written consent of the right-of-way manager.
(2) All excavations shall comply with the city construction standards, as amended, and
requirements of this article. Unless otherwise required by city standards, as amended, or if unusual
conditions are encountered, the right-of-way manager may require new standards for compaction,
backfill and pavement restoration.
(3) Any excavated pavement, debris and/or other rubble shall be removed, together with any
surplus material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/720
backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the right-of-way user shall remove all loose
paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the
right-of-way manager.
(4) Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalks of any excavation, the pavements above such
caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled, compacted and sidewalk pavement restored. In no case
shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement.
Sec. 21.13.094 Permanent pavement repairs
The right-of-way user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated
area is complete. The right-of-way user shall make the final repairs within seven days on thoroughfares that are
classified as major and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the right-of-way manager
makes final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the right-of-way user.
Sec. 21.13.095 Substandard repair of pavement of right-of-way
In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should
become depressed, cracked or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been
made and during the two-year warranty, the right-of-way user shall comply with any applicable obligations of
this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to the city of the cost to restore the street and/or rightof-
way.
Sec. 21.13.096 Failure to complete work within specified time
In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the right-of-way user within the time required
or in accordance with the specifications required herein or by the right-of-way manager, the right-of-way
manager may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable
condition. The right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site.
Sec. 21.13.097 Removal and reconstruction where work is defective
All construction work in the streets, right-of-ways, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be
subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the sole opinion of the right-of-way manager, any
such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a
defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or
specification therefor given to him by the right-of-way manager, then upon written demand or notice from the
right-of-way manager, such right-of-way user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete and/or remove and
reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the right-of-way manager may require, and these provisions
shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or right-of-way user shall fail or refuse to
do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the right-of-way manager, then, if required by the right-of-way
manager, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the
city, in such a manner as in the opinion of the right-of-way manager may be necessary to make such work as
good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the
right-of-way manager, and the contractor or right-of-way user shall reimburse city for any and all cost incurred
by the city performing the work described in this section.
Sec. 21.13.098 Cleanup of right-of-way
In every case, and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials,
debris and waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the excavation shall be the sole
responsibility of the right-of-way user. The right-of-way user shall maintain the area on and around the
excavation and related work in a clean, safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation
and shall clean the same area upon completion of work. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a vacuum street
sweeper. The right-of-way user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/720
completion and approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the right-of-way manager, sufficient
reason therefor having been given to his satisfaction, grants a written extension of time.
Sec. 21.13.099 Reporting completion of work
When the work under permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city in accordance with the
requirements placed on the permit. The city will schedule a final walk-through with the contractor to develop a
final punch list of items to be remedied.
Sec. 21.13.100 Effect of article on persons engaged in construction
Any permit issued prior to the adoption of this article will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city
ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article,
except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in
accordance with this article.
Secs. 21.13.101–21.13.120 Reserved
Division 4. Indemnification, Insurance, Bonding and Liability
Sec. 21.13.121 Liability of right-of-way user
To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned
by any act and/or omission occurring in connection with its excavation, and subject to state law, the right-of-way
user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents,
representatives and volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands,
claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its
councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any
type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall
promptly notify a permittee, or right-of-way user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of
any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or
right-of-way user in connection with an excavation.
Sec. 21.13.122 Insurance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, unless exempt under this chapter, to construct, reconstruct or repair any
sidewalk, driveway, curb or curb and gutter in any street, alley, easement or right-of-way of the city without
having first executed and delivered to the city a current policy of liability insurance in an amount determined by
the city, and such insurance must be conditioned as follows: that the principal shall fully indemnify and hold the
city harmless from any and all cost, expense or damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done
to any person or property in the prosecution of the work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the
performance of such work. The city shall have no duty to perform under this article until such certificate has
been delivered to the department.
(b) The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense before issuing a permit, to receive copies of
the policies and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a
reasonable request for deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or
exclusions (except where policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon any party to the
policy or the underwriter of such policy). Upon such request by the city, the right-of-way user shall exercise
reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof.
(c) Right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, nonrenewal or material
change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days notice for
cancellation due to nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of
insurance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/720
(d) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the right-of-way
user may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from
the right-of-way user's, or its subcontractors', performance of the work performed in the public right-of-way.
(e) The city owned utilities shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein.
(f) With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general
(public) liability insurance coverage, the city right-of-way manager may, in his discretion, allow the right-of-way
user to self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to show the user has sufficient assets
and history of performance to justify the user to self-insure.
Sec. 21.13.123 Performance/assurance bond
Before a permit shall be issued, the right-of-way manager may, in his discretion, may require the applicant
and/or the person or entity for which the applicant is performing, to execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on
file with the city, a good and sufficient bond of performance or assurance, in the sum to be determined by the
city and conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate
claims for damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such
work or by reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction
thereof, and to hold the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and representatives,
free and harmless from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond which
shall cover the cost of repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done
that may become necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained
until the work is accepted by the city.
Sec. 21.13.124 Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work
Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or
becoming known, or which should have been known, during the guarantee period (the two years) shall be known
as maintenance or repair work, and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully
liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an
excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its sole expense, have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner,
the section of the restoration that has failed, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in
this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and
option to terminate the right-of-way user's guaranty, upon written notice to the right-of-way user. In such event,
the right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the
restoration work.
Sec. 21.13.125 When additional security required
In the event the right-of-way manager reasonably believes the contractor's or right-of-way user's solvency is
threatened, the right-of-way manager may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor and/or right-of-way
user for bonds, and the contractor and/or right-of-way user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or
bonds to the city.
Sec. 21.13.126 Decision of right-of-way manager binding on contractor, right-of-way user and sureties
If any question arises as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the rightof-
way manager shall be conclusive on the contractor, right-of-way user, and the sureties on all such bonds.
Secs. 21.13.127–21.13.140 Reserved
Division 5. Variances and Exemptions
Sec. 21.13.141 Variance/exemptions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/720
A permittee or right-of-way user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a
written request with the right-of-way manager stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. The rightof-
way manager may reject incomplete variance requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the
application process.
(1) Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in
writing, in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted
detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable.
(2) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any penalty and/or fee, other than as
provided in this article, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed
request stating the reasons therefor.
(3) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any permit, or any other requirement of this
article shall be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested exemption and/or
variance.
(4) The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance and/or exemption within ten
days of receipt of the application for variance and/or exemption.
(5) Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with section 21.13.051.
Secs. 21.13.142–21.13.160 Reserved
Division 6. Certified Telecommunication Providers
Sec. 21.13.161 Authority required/nonexclusive use
A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the PUCT pursuant to state law,
prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way
shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public rightof-
way, based on the act and all other state or federal laws.
Sec. 21.13.162 Transfer and notice
A CTP shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or
control of a CTP's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also
maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during
which the CTP uses the right-of-way.
Sec. 21.13.163 Exemption from fees
CTPs are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article:
(1) Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee;
(2) Additional permit fee;
(3) Saturday inspection fee;
(4) Registration fee.
Sec. 21.13.164 Waiver bonds
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/720
Unless determined otherwise by the right-of-way manager a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements
of this chapter, however, in the event that the right-of-way manager determines, based upon reasonable grounds,
that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the health and safety of the public, then the right-ofway
manager may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed $100,000.00. Factors to be
considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but are not limited to, a conviction for violation of
this article, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the provisions of this article or the failure to comply
with this article. If three years pass from the date that the right-of-way manager requires a bond of a CTP and it
has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required
pursuant to this section.
Sec. 21.13.165 Indemnity
A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code section 283.057, as may be
amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code section 283.057, as amended.
Secs. 21.13.166–21.13.180 Reserved
Division 7. Network Providers
Sec. 21.13.181 Authority required/nonexclusive use
A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization
pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The network provider's right to use
and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police
powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the Texas Local Gov't Code chapter 284 and all other state
or federal laws.
Sec. 21.13.182 Transfer and notice
A network provider shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the
ownership or control of a network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or
assignment. A network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the
right-of-way manager at all times during which the network uses the right-of-way.
Sec. 21.13.183 Indemnity
A network provider shall indemnify the city as specified by Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended.
(Ordinance 14-2017 adopted 8/7/17)
Sec. 21.13.184 Compliance with design manual
A network provider shall comply with the city design manual for the installation of network nodes and node
support poles, as amended by the right-of-way manager, unless a variance or exemption has been granted,
pursuant to section 21.13.141.
Sec. 21.13.185 Network provider fees; exemptions
Network providers must pay the network node application fee(s), the network node user fees and the transport
facility user fees, as applicable, as adopted in the city's master fee schedule. Network providers are exempted
from the following fees provided for in this article:
(1) Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/720
(2) Administration fee;
(3) Saturday inspection fee;
(4) Registration fee.
(Ordinance 29-2018 adopted 12/3/18)
Secs. 21.13.186–21.13.200 Reserved
Division 8. Miscellaneous
Sec. 21.13.201 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00, unless the violation
relates to fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping and refuse, in which the fine shall not
exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate
offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 14-2017 adopted 8/7/17)
CHAPTER 22
RESERVED
CHAPTER 23
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE 23.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 23.01.001 Authority; Extension to extraterritorial jurisdiction
(a) Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas,
including Chapter 212, Texas Local Government Code, being adopted after a public hearing on the matter held
on March 29, 2004.
(b) Application in the ETJ. The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted as the subdivision
ordinance of the city, also referred to herein as “this chapter”. The city council hereby extends the application of
this chapter to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as that area may exist from time to time. This chapter
shall be applicable to the filing of plats and to the subdivision and development of land, as those terms are
defined herein and in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, within the corporate limits of the city
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as they may be from time to time adjusted by annexation or disannexation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/720
The city shall have all remedies and rights provided by said Chapter 212 with regard to the control and approval
of land development, subdivisions and plats both within the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(c) Interlocal agreement with Dallas and Kaufman Counties. The city has executed interlocal cooperation
agreements with Dallas and Kaufman Counties as authorized under Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government
Code. Each of these Counties has assigned the city its respective authority to approve subdivision plats in the
city's ETJ. The agreements generally provide for the city to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with
specified regulations of Dallas or Kaufman County (as appropriate for any land parcel), within the applicable
areas of the city's ETJ (for specific responsibilities, see the separate interlocal agreement with the applicable
county). This subdivision chapter will therefore be enforced to the fullest extent possible in the ETJ as agreed
upon with Dallas and Kaufman Counties.
Sec. 23.01.002 Interpretation and purpose
(a) Minimum requirements. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, it is the
intention of the city council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be
minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions within the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(b) Quality of life; orderly development; protection of the public interest. The subdivision (i.e., platting) of
land is the first step in the process of development. The distribution and relationship of residential,
nonresidential and agricultural uses throughout the community, along with the system of improvements for
thoroughfares, utilities, public facilities and community amenities, determine, in large measure, the quality of
life enjoyed by the residents of the city. Health, safety, economy, amenities, environmental sensitivity, and
convenience are all factors which influence and determine a community's quality of life and overall character. A
community's quality of life is of the public interest. Consequently, the subdivision of land, as it affects a
community's quality of life, is an activity where regulation is a valid function of municipal government. The
regulations contained herein are intended to encourage the development of a quality municipal environment by
establishing standards for the provision of adequate light, air, open space, stormwater drainage, transportation,
public utilities and facilities, and other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy,
attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its
human and natural resources. Through the application of these regulations, the interests of the public, as well as
those of public and private parties, both present and future, having interest in property affected by this chapter,
are protected by the granting of certain rights and privileges. By establishing a fair and rational procedure for
developing land, the requirements in this chapter further the possibility that land will be developed for its most
beneficial use in accordance with existing social, economic and environmental conditions.
(c) Purpose. The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions and
developments of land within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city are intended to:
(1) Promote the development and the utilization of land in a manner that assures an attractive and
high quality community environment in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning
ordinance of the city;
(2) Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and
to inform them of the standards which shall be required;
(3) Protect the public interest by imposing standards for the location, design, class and type of
streets, walkways (i.e., sidewalks), alleys, utilities and essential public services;
(4) Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the city's limits and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(5) Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/720
(6) Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the existing community, and coordinate
the future development of adjoining tracts;
(7) Provide that the cost of improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the tract
of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of
improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the
whole community as contained in this chapter;
(8) Ensure the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services for each tract
being subdivided;
(9) Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings; provide for the
circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, having particular regard to the avoidance of
congestion in the streets and highways; provide for pedestrian circulation that is appropriate for the
various uses of land and buildings; and provide the proper location and width of streets;
(10) Prevent pollution of the air, streams and bodies of water; assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities; safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and
endangered or threatened plant and animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of
natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of
the community and the value of the land;
(11) Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality, and ensure development that
is appropriate with regard to these natural features;
(12) Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision;
(13) Ensure that public or private facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve
proposed and future developments and citizens within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(14) Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the community;
(15) Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood and other danger;
and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
(16) Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the community, and
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the community;
(17) Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the community and the value of buildings
and improvements upon the land, and minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
(18) Guide public and private policy and action in providing adequate and efficient transportation
systems, public utilities, and other public amenities and facilities; and
(19) Encourage the development of a stable, prospering economic environment.
(d) Minimum design standards. Minimum standards for development are contained in the city's technical
construction standards and specifications (TCSS), the zoning ordinance, the city's building codes, applicable
articles of the code of ordinances, and in this chapter. However, the comprehensive plan (including the future
land use plan, thoroughfare plan, parks, recreation and open space master plan, and other related plans) contains
policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of development in Seagoville and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating land
development, a standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous municipal setting
and physical environment within the community. Subdivision design shall be of a quality that will carry out the
purpose and spirit of the policies expressed within the comprehensive plan and within this chapter, and shall be
encouraged to exceed the minimum standards required herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/720
Sec. 23.01.003 Application of regulations
(a) Final plat approval and construction of improvements required. No subdivision plat shall be recorded until
a final plat, accurately describing the property to be conveyed, has been approved in accordance with this
chapter and with other applicable city regulations (described in subsection 23.01.003(b) below). No building
permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, floodplain permit, utility tap, or certificate
of acceptance for required public improvements shall be issued by the city for any parcel of land or plat until:
(1) A final plat has been approved in accordance with this chapter; and
(2) All improvements required by this chapter have been constructed and accepted by the city, or
(3) Assurances for completion of improvements have been provided in accordance with article
23.06 of this chapter.
(b) Compliance with city plans and ordinances required. Compliance with all city ordinances pertaining to the
subdivision of land, and the comprehensive plan (as amended), shall be required prior to approval of any
development application governed by this chapter. It is the property owner's responsibility to be familiar with,
and to comply with, city ordinances and the comprehensive plan (as amended). Applicable ordinances and other
requirements include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Comprehensive plan (as amended), which includes the future land use plan, thoroughfare plan,
parks, recreation and open space master plan, and all other associated maps and plans;
(2) Zoning ordinance;
(3) Building codes;
(4) Flood damage prevention code and floodplain management ordinance;
(5) Fire prevention code(s); and
(6) Other applicable chapters of the city's code of ordinances.
Sec. 23.01.004 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development activity
within the city's limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels; or
(2) All subdivisions of land whether by metes and bounds division or by plat, which were outside
the jurisdiction of the city's subdivision regulations in Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable),
Texas and which subsequently came within the jurisdiction of the city's subdivision regulations
through:
(A) Annexation; or
(B) Extension of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction; or
(3) The combining of two (2) or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of
creating one (1) or more legal lots in order to achieve a more developable site, except as otherwise
provided herein; or
(4) When a building permit is required for the following uses:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/720
(A) Residential single-family:
(i) Construction of a new single-family dwelling unit; or
(ii) Moving of a primary structure or a main building onto a piece of property; or
(iii) Construction of a structure or building in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
whether or not land is being subdivided; or
(B) Nonresidential and multifamily:
(i) Construction of a new nonresidential or multifamily structure; or
(ii) Additions, such as increasing the square footage of an existing building by more
than twenty percent (20%) of its gross floor area; or
(iii) Moving a primary structure or a main building onto a piece of property; or
(iv) Construction of a structure or building in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
whether or not land is being subdivided; or
(5) For tracts where any public improvements are proposed; or
(6) Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land lying within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction into two (2) or more tracts, and claims exemption from Subchapter A of Chapter 212 of
the Texas Local Government Code for purposes of development, that results in parcels or lots all
greater than five (5) acres in size; or in the event that development of any such tract is intended, and
where no public improvement is proposed or required by the city to be dedicated, he shall first obtain
approval of a development plat that meets the requirements of Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Regulation of Property Development, sections 212.041 through 212.050,
as may be amended. (See section 23.02.005 of this chapter for requirements for development plats.)
Sec. 23.01.005 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Development of land legally platted and approved prior to the effective date of this chapter,
except as otherwise provided for herein (construction of facilities and structures shall conform to
design and construction standards in effect at the time of construction) and for which no
resubdivision is sought; or
(2) Development of land constituting a single tract, lot, site or parcel for which a legal deed of
record describing the boundary of said tract, lot, site or parcel was filed of record in the Deed
Records of Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable), Texas on or before the effective date of the
city's first Subdivision Ordinance, Ordinance No. 640 (adopted November 5, 1987); or
(3) Sale, inheritance, or gift of land by metes and bounds of tracts upon which no improvements,
development, subdivision or alteration is occurring or is planned to occur; or
(4) Existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; or
(5) Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(6) When a permit is requested for unplatted or already platted parcels for one or more of the
following activities:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/720
(A) Replacement or reconstruction of an existing single-family or duplex structure, but not to
exceed the original square footage, nor deviate from the original location, of the original
structure;
(B) Single-family or duplex residential building additions (i.e., increasing the square footage
of a residence), of not over fifty percent (50%) of the existing original structure's value, and of
not over twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the original structure;
(C) Accessory buildings (as defined in the zoning ordinance);
(D) Remodeling or repair (exterior or interior) which involves no expansion of square
footage; or
(E) Moving a structure off a lot or parcel, or for demolition permits.
Sec. 23.01.006 Pending applications
All applications for plat approval, including final plats, that are pending on the effective date of this chapter and
which have not lapsed shall be reviewed under the regulations in effect immediately preceding the effective date
of this chapter.
Sec. 23.01.007 Interpretation; conflict; severability
(a) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the regulations contained in this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
(b) Conflict with other laws. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except as provided in this chapter. To the extent
that this chapter promulgates standards or imposes restrictions or duties which differ from those imposed by
other city ordinances, rules or regulations, the regulations contained within this chapter shall supersede such
other provisions to the extent of any conflict or inconsistency.
(c) Severability. If any part or provision of this chapter, or the application of this chapter to any person or
circumstance, is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall
be rendered, and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application
of them to other persons or circumstances. The city council hereby declares that it would have enacted the
remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application which is judged to be
invalid.
Sec. 23.01.008 Saving provision
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing
subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under
any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city except as shall be expressly provided in
this chapter.
Sec. 23.01.009 Waivers/suspensions
(a) General. Where the planning and zoning commission makes a finding that undue hardships will result
from strict compliance with a certain provision(s) of this chapter, or where the purposes of these regulations may
be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a waiver/suspension from any portion of
these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured, provided that the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/720
waiver/suspension shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, and further
provided that the commission shall not approve a waiver/suspension unless it shall make findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
(1) Granting the waiver/suspension will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare,
and will not be injurious to other property or to the owners of other property, and the
waiver/suspension will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other property in the vicinity;
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a waiver/suspension is based are unique to the
property for which the waiver/suspension is sought, and are not applicable generally to other
property;
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape and/or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out;
(4) The waiver/suspension will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance or
comprehensive plan (as amended) or any other adopted plan(s) or ordinance(s) of the city; and
(5) An alternate design will generally achieve the same result or intent as the standards and
regulations prescribed herein.
Such findings of the commission, together with the specific facts upon which such
findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the commission
meeting at which a waiver/suspension is considered. A waiver/suspension from any
provision of this chapter may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and
substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the property owner or developer, standing
alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(b) Criteria for waivers/suspensions from development exactions other than streets. Where the commission
finds that the imposition of any development exaction pursuant to these regulations exceeds reasonable benefit
to the property to be platted or developed, or is so excessive as to constitute confiscation of the tract to be
platted, it may approve a full or partial, at its discretion, waiver/suspension to such requirements, so as to
prevent such excess.
(c) Criteria for waivers/suspensions for street exactions. Where the commission finds that the imposition of
any dedication or construction requirement for streets pursuant to this chapter exceeds reasonable benefit to the
property to be platted or developed, it may approve a full or partial, at its discretion, waiver/suspension to such
requirements so as to prevent such excess. In order to qualify for a waiver/suspension under this section, the
property owner shall demonstrate that the costs of right-of-way dedication and construction of streets other than
streets classified as local streets imposed pursuant to these regulations substantially exceeds the proportionality
standards as outlined in section 23.01.015 of this chapter.
(d) Conditions. In approving a waiver/suspension from any provision in this chapter, the commission may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in section 23.01.002.
(e) Procedures:
(1) A petition for a waiver/suspension shall be submitted in writing to the municipal development
review committee by the property owner before, or at the same time as, the first required
development application (such as the construction plat) is submitted for the consideration of the
planning and zoning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application, and all
of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/720
(2) All requests for waivers/suspensions shall be considered by the planning and zoning
commission, which shall have the authority to decide such requests in conjunction with the plat or
development application. The commission shall review the information submitted by the applicant
regarding a request for waiver/suspension under this section, and shall vote to:
(A) Approve the waiver/suspension as submitted by the applicant;
(B) Approve the waiver/suspension subject to conditions deemed appropriate by the
commission to safeguard the public health, safety or welfare, or to avoid unfairness or inequity
with other nearby property owners or the general public; or
(C) Deny the waiver/suspension.
(3) A decision by the commission to deny a request for a waiver/suspension to any provision in this
subdivision ordinance may be appealed by the applicant to city council provided that such appeal is
submitted in writing to the municipal development review committee within ten (10) calendar days
following the commission's decision. In the event of an appeal, the city council's decision on a
request for a waiver/suspension shall be final.
Sec. 23.01.010 Payment of all indebtedness attributable to a specific property
No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving or other infrastructure fees or assessments, delinquent
fees, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the city, and which are directly attributable to a piece of
property, shall be allowed to receive approval for any development application (e.g., plat, replat, engineering
plans, etc.) until the taxes, assessments, debts or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by
the property owner or a previous owner thereof shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an
arrangement satisfactory to the city manager (or his/her designee) has been made for the timely full payment of
such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes,
assessments, debts or obligations to the city have been paid in full at the time of submission for any application
for approval under this chapter. A tax certificate(s) shall also be provided by the applicant with any development
application as required by section 12.002 of the Texas Property Code.
Sec. 23.01.011 Right to deny hearing and plat
The city may deny a hearing and any approval pursuant to this chapter if the applicant does not submit the
information and fees required by this chapter.
Sec. 23.01.012 Misrepresentation of facts
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or willfully misrepresent, or fail to include, any
information required by this chapter in any plat or development application or during any public hearing or
meeting of the commission (or city council, as applicable). Such a violation shall constitute grounds for denial of
the plat or development application.
Sec. 23.01.013 Adequate public facilities policy
(a) Adequate service for areas proposed for development. Land proposed for development in the city and in
the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services,
including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, drainage facilities and park
facilities. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities
necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are
to be located within the property being developed or off-site.
(1) New development must be supported by adequate levels of public facilities and services.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/720
(2) It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of rights-of-way and easements for
capital improvements to support new development at the earliest stage of the development process.
(3) Requirements for dedication and construction of public infrastructure improvements to serve a
proposed new development should be attached as conditions of approval of any development
application that contains a specific layout of the development.
(4) There is an essential nexus between the demand on public facilities systems created by a new
development and the requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct capital
improvements to offset such impacts.
(5) The city desires to assure both that development impacts are mitigated through contributions of
rights-of-way, easements and construction of capital improvements, and that a development project
contribute not more than its proportionate share of such costs.
(b) Conformance to plans. Proposed capital improvements serving new development shall conform to and be
properly related to the public facilities elements of the city's adopted comprehensive plan (as amended), other
adopted master plans for public facilities and services (as amended), and applicable capital improvements plans,
and shall at least meet the service levels specified in such plans.
(c) Adequacy of specific facilities.
(1) Water. All lots, tracts or parcels of a proposed or new development shall be connected to a
public water system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and emergency purposes,
including adequate fire protection. Additional standards and requirements are defined in sections
23.03.003, 23.03.009, 23.05.001 and 23.05.008 of this subdivision ordinance.
(2) Wastewater. All lots, tracts or parcels of a proposed or new development shall be served by an
approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city manager (or designee) shall be
responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city
may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate
wastewater capacity. Additional standards and requirements are defined in sections 23.03.003,
23.03.009, 23.05.001 and 23.05.008 of this subdivision ordinance.
(3) Roads. The roadway system surrounding and serving a proposed or new development shall
provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation,
and shall be properly related to the city's adopted thoroughfare plan (as amended), and shall be
appropriate for the particular anticipated traffic characteristics and volumes of each proposed
subdivision or development. New developments shall be supported by a thoroughfare network having
adequate capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. Each development shall have adequate
access to the city's improved thoroughfare network. Additional standards and requirements are
defined in sections 23.03.001, 23.03.002, 23.03.003, 23.03.004, 23.03.005, 23.05.001, 23.05.005 and
23.05.009 of this subdivision ordinance.
(4) Storm drainage. Drainage improvements serving a proposed or new development shall
accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area under developed conditions,
and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The
city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as stormwater retention
or detention, the construction of off-site drainage improvements, and/or drainage impact fees in order
to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development. Additional standards and requirements are
defined in sections 23.03.003, 23.03.010, 23.04.001, 23.04.002, 23.05.001 and 23.05.010 of this
subdivision ordinance.
(5) Other utility services (not provided by the city). All lots, tracts or parcels of a proposed or new
development shall be served by other non-city-provided utility services, including but not limited to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/720
electricity, natural gas and telephone services. Additional standards and requirements are defined in
sections 23.03.008 and 23.05.001 of this subdivision ordinance.
(6) Parks and open space. All lots, tracts or parcels or [of] a proposed or new development shall be
served by, and shall have reasonable access and proximity to, the city's public park and open space
system as shown on the parks, recreation and open space master plan (as amended). Additional
standards and requirements are defined in sections 23.03.009, 23.04.001, 23.04.004, 23.05.001 and
23.05.008 of this subdivision ordinance.
(d) City options. In order to maintain prescribed levels of public facilities and services for the health, safety
and general welfare of its citizens, the city may require the dedication of easements and rights-of-way for, and/or
the construction of, on-site or off-site public infrastructure improvements for water, wastewater, road, storm
drainage, utility and/or park facilities to serve a proposed development, or the city may require the payment of
fees in lieu thereof. If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided concurrent with the
schedule of development proposed, the city may deny the development until the public facilities and services can
be provided, or the city may require that the development be phased so that the delivery of facilities and services
coincides with the demand for the facilities that is created by the development. The city may impose any
conditions relating to the provision of required infrastructure or improvements that is specified by an ordinance
establishing or amending the zoning for the property (such as, but not limited to, a planned development
ordinance).
(e) Property owner's/developer's obligations.
(1) Dedication and construction of improvements. The property owner shall dedicate all rights-ofway
and easements for, and shall construct, capital improvements within the rights-of-way or
easements for those water, wastewater, road, drainage, utility and park improvements needed to
adequately serve a proposed development consistent with the city's applicable master facilities plans,
whether the facilities are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries of the property being
developed.
(2) Adjacent road improvements. In the case of adjacent or abutting roads, the city may require
that the entire right-of-way be dedicated and improved to city design standards, depending on factors
such as the impact of the development on the road, the timing of development in relation to need for
the road or improvements to the road, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a
timely manner. In the case of frontage or service roads for state and federally designated highways
and roadways, the entire abutting right-of-way shall be dedicated and improved to applicable design
standards.
(3) Substandard road improvements. Where an existing road that does not meet the city's right-ofway
or design standards abuts or passes through a proposed development, the city may require the
property owner to dedicate the right-of-way for the road's ultimate planned width as shown on the
thoroughfare plan (as amended), and to improve the road according to the dimensions and
specifications in the thoroughfare plan (as amended) and in the city's TCSS, depending on factors
such as the anticipated impact of the development on the roadway, the timing of development in
relation to the need for the roadway, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a
timely manner.
(4) Facilities impact studies. The city may require that a property owner prepare a comprehensive
traffic impact study, storm drainage study or other public facilities study in order to assist the city in
determining whether a proposed development will be supported with adequate levels of public
facilities and services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created by the development. The
study shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing facilities and the nature and extent of any
deficiencies, and the capital improvements needed to meet the adopted level of service assuming
development at the intensity proposed in the development application. The study shall be subject to
approval by the city's engineer and by the city manager (or designee). The city also may require, at
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/720
the time of approval of any subsequent development application, an update of a public facilities study
approved in connection with a prior development application for the subject property.
(f) Timing of dedication and construction.
(1) Initial provision for dedication or construction. The city shall require an initial demonstration
that a proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services at the time of
approval of the first development application that portrays a specific plan of development, including
but not limited to a petition for rezoning a property including establishing a planned development
(PD) zoning district or other overlay zoning district; a petition for an annexation agreement or a
development agreement; an application for a site layout concept plan or site plan; and an application
for a concept plan or any type of plat. As a condition of approval of the development application, the
city may require provision for dedication of rights-of-way or easements for, and construction of,
capital improvements to serve the proposed development.
(2) Deferral of obligation. The obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for and/or to construct one or
more capital improvements to serve a new development may be deferred until approval of a
subsequent phase of the subdivision, at the sole discretion of the planning and zoning commission
(see section 23.06.010 of this chapter) during consideration of plat approval, upon written request of
the property owner, or at the city's own initiative. As a condition of deferring the obligation, the city
may require that the developer enter into a subdivision improvement agreement specifying the time
for dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of capital improvements needed to serve the
development (see section 23.06.010 of this chapter).
Sec. 23.01.014 Determination of vested rights
(a) Vested rights provision.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one or more standards
of this subdivision ordinance should not be applied to a construction or final plat application by
operation of state law, or whether certain plats are subject to expiration.
(2) Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a construction or
final plat application. A vested rights petition also may be filed to prevent expiration of certain plats
pursuant to section 23.02.001.
(3) Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the plat application shall be
decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior subdivision
requirements or development standards, or the approved plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be
extended.
(b) Petition requirements.
(1) Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or applicant with
a construction or final plat application, or by the holder of a plat subject to expiration pursuant to
section 23.02.001.
(2) Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for
some or all of the land subject to the plat application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter
245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 43.002 or successor
statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to
the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following
information and documents:
(A) A narrative description of the grounds for the petition;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/720
(B) A copy of each approved or pending development application which is the basis for the
contention that the city may not apply current standards to the plat application which is the
subject of the petition;
(C) The official date of submittal of the plat application, or of a development plan pursuant to
which the plat was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date established under
section 23.02.001;
(D) The date the project for which the application for the plat was submitted was
commenced;
(E) Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the plat application from which
relief is sought;
(F) Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the plat application
(i.e., those that deviate from the city's current standards);
(G) Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the plat
application at issue;
(H) A copy of any prior vested rights determination by the city involving the same land; and
(I) [Reserved]
(J) Where the petitioner alleges that a plat subject to expiration under section 23.02.001
should not be terminated, a description of the events, including any plat or other development
applications on file, that the petitioner believes should prevent such termination.
(3) Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed simultaneously with a plat
application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of
expiration of a plat subject to expiration under section 23.02.001.
(c) Processing of petition and decision.
(1) Responsible official. The responsible official to process the vested rights petition shall be the
city manager (or designee). A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city's Attorney following
acceptance.
(2) Decision by planning and zoning commission on petition. The commission shall render a
decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the plat application, based
upon the report and recommendation of the responsible official.
(3) Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner may appeal the commission's decision on the
vested rights petition to the city council if such appeal is submitted in writing to the responsible
official within ten (10) calendar days following the date of the commission's decision, and such
appeal shall be accompanied by a written waiver of the state-mandated thirty-day review time for
plats, and such appeal shall not be deemed officially submitted until such waiver is received by the
city. An appeal under this subsection stays further proceedings on any plat or development
application for any portion of the subject property, and it also stays acceptance of filing of any related
plat or development applications for any portion of the subject property.
(4) Decision by city council. The city council on appeal shall decide the vested rights petition after
considering the responsible official's report and the decision by the planning and zoning commission
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
(d) Action on petition and order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/720
(1) Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the
following actions:
(A) Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be
reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or
(B) Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be
reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in petition-identified prior
subdivision regulations; or
(C) Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain current standards shall be applied
to the plat application, while standards contained in petition-identified prior subdivision
regulations also shall be applied; or
(D) For petitions filed pursuant to section 23.02.001, determine whether the approved plat
should be terminated, or specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for such plat.
(2) Order on the petition. The responsible official's report and each decision on the vested rights
petition shall be memorialized in an official action by the decision-maker (i.e., planning and zoning
commission, or city council on appeal) identifying the following:
(A) The nature of the relief granted, if any;
(B) The approved or filed plat application(s) or other development application(s) upon which
relief is premised under the petition;
(C) Current standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought;
(D) Prior standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought,
including any procedural standards;
(E) The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part
on the petition; and
(F) For petitions filed pursuant to section 23.02.001, determine whether the approved plat
should be terminated, and specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the plat.
(e) Criteria for approval. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following
factors:
(1) The nature and extent of prior plat or other development applications filed or approved for the
land subject to the petition;
(2) Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property
subject to the petition;
(3) Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated
in accordance with law;
(4) Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current subdivision ordinance
from which the applicant seeks relief;
(5) Whether any prior approved plat(s) or other development application(s) relied upon by the
petitioner have expired; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/720
(6) For petitions filed pursuant to section 23.02.001, whether any of the events preventing
expiration have occurred.
(f) Application following relief order. Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the
property owner shall conform the plat application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the plat
application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary.
Where proceedings have been stayed on the plat application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the
planning and zoning commission (or city council on appeal), proceedings on the application shall resume after
the commission's (or council's, on appeal) decision on the vested rights petition.
(g) Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one (1) of the following
events:
(1) The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised plat application consistent
with the relief granted within thirty (30) calendar days of the final decision on the petition; or
(2) The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under
the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or
(3) The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires.
Sec. 23.01.015 Proportionality appeal
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Public infrastructure improvement means a water, wastewater, street, drainage or park facility
that is a part of one or more of the city's public facilities systems (see also definition for “Public
Improvements” in section 23.01.016, definitions, which shall also apply here).
(2) Public facilities system means the collection of water, wastewater, street, drainage or park
facilities owned or operated by or in behalf of the city for the purpose of providing services to the
public, including existing and new developments.
(b) Purpose, applicability and effect.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that a requirement to dedicate,
construct or pay a fee for a public infrastructure improvement imposed on a proposed plat or
development application as a condition of approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden
on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the
proposed development on the city's public facilities systems.
(2) Applicability. An appeal under this section may be filed by a property owner to contest any
requirement to dedicate land, to construct improvements or to pay development fees, other than
impact fees, for a public infrastructure improvement, which requirement is imposed under the city's
subdivision ordinance to a plat or development application pursuant to this chapter, whether the
requirement is applicable under uniform standards, or is imposed pursuant to an individual evaluation
of the proposed subdivision.
(c) Proportionality determination by city's engineer. Prior to a decision by the planning and zoning
commission on any plat or development application filed under this chapter, the city's engineer shall prepare a
report affirming that each public infrastructure improvement to be imposed as a condition of plat or development
approval is roughly proportionate to the demand created by the development on the city's public facilities
systems, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the development proposed.
(1) In making his proportionality determination, the city's engineer may rely upon categorical
findings pertaining to on-site improvements; the proposed or potential use, and intensity of use, of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/720
land; the timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels of public
facilities; impact fee studies or other studies that measure the demand for services created by the
development and the impact on the city's public facilities systems; the function of the public
infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed development; the degree to which public
infrastructure improvements to serve the subdivision are supplied by other developments; the
anticipated participation by the city in the costs of such improvements; any reimbursements for the
costs of public infrastructure improvements for which the proposed development is eligible; or any
other information relating to the mitigating effects of the public infrastructure improvements on the
impacts created by the development on the city's public facilities systems.
(2) Based upon his proportionality determination, the city's engineer shall affirm that the public
infrastructure improvement requirements of the subdivision ordinance do not impose costs on the
developer for such improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to those incurred by the
city in providing public facilities to serve the development.
(3) The city's engineer may promulgate any application requirements that may assist in making the
proportionality determination required by this subsection.
(d) Commission determination. The city's planning and zoning commission shall take into account the city's
engineer's report concerning the proportionality of public infrastructure improvement requirements to be applied
to a proposed plat or development application, as the case may be, in making its decision on the application, and
shall identify any variation to the requirements that are to be included as conditions to approval of the plat or
development application.
(e) Appeals.
(1) Who may appeal. An appeal to the city council under this section may be filed by a property
owner or the applicant for a plat or development application, in which a requirement to dedicate land
for, construct or pay a fee, other than an impact fee, for a public infrastructure improvement has been
applied or attached as a condition of approval, or as grounds for denying the plat or development
application by the planning and zoning commission.
(2) Time for filing and request for extension of time. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten
(10) calendar days following the date the planning and zoning commission takes action applying the
public infrastructure improvement requirement to the plat or development application. The appeal
shall be filed with the city manager (or designee), and shall be forwarded to the city council for
consideration in conjunction with its deliberations on the appealed plat or development application.
The applicant may request postponement of consideration of the plat or development application by
the city council pending preparation of the study required by subsection (4) below, in which case the
applicant shall also waive in writing the statutory period for deciding plats for the time needed to
decide the appeal by the city council.
(3) Form of appeal. An appeal under this section shall allege that application of the standard or the
imposition of conditions relating to the dedication, construction or fee requirement is not roughly
proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the city's
public facilities systems, or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development.
(4) Study required. The appellant shall provide a detailed study in support of the appeal that
includes the following information within thirty (30) calendar days following submission of the
written request of appeal:
(A) Total capacity of the city's water, wastewater, street, drainage and park facilities
system(s) to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity
and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system
capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/720
phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including
any phases already developed.
(B) Total capacity to be supplied to the city's water, wastewater, street, drainage and park
facilities system(s) by the dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements or fee
contribution. If the project is proposed as a phased development, the information shall include
any capacity supplied by prior dedication, construction or fee payments.
(C) Comparison of the capacity of the city's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the
proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed
dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements, or fee payment. In making this
comparison, the impacts on the city's public facilities system(s) from the entire development
shall be considered.
(D) The amount of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the public infrastructure
improvement to be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements.
(E) Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts
created by the proposed development and the dedication, construction or fee requirement
imposed by the city.
(f) Land in extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where the subdivision or the public infrastructure improvements are
located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and are to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal
agreement under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 242, an appeal or study in support of the appeal shall
not be accepted as complete for filing by the city manager (or designee) unless the appeal or study is
accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to Dallas and/or Kaufman County(s), as applicable
(i.e., the county(s) in which the facilities are to be located).
(g) Decision. The city council shall decide the appeal in conjunction with its decision on the appealed plat or
development application. The council shall base its decision on the criteria listed in subsection (h) below, and
may take one of the following actions.
(1) Deny the appeal, and impose the standard or condition on the plat or development application
in accordance with the city's engineer's recommendation and/or the planning and zoning
commission's decision on the plat or development application; or
(2) Deny the appeal, upon finding that the proposed dedication, construction or fee requirements
are inadequate to offset the impacts of the subdivision on the public facilities system(s) for water,
wastewater, street, drainage or park improvements, and either deny the plat or development
application or require that additional public infrastructure improvements be made as a condition of
approval of the plat or development application; or
(3) Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part any dedication, construction or fee requirement
for public infrastructure improvements to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or
(4) Grant the appeal, and direct that the city participate in the costs of acquiring land for or
constructing the public infrastructure improvement under standard participation policies.
(h) Criteria for approval. In deciding an appeal under this section, the city council shall determine whether the
application of the standard or condition requiring dedication of an interest in land for, construction of, or
payment of a fee for public infrastructure improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the
impacts created by the proposed subdivision on the city's public facilities systems for water, wastewater, street,
drainage and park facilities, and reasonably benefits the development. In making such determination, the council
shall consider the evidence submitted by the appellant, the city's engineer's report and recommendation, and the
planning and zoning commission's review and assessment on the application, considering in particular the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/720
factors identified in subsection (c) above, and, where the property is located within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, any recommendations from the county.
(i) Action following decision. If the relief requested under the proportionality appeal is granted in whole or in
part by the city council on appeal, the dedication, construction or fee requirement initially imposed by the
planning and zoning commission as a condition of plat or development application approval shall be modified
accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to the commission's approval of the plat or
development application shall be conformed to the relief granted. Thereafter, the appellant shall resubmit the plat
or development application to the city council within ninety (90) calendar days following the date relief under
the appeal is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the city council's decision on the appeal.
(j) Expiration of relief. If an applicant for plat or development application approval prevails on a
proportionality appeal, but fails to conform the plat to the relief granted by the city council with the ninety-day
(90-day) period provided above, the relief granted by the city council on the appeal shall expire and shall be
deemed null and void.
(1) The council may extend the time for filing the revised plat or development application for good
cause shown, but in any event, the expiration date for the relief granted shall not be extended beyond
one calendar year (i.e., 365 calendar days) from the date relief was granted on the appeal.
(2) If the plat or development application is modified pursuant to this section, and such
modifications result in an increase in the number of residential units or the intensity of nonresidential
uses, the city may require a new study to validate the relief granted by the city council.
(3) If the plat or development application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds,
a new petition for relief shall be required on any subsequent application.
Sec. 23.01.016 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be
determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The word
“shall” is always mandatory, while the word “may” is merely directory.
Addition. A lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city which is intended for the purpose of subdivision or development.
Administrative officers or officials. Any officer of the city referred to in this chapter by title, including but not
limited to the city engineer, city secretary, fire chief, police chief, public works official and chief building
official shall be the person so retained in that position by the city, or his or her duly authorized representative.
This definition shall also include civil engineering, planning, legal, financial, traffic engineering and other
consultants retained by the city to supplement or support existing city staff, as deemed appropriate by the city.
Alley. A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is
used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties that derive primary access from a
street. The length of an alley segment is to be measured from the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the
alley is provided access, or from the centerpoint of an intersection with another alley which connects to a street.
Amended or amending plat. A revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to a recorded plat, in
accordance with section 212.016, as amended, of the Texas Local Government Code.
Amenity. An improvement to be dedicated to the public or to the common ownership of the lot owners of the
subdivision and providing an aesthetic, recreational or other benefit, other than those prescribed by this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/720
Applicant. A person or entity who submits an application for an approval required by this chapter. Also
sometimes referred to as “developer”, “subdivider”, or other similar term.
Application. A written request for an approval required by this chapter.
Approval (by planning and zoning commission). Unless otherwise cited in this chapter or provided in state law,
the city's planning and zoning commission is the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, in
accordance with section 212.006 of the Texas Local Government Code. The only appeal to a decision by the
commission shall be the city council.
Approving body. See “approval (by planning and zoning commission)”.
Assurance. Any form of security that is submitted to the city for the purpose of ensuring that adequate monies
are available for the construction of improvements in relation to an approved plat application, development
application and/or engineering/construction plans (also see section 23.06.002).
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Block length or street length. For a residential subdivision, that distance measured along the centerline of the
street from the intersection centerpoint of one through street to the intersecting centerpoint of another street, or
to the midpoint of a cul-de-sac. The through street referred to above shall not be a cul-de-sac, a dead-end street,
or a looped street, but shall be a street which clearly has two points of ingress from two different directions.
Bond. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the city.
Building setback line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building
or other structure and the adjacent street right-of-way line, property line, a creek, or some other specific feature.
Capital improvements program (CIP). The official proposed schedule, if any, of all future public projects listed
together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project, as adopted by city council.
City. The City of Seagoville, Texas.
City attorney. The term “city attorney” shall apply only to such attorney, or firm of attorney[s], that has been
specifically employed by the city to assist in legal matters. This term shall also apply if the city retains a person
to perform the functions of city attorney as an official city employee.
City council. The duly elected governing body of the city.
City engineer. The term “city engineer” shall apply only to such licensed professional engineer, or firm of
licensed professional consulting engineers, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in
engineering-related matters. This term shall also apply if the city retains a person to perform the functions of city
engineer as an official city employee.
City manager. The person holding the position of the city's chief executive officer (e.g., city manager), as
appointed by the city council, as the term is applicable to the city's form of management (per the city charter).
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Comprehensive plan. The phrase “comprehensive plan” shall mean the comprehensive plan of the city and
adjoining areas as adopted by the city council, including all its revisions and Plan elements (including, but not
limited to, the future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, parks, recreation and open space master plan, etc.). This
plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private
buildings, streets, parks, water and wastewater facilities, and other public and private developments and
improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/720
Concept plan. A drawing of the overall conceptual layout of a proposed development, superimposed upon a
topographic map which generally shows the anticipated plan of development, and which serves as a working
base for noting and incorporating suggestions of the city's administrative officers, the commission, and others
who are consulted prior to preparation of the construction plat. A concept plan is also sometimes referred to as a
“preliminary site plan”, a “sketch plan” or a “land study”.
Construction plat (also “preliminary plat”). The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for
subdividing, improving and developing a tract, showing in plan view the proposed street and lot layout,
easements, dedications and other pertinent features, with such notations as are sufficient to substantially identify
the general scope and detail of the proposed development. The preliminary plat is referred to as the
“construction plat” herein, since the engineering plans for public improvements are submitted along with it, and
since it contributes toward authorization to proceed with construction of the subdivision and its associated public
improvements, subject to any additions, alterations, plan approval and construction release by the city
engineer[.]
Contiguous. Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line or point of one lot touches a boundary line, or
lines, or point of another lot.
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular
turnaround or “bulb”. The length of a cul-de-sac is to be measured from the intersection centerpoint of the
adjoining through street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Easement. The word “easement” shall mean an area for restricted use on private property upon which the city or
a public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs
and other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance
or efficiency of its respective systems within said easements. The city and public utilities shall, at all times, have
the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing,
inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of their respective systems without the
necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone.
Engineer. A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act
to practice the profession of engineering.
Engineering plans or drawings. The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location
and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the
city as a condition of approval of the plat.
Escrow. A deposit of cash with the city in accordance with this chapter.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency of the U.S. government.
Final plat (also “record plat” or “as-built plat”). The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision
of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer,
with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner, and with all boundaries, corners and curves of the
land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. The final plat
of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be recorded in the land records of Dallas or Kaufman County (as
applicable), Texas. An amended plat is also a final plat.
Governing body. The city council of the city.
Improvement or developer agreement. A contract entered into by the applicant and the city, by which the
applicant promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision or addition within a
specified time period following final plat approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/720
Land study. This is the same as a “concept plan”.
Land planner. Persons, including surveyors or engineers, who possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency
in the planning of residential, nonresidential and other related developments, such proficiency often having been
acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum, or by
actual experience and practice in the field of land planning, and who may be certified as a member of the
American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP).
Lot (also lot of record). A divided or undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and
which is, or which may in the future be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is
designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly
approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record at the county.
Major plat. All plats not classified as minor plats, including but not limited to subdivisions of more than four (4)
lots, or any plat that requires the construction of a new street (or portion thereof) or the extension of a municipal
facility as required by this or any other city ordinance.
Major subdivision. This is the same as a “major plat”.
Minor plat. A subdivision resulting in four (4) or fewer lots, provided that the plat does not create any new street
nor the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. Any property to be
subdivided using a minor plat shall already be served by all required city utilities and services, and all lots will
have access from a public roadway that has already been improved to city standards.
Minor subdivision. This is the same as a “minor plat”.
Municipal development review committee (also “development review committee”, “development review team”,
“DRC”). The term “municipal development review committee ” shall apply only to such practicing, professional
land planner, or firm of professional land planners, that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in
planning- and zoning-related matters. This term shall also apply to any official city employee in the municipal
development review committee.
On-site facilities or improvements. These are the existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed
within the property boundaries of the plat, and the existing or proposed facilities required to be constructed or
improved immediately adjacent to the property that are needed to serve the development. Facilities and
improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, alleys, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage facilities,
sidewalks, screening devices, and curbs and gutters.
Off-site facilities or improvements. “Off-site” facilities shall mean those facilities or improvements that are
required to serve the site but that are not located within the boundaries of the plat, and are not required to be
constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property to serve the development. These include
oversizing for streets, sewer lines, water lines and storm drainage facilities, as well as the excess capacity of
facilities such as water storage tanks and wastewater treatment plants available for new development.
Overlength street (or alley). A street segment, or a cul-de-sac or alley segment, which exceeds the maximum
length allowed by this chapter, as measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of
one through street, which shall not be a cul-de-sac or dead-end or looped street, to the intersecting centerpoint of
another through street or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. For an alley segment, the
measurement shall be to the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, including
any alley turnouts, or from the centerpoint of an intersection with another alley which connects to a street.
Pavement width. The portion of a street that is available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are used, it is the
portion from the back of one face curb to the back of curb.
Perimeter street. Any existing or planned street which is adjacent to the subdivision or addition to be platted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/720
Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or legal
entity of any kind.
Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Plat. This means a construction plat, final plat, development plat, amended plat or replat, as determined by the
context.
Preliminary plat. This is the same as a “construction plat”. (see “construction plat”.)
Private street. A private vehicular accessway, including an alley, that is shared by and that serves two or more
lots, which is not dedicated to the public, and which is not publicly maintained.
Property owner (also known as “applicant” or “subdivider” or “developer”). Any person or firm, association,
syndicate, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity, or any agent thereof, that has
sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter. In any event, the term “property owner” shall be restricted to include only
the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of such owner(s), such as a developer, of land sought to be subdivided.
Public improvements. Facilities, infrastructure and other appurtenances, typically owned and maintained by the
city (but not necessarily located upon city-owned property or right-of-way - public improvements can be located
upon private property), which serve a public purpose in providing a needed service or commodity, such as
wastewater collection and treatment and water storage and distribution, and which protect the general health,
safety, welfare and convenience of the city's citizens, including efficiency in traffic circulation and access for
emergency services. Required public improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, street and alley
paving, including any necessary median openings and left turn lanes on major thoroughfares; water lines and
pumping stations; sanitary sewer lines and lift stations; storm drainage structures and stormwater management
devices; water quality and erosion controls; screening and retaining walls; fire lane paving and fire hydrants;
landscaping, where such is used for required screening or other required landscaped area, and associated
irrigation system; and any required public sidewalks, streetlights and street name signs. The term “public
improvements” shall not include facilities or infrastructure of private providers of utility services other than
water and wastewater, but shall be deemed to include facilities and infrastructure that the city would normally
require of a development but which will be owned and maintained by an entity such as a homeowners'
association, as in the case of private streets.
Replatting or replat. This is the resubdivision of any part or all of a block or blocks of a previously platted
subdivision, addition, lot or tract.
Review. Shall be construed to mean “to read, analyze, assess and act upon” a development application.
Right-of-way. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a street or alley. Where appropriate,
“right-of-way” may include other facilities and utilities such as sidewalks; railroad crossings; electrical,
communication, oil and gas facilities, water and sanitary and storm sewer facilities; and any other special use.
The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians outside of the paved portion of the street. The
usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such rightof-
way, and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
Standard street. A standard street is a street or road that meets or exceeds the minimum specifications in the
city's standard street specifications, and which is constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of
roadway it is designated for on the city's thoroughfare plan.
Street. A right-of-way, whether public or private and however designated, which provides vehicular access to
adjacent land. Streets may be of the following categories:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/720
(1) Major thoroughfares, also known as arterial streets or primary thoroughfares, which provide
vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another or to distant points within the city, and
including freeways or highways leading to other communities.
(2) Collector streets, also known as feeder streets or secondary thoroughfares, which provide
vehicular circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares.
(3) Local residential streets, also known as minor thoroughfares or streets, which primarily provide
direct vehicular access to abutting adjacent property.
(4) Private streets are streets which are owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or
property owners' association, and which are not dedicated to the public.
Street improvements. This means any street or thoroughfare, together with all appurtenances required by city
regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare, and including but not limited to curbs and gutters,
walkways (sidewalks), drainage facilities to be situated in the right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare,
traffic-control devices, streetlights and street signs, for which facilities the city will ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation.
Street length. This means the same as “block length”.
Street right-of-way. The width of the right-of-way for any roadway is the shortest perpendicular distance
between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of the street.
Subdivision (also known as “addition”). A division or redivision of any tract of land situated within the city's
corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. “Subdivision” includes
resubdivisions of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision.
Submission date. The submission date is when all necessary forms, fees, plans, information and copies have
been submitted to the city, previewed for completeness, and deemed as “complete” by action of issuance of a fee
receipt by the city.
Substandard street. An existing street or road that does not meet the minimum specifications in the city's
standard street specifications, and which is not constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway
it is designated for on the city's thoroughfare plan.
Surety (or “security” or “assurance”). See section 23.06.002.
Surveyor. A licensed land surveyor or a registered public land surveyor, as authorized by state statutes to
practice the profession of surveying.
SWPPP. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (as in a set of engineering construction plans).
TCSS. The city's technical construction standards and specifications for the construction of subdivision
improvements, a copy of which is maintained and available for inspection at the city hall, and which is
incorporated herein by reference. The TCSS shall be comprised of the current edition of the North Central Texas
Council of Governments' (NCTCOG's) “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction”, as amended by
the city, that are in effect at the time of submission of the plat application. The TCSS shall also include any
additional provisions or policies the city implements that pertain to the construction of site improvements such
as street, parking lot, driveway and sidewalk paving, storm drainage structures, utility lines and facilities,
screening walls/fences, retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation improvements, street lighting or signage,
restricted access (gated) entrances to any type of development, and other similar improvements. The city
engineer shall have the authority to determine whether or not the engineering plans for any type of site
improvement are in conformance with the city's TCSS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/720
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Temporary improvements. Improvements built and maintained by the property owner that are needed to remedy
a circumstance that is temporary in nature, such as a temporary drainage easement or erosion control device, that
will be removed upon completion of the subdivision or shortly thereafter.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The civil engineering branch of the U.S. government.
Yard. The open area between building setback lines and lot lines.
ARTICLE 23.02 PROCEDURES
Sec. 23.02.001 General statutory procedures for plats
(a) Zoning requirements. A property within the city's corporate limits that is being proposed for platting or
development must be properly zoned by the city prior to submission of an application for approval of any plat or
development application. In addition, the proposed development layout or subdivision design shown on the
proposed plat or development application must be in conformance with all standards and requirements
prescribed in the city's zoning ordinance and this chapter.
(1) Noncompliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is
located, or lack of the proper zoning, shall constitute grounds for denial of the plat or development
application.
(2) Any plat or development application submitted for approval by the city shall be in accordance
with the city's zoning ordinance, if the property is located within the city's corporate limits. If the
property is located within the city's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction, it shall be in
accordance with the city's Comprehensive Plan, as amended, including all adopted water, sewer,
storm drainage, future land use, park, recreation, open space and thoroughfare plans. All plats shall
be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor (RPLS).
(b) Classification of subdivisions and additions. Before any tract of land or plat is filed for record with the
county clerk, the developer shall apply for and secure approval of the required subdivision plat from the city's
planning and zoning commission, in accordance with the following procedures, unless otherwise provided
within this chapter.
(1) Minor subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. Minor plat
approval by the city manager (or designee) requires the submission of a final plat drawing and other
submission materials required by this chapter. Lots may be conveyed or sold only after the plat has
been approved by the city in accordance with this chapter, and after the plat has been filed for record
with Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable).
(2) Major subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. The procedure
for approval of a major subdivision typically involves two steps: a construction plat and a final plat.
Sections 23.02.001 through 23.02.004 of this chapter provide the requirements for each, and major
plat approval shall be in accordance with these sections and all other provisions of this chapter. Upon
completion of the required public improvements, or upon submission and city approval of the
appropriate surety for public improvements, the developer may submit the final plat for approval. All
major subdivision plats must be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission. If
the land is required to be platted, no conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may
occur until after the final plat is approved by the city in accordance with this chapter, and after the
plat has been filed for record with Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable).
(c) Submission requirements for all types of plat applications. In addition to the requirements outlined herein
for each type of development application, the city may maintain separate policies and procedures for the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/720
submission and processing of applications including, but not limited to, application forms, checklists, language
blocks for plats, and other similar items. The forms and paperwork are available in the municipal development
review committee. These policies and procedures may be amended from time to time, and it is the applicant's
responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these policies and procedures.
(d) Application processing for all types of plats.
(1) Complete application determination. Every application for approval of a construction plat or
final plat shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the municipal development review
committee. No application shall be accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents
required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision ordinance. The
municipal development review committee from time to time may identify additional requirements for
a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with the application contents
and standards set forth in the subdivision ordinance. The city also may promulgate a fee for review of
the application for completeness. These policies and procedures may be amended from time to time,
and it is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these policies and
procedures.
(2) Incompleteness as grounds for denial. The viewing or processing of an application by any city
official or employee prior to the time the application is determined to be officially complete shall not
be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness
of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A determination of
completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of
this subdivision ordinance.
(3) Preapplication conference. A property owner may request a preapplication conference with the
municipal development review committee for purposes of identifying requirements that are
applicable to a proposed plat. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the city,
and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the preapplication conference is
not intended as a plan of development or application for plat approval, that such preapplication
conference is not binding on the city, and that such preapplication conference does not in any way
initiate application submission or statutory review times for plats.
(4) Time for making determination. Following submission of a plan of development or plat
application, the municipal development review committee shall make a determination in writing
whether the plan or application constitutes a complete application for that type of plat or development
application not later than the tenth (10th) business day following the date the application is received
by the city's municipal development review committee. The determination shall specify the
documents or other information needed to complete the application, and shall state the date the
application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided to the city.
(5) When deemed complete. An application for approval of a construction plat, or any other type
of plat or development application, that is filed on or after the effective date of this chapter (October
19, 2006), or any subsequent construction plat or final plat application filed after approval of such
construction plat, shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application
has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete.
(6) Time for completing application. If an application is not completed on or before the forty-fifth
(45th) calendar day after the application is submitted to the municipal development review committee
for processing the application in accordance with his or her written notification, the application will
be deemed to have expired, it will become null and void, and it will be returned to the applicant
together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application for approval of the plat or
development must be submitted. The city may retain any fee(s) paid for reviewing the application for
completeness.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/720
(7) Sequence of applications. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision ordinance to
the contrary, an application for a plat or development shall not be considered complete unless
accompanied by a copy of the ordinance that established the zoning on the property, or other
certification verifying that the proposed use, lots sizes and lot dimensions for which the application is
submitted is authorized by the zoning district (or with county regulations, if outside the city's
corporate limits) in which the property is located.
(8) Vested rights. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired
pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
(9) Official filing date. The time period established by state law or this subdivision ordinance for
processing or deciding an application shall commence on the date that a complete application has
been accepted for filing, which is the date that shall be deemed the official filing date.
(e) Submission procedures and city review process for all types of plats.
(1) Submission timing. An application for approval of any plat or development shall be submitted
to the city at least twenty (20) calendar days, but no more than thirty (30) calendar days unless the
applicant waives the 30-day requirement for action on the plat in writing, prior to the planning and
zoning commission meeting at which it is to be considered.
(A) Due to state-mandated notification requirements, any residential replat that requires
public notification (see section 23.02.006) shall be submitted to the city at least thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the commission meeting at which it is to be considered. Such replat
application shall also be accompanied by a written waiver of the 30-day requirement for
action on the plat due to timing constraints imposed by publication of the required notice
in the city's official newspaper.
(2) Submission materials. All plat and development applications shall include the following
materials:
(A) A written application form (on the city's form) which bears the original notarized
signature(s) of the property owner(s) of the subject property.
(B) The appropriate submission fee.
(C) The appropriate number of full-size sets (as determined by the municipal development
review committee) of full-size folded prints of the plat (and engineering/construction plans, if
applicable), as required by the city's current development review policies and requirements, and
one clear and legible 11" x 17" black-and-white reduction of the plat (and all other required
plans, as applicable and as determined by the municipal development review committee). Sizes
of these prints and reductions shall be determined by the municipal development review
committee.
(D) A copy of any applicable development agreement(s) or private deed restrictions
pertaining to the subject property (if any).
(E) A certificate or other satisfactory evidence from the Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable)
county tax assessor-collector showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property
(required at the time of any type of plat or development application), and that no delinquent
taxes exist against the property, as shown in the county plat or deed records. Documentation
shall also be included that shows no delinquent assessments, fees, or other debts or obligations
to the city and which are directly attributable to the subject property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/720
(F) A traffic impact analysis (TIA), if required pursuant to section 23.03.001(e) of this
chapter.
(G) An engineer's summary report which describes, in as much detail as necessary, the
following:
(i) The overall nature and scope of the proposed development, including zoning of the
property, proposed use(s) and acreage of each proposed use, minimum lot sizes, widths
and depths, number of lots to be created, and special amenities or facilities that will be
included in the development (with long-term maintenance provisions for each duly noted);
(ii) How the property will be served with all required utilities and services;
(iii) How stormwater drainage will be handled; and
(iv) An itemization and description of any waivers/suspensions from provisions of this
chapter that will be sought.
(v) If the proposed development will have access points onto an existing or planned
thoroughfare shown on the city's (and/or applicable county's) adopted thoroughfare plan,
the application shall also include a letter from the appropriate entity, such as TxDOT or
Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable), showing the city or county thoroughfare plan
(whichever is applicable), and acknowledging and approving proposed driveway locations
and corresponding median openings and left turn lanes, if applicable.
(vi) Letters shall also be provided from each of the applicable utility service providers,
including water, wastewater, gas, electricity, telephone, cable TV and solid waste,
verifying their ability to provide an adequate level of service for the proposed
development.
(vii) A letter from the Dallas (or other applicable) Independent School District may also
be required that acknowledges the District(s) has been informed of the size (with respect
to the anticipated number of homes and/or school-age children), location and timing of the
proposed development, and that expresses any desire the District may have to obtain a
future school site within any portion of the subject property.
(viii) One copy of all of the above materials (and any associated plans) shall be
submitted to the municipal development review committee for review in order for the
application to be deemed complete.
(H) Other submission requirements.
(i) All plat drawings and other corresponding plans and drawings, including
engineering plans and landscape and screening plans, shall be drawn to a standard
engineering scale of no more than one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'), and all sheets
shall not exceed 24" x 36" in size. In cases of large developments which would exceed the
dimensions of the sheet at one-hundred-foot (100') scale, plats may be on multiple sheets
and in a format that will be acceptable for eventual filing at Dallas or Kaufman County (as
applicable). If there are multiple sheets, then a key sheet will be required.
(ii) Other applicable information and materials may be deemed appropriate by the city,
and therefore may be required by the city. Such materials must also be submitted for an
application to be deemed complete.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/720
(iii) All of the materials and plans specified within this section 23.02.001 shall be
submitted to the municipal development review committee for review in order for the
application to be deemed complete.
(3) City staff review. Upon official submission of an application for plat or development approval,
the city shall commence technical review of the development proposal by forwarding a copy of the
application and plat to development review team members, as determined by the city.
(A) City development review team members shall review the plat or development
application, and shall ascertain its compliance with these and other applicable city regulations.
(B) Following city staff review of the plat or development application and supporting
documents, and following discussions with the applicant on any revisions deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of improvements to be installed, the applicant shall resubmit final
copies of the completely corrected plat (and engineering plans, if applicable) to the municipal
development review committee no later than seven (7) working days prior to the commission
meeting for final review and inclusion in the commission packets.
(4) Official filing of the submitted plat or development application. The official filing date of a
submitted plat or development application shall be consistent with the date upon which the submitted
plat or development application is deemed by the city to be a complete application.
(5) Resubmission and scheduling.
(A) Failure to resubmit final completely corrected copies of the plat (and engineering plans,
if applicable) back to the city in time for adequate review prior to the planning and zoning
commission meeting shall be cause for the municipal development review committee to
forward the plat application to the commission as it was originally submitted rather than the
corrected version of the plat unless the applicant has submitted a written 30-day waiver
statement.
(B) If, upon resubmission of the corrected plat (and engineering plans, if applicable) to the
city for re-review by the city a maximum of three (3) times, the municipal development review
committee determines that the application is still incomplete or is not correct to a reasonable
extent, the plat application shall be subject to denial.
(C) After a plat or development application has been scheduled on an agenda (or at any time
prior), the applicant may request, in writing, a waiver of the 30-day approval requirement in
order to allow him or her more time to correct deficiencies, address concerns, or otherwise
improve the plat or development application pursuant to the city's regulations. Only after
receipt of the written waiver may the city delay action on the plat or development application
beyond thirty (30) calendar days following the official submission date.
(6) Action by the planning and zoning commission. All subdivision plat and development
applications (except minor plats and amending plats, as provided herein) that have not expired shall
be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and if in complete conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable regulations of the city, then they shall be
approved by the planning and zoning commission.
(A) The commission shall review each plat or development application and shall take action
to either approve the plat or development application as submitted by the applicant, or approve
the plat or development application subject to certain conditions, or shall vote to deny the plat
or development application, within thirty (30) calendar days following the official filing date
unless the applicant has submitted a written waiver of the 30-day review/approval time pursuant
to this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/720
(B) The planning and zoning commission shall approve or deny the plat or development
application by a simple majority vote of the commission members present and voting.
(C) If the commission denies a plat or development application, the commission shall state
such disapproval and the reasons therefor. The commission's decision to deny a plat or
development application may be appealed to the city council provided that a written request for
such appeal is received by the city manager (or designee) within ten (10) calendar days
following the commission's action.
(f) Proof of land ownership. The city requires proof of land ownership prior to approval of any plat or
development application involving real property. Along with the application submission, the applicant shall
provide evidence satisfactory to the municipal development review committee , that he or she is the owner of
record of the subject land parcel(s), or is the property owner's authorized agent. The municipal development
review committee shall have the authority to determine what document(s) the city will require to prove
ownership, such as one of the following:
(1) Letter of title guarantee from a licensed attorney;
(2) General warranty deed;
(3) Special warranty deed;
(4) Title policy; or
(5) Some other documentation that is acceptable to the municipal development review committee.
If ownership cannot be conclusively established prior to the meeting date on which the plat or development
application will be heard, the city shall have the authority to deny the application on the basis of protecting the
public interest.
(g) Construction plat expiration and extension.
(1) Expiration. An approved construction plat application shall expire and shall thereafter be
deemed null and void if the engineering/construction plans for all of the development shown on the
construction plat have not been approved by the city and actual construction on the first portion/phase
commenced within six (6) months (i.e., 183 calendar days) following the date the construction plat
was approved by the commission, and if a final plat application for all the land subject to the
construction plat has not been approved within two (2) calendar years (i.e., 730 calendar days) from
the date of the commission's approval of the construction plat. Subsequent expiration of the final plat
shall also result in expiration of the construction plat for the same land. Upon expiration, or upon
denial of a timely submitted request for extension of plat approval, a new plat application shall be
submitted, subject to requirements in effect at the time the application is filed with the city.
(2) Extension. The commission may extend a construction plat for a period not to exceed one (1)
additional calendar year (i.e., 365 calendar days), upon the written request of the applicant (approval
of the construction plat shall not be for a time period of more than three (3) calendar years, i.e., 730
calendar days, total). The request must be filed before the construction plat expires and must
document the reasons for the extension. In determining whether to grant a request, the commission
shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply
with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely
completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to
the proposed development. In granting an extension, the commission may impose such conditions as
are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is
served, including compliance with one or more new adopted development standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/720
(h) Construction plans expiration and extension.
(1) Expiration. Construction plans must be approved by the city within six (6) months (i.e., 183
calendar days) following approval of the construction plat. Approved construction plans shall expire
and shall thereafter be deemed null and void if actual construction on that portion/phase of the
development has not commenced within six (6) months (i.e., 183 calendar days), and has not been
completed within two (2) calendar years (i.e., 730 calendar days), from the date of the city's
engineer's approval. Upon expiration, or upon denial of a timely submitted request for extension of
the approval of the construction plans, new construction plans shall be submitted, subject to
requirements in effect at the time the construction plans are filed with the city.
(2) Extension. The city engineer may extend the approval of construction plans for a period not to
exceed one (1) additional calendar year (i.e., 365 calendar days), upon the written request of the
applicant (approval of engineering plans shall not be for a time period of more than three (3) calendar
years, i.e., 730 calendar days, total). The request must be filed before the construction plans expire
and must document the reasons for the extension. In determining whether to grant a request, the city
engineer shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to
comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in
timely completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be
applied to the proposed development. In granting an extension, the city engineer may impose such
conditions as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the
public interest is served, including compliance with one or more new adopted development standards.
Sec. 23.02.002 Dormant plats
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following terms shall apply:
(1) Final plat means the final stage of approval of a subdivision or addition that was required by
prior Subdivision Regulations as a condition of recording a division of land in the deed or plat
records of Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable), and that was approved or filed for approval by
the city pursuant to such prior Subdivision Regulations.
(2) Prior plat means a land study, concept plan, sketch plat, preliminary plat, construction plat, or
other similar representation showing a division of land into lots or tracts that was approved or filed
for approval by the city pursuant to prior Subdivision Regulations, other than a final plat.
(3) Prior subdivision regulations means any subdivision regulation or rule incorporated within a
subdivision ordinance of the city that was in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter (October
19, 2006).
(b) Expiration of dormant plat. Any prior plat or portion thereof, or any final plat or portion thereof that has
not been recorded, which prior plat or final plat was approved or filed for approval before, but that was not
subject to an expiration date under prior Subdivision Regulations as of the effective date of this chapter (October
19, 2006), shall expire at 5:00 p.m. (Central Standard Time) on September 1, 2011.
(c) Petition to appeal expiration of dormant plat. The owner of the land subject to the prior plat or final plat
that expires under subsection (a) [(b)] above may petition the planning and zoning commission to reinstate such
prior plat or final plat by filing a vested rights petition (see section 23.01.014) within six (6) months (i.e., 183
calendar days) following the expiration. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall
be accompanied by documentation of one of the following:
(1) As of the plat's expiration date under subsection (b) above, one of the following events had
occurred:
(A) In the case of an approved prior plat:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/720
(i) A final plat application for all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat
was approved, or was filed and was subsequently approved, or an application for a final
plat was submitted for all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat, but such
application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness;
(ii) Costs for development of the land subject to the prior plat, including but not limited
to costs associated with street, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve
the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the
aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the
land subject to the prior plat;
(iii) Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for
development of all or a part of the land subject to the approved prior plat; or
(B) In the case of an approved, unrecorded final plat:
(i) Costs for development of the land subject to the final plat, including but not limited
to costs associated with street, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve
the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the
aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the
land subject to such final plat;
(ii) Fiscal security was posted after approval of the final plat to ensure performance of
an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved final plat; or
(iii) Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the
approved final plat were paid.
(2) For an approved prior plat, one of the following events occurred after the prior plat's approval
date, but before the expiration date specified in subsection (b) above:
(A) A final plat was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat and
remained in effect for such land on the effective date of this chapter (October 19, 2006); or
(B) A complete application for approval of all or part of the land subject to the approved
prior plat was pending for decision on the effective date of this chapter (October 19, 2006).
(d) Planning and zoning commission action. The commission may take one of the following actions:
(1) Reinstate the expired prior or final plat subject to such expiration dates as may be authorized by
law, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in subsection (c)(1) above.
(2) Reinstate the expired prior plat for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the
petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in subsection (c)(2) above, subject to such expiration
dates or other conditions that assure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or
pending final plat application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting relief under this
provision, the commission may require that development of such remaining land is subject to
standards enacted after initial approval of the expired prior plat.
(3) Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in
subsection (c) above.
(4) Reinstate the prior plat for only that part of the land subject to a pending final plat application,
if it finds that the petitioner has met the criteria in subsection (c)(2)(B) above and the pending plat
application subsequently was approved, and deny the petition for the remaining land within the
expired prior plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/720
(e) Appeal to city council. The petitioner may appeal the commission's decision on the dormant plat expiration
petition to the city council if such appeal is submitted in writing to the responsible official within ten (10)
calendar days following the date of the commission's decision. An appeal under this subsection stays further
proceedings on any pending plat or development application for any portion of the subject property, and it also
stays acceptance of filing of any related development applications for any portion of the subject property.
(f) Decision by city council. The city council on appeal shall decide the dormant plat expiration petition after
considering the responsible official's report and the decision by the planning and zoning commission within
thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
Sec. 23.02.003 Procedures and submission requirements for construction plat approval
(a) The applicant shall prepare a construction plat together with full engineering plans for the construction of
the subdivision and all associated public improvements and other supplementary materials, as required by this
chapter or by the city.
(b) The construction plat shall constitute only that portion of the property or subdivision which the applicant
proposes to construct and record provided, however, that such portion conforms to all the requirements of this
chapter and with any other applicable regulations and codes of the city.
(c) The construction plat shall include all contiguous property under the ownership or control of the applicant
unless otherwise approved by the municipal development review committee.
(1) The contiguous property may be developed in more than one phase which, if so, shall be
clearly identified on the construction plat.
(2) If not all of the contiguous property is intended to be developed, the portion that is not intended
to be developed may be identified and treated as a “remainder tract” and shown on the construction
plat for informational purposes only, if permitted by the municipal development review committee.
(A) A remainder tract is deemed to be that portion of the contiguous property that is not
included within the boundaries of a construction plat.
(B) A remainder tract shall not be considered a lot or tract of the subdivision that is shown on
the construction plat.
(C) Approval of the related construction plat shall not constitute approval of development on
a remainder tract.
(D) Information accompanying the construction plat application for a remainder tract shall be
deemed to be an aid to the planning and zoning commission in taking action on the construction
plat, and may be used to determine whether development of the land subject to the construction
plat will be adequately served by public facilities and services and is otherwise in compliance
with this subdivision ordinance, taking into account the development of the property as a whole.
Information concerning the remainder tract, including topography, drainage, and existing and
planned public improvements, may be considered in formulating conditions to approve the plat
application.
(E) Based upon such information, the planning and zoning commission may require that
additional or less land be included as part of the construction plat in order to satisfy the
standards applicable to the plat.
(d) Simultaneous submission of plats. The applicant may choose to submit a final plat for review concurrently
with the construction plat. In such case, the city may schedule concurrent review of both plats, provided that all
required information and other items are submitted for both plats, including full engineering plans and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/720
appropriate assurances for the completion of all improvements, as per article 23.06 of this chapter, and provided
that adequate review can be achieved by the city. If the city, due to staff resources or other factors, cannot
complete its review of both plats and other associated materials prior to the applicable planning and zoning
commission meeting, then only the construction plat shall be considered for approval and the final plat shall be
denied unless the thirty-day review requirement is waived in writing by the applicant.
(e) Approval of a construction plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed general approval
of the street and lot layout shown on the construction plat, and to the preparation of the final plat when
construction of all required public improvements is nearing completion (or when appropriate surety for
completion is provided to the city in conformance with article 23.06 of this chapter). Approval for construction
of the necessary streets, water lines, sewer lines, drainage facilities, and other required improvements and
utilities shall be authorized only through the city's engineer's approval of the engineering plans. Except as
provided for herein, approval of the construction plat shall constitute conditional approval of the final plat when
all conditions of approval and when all procedural requirements set forth in this chapter have been met, and
when construction of all improvements (or surety provided) are satisfactorily completed.
(f) Standards for approval. No construction plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission
unless the following standards have been met:
(1) The layouts and engineering plans for required public improvements and city utilities have
been submitted by the applicant for approval by the city's engineer (whether specifically stated or not,
construction plat approval shall always be subject to any additions or alterations to the
engineering/construction plans as deemed necessary by the city's engineer, as needed, to ensure the
safe, efficient and proper construction of public improvements within the development); and
(2) The plat conforms to this chapter, the comprehensive plan (as amended), and applicable zoning
and other city regulations.
(g) No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in the proposed subdivision prior to
approval of the construction plat by the city, nor prior to issuance of all appropriate construction permits by the
city and other appropriate entities and agencies.
(1) The applicant shall, prior to commencement of construction, provide the city with copies of
letters from applicable local utility companies stating that each utility company has reviewed the
construction plat and stating any requirements, including easements, they may have. This
requirement may be deferred until the final plat is submitted if such deferral request is submitted to
the city in writing and approved by the municipal development review committee prior to the
commission meeting at which the construction plat will be considered.
(2) No excavation, grading, soil disturbance, tree removal or site clearing activities shall occur
prior to approval of the construction plat and the engineering plans. However, preliminary grading or
site preparation activities, such as limited excavation, filling, and removal or clearing of brush,
undergrowth or man-induced debris, may be authorized by the city manager (or designee), at his or
her discretion, if such request is submitted in writing by the developer, if such activities are in
conformance with all applicable city ordinances and codes, and if such activities will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare (also see section 23.06.008 for site
development permit requirement).
(h) Information required upon or with construction plat. The proposed construction plat and associated
engineering plans shall show the following information (the construction plat itself shall only include those
items marked by italics - other physical and engineering data shall be included in the engineering plans or as
separate documents - additional information may be required on the construction plat and/or the engineering
plans by the municipal development review committee if such additional information is deemed necessary to
clarify any aspect of the proposed development, or to demonstrate or ensure compliance with city requirements
or development standards:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/720
(1) An accurately drawn vicinity, or location, map that shows the location of the proposed
construction plat within the city (or within its ETJ) and in relationship to existing roadways;
(2) Boundary lines, abstract/survey lines, corporate and other jurisdictional boundaries, existing
or proposed highways and streets (including right-of-way widths), bearings and distances sufficient
to locate the exact area proposed for the subdivision, and all survey monuments (identified and
labeled; see section 23.05.002 for specifications) including any required concrete monuments (per
the city's Planner and/or Engineer); the length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths,
tangent lengths and central angles of all curves shall be indicated along the lines of each lot (curve
and line data may be placed in a table format); accurate reference ties via courses and distances to
at least one recognized abstract or survey corner or existing subdivision corner shall be shown;
(3) The name, location and recording information of all adjacent subdivisions (or property owners
of adjacent unplatted property), including those located on the other sides of roads or creeks, shall be
drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in
sufficient detail to show accurately the existing streets, alleys, building setbacks, lot and block
numbering, easements, and other features that may influence the layout of development of the
proposed subdivision; adjacent unplatted land shall show property lines, the names of owners of
record, and the recording information;
(4) The location, widths and names of all streets, alleys and easements (it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to coordinate with appropriate utility entities far placement of necessary utility
easements and for location of all streets and median openings on highways or arterial roadways),
existing or proposed, within the subdivision limits and adjacent to the subdivision; a list of proposed
street names shall be submitted (in the form of a letter or memo along with the application form) for
all new street names (street name approval is required at the time the construction plat is approved);
(5) The location of all existing property lines, existing lot and block numbers and date recorded,
easements of record (with recording information), buildings, existing sewer or water mains (can be
shown on a separate sheet, if preferred), gas mains or other underground structures, or other existing
features within the area proposed for subdivision;
(6) Proposed arrangement and square footage of lots (including lot and block numbers) and
proposed use of same; for nonresidential uses, the location and size of buildings (this information
may be provided on a separate sheet, such as on the final site plan; see the zoning ordinance);
(7) A title block within the lower right-hand corner of the plat (and engineering plans) which
shows the title or name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded; the name, address
and phone number of the property owner(s); the name, address and phone number of the land
planner, licensed engineer or registered professional land surveyor who prepared the plat/plans, the
scale of the plat/plans; the date the plat/plan was prepared, and the location of the property
according to the abstract or survey records of Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) County, Texas; the
subdivision name shall not duplicate (or too closely phonetically replicate) the name of any other
platted subdivision in Seagoville, its ETJ, or other surrounding communities in Dallas or Kaufman
County, but phasing identification is allowed to be similar to previous phases of that particular
development (it is the property owner's responsibility to check the plat records of Dallas or Kaufman
(as applicable) County to ensure that the proposed subdivision name will not duplicate or sound too
much like a subdivision name already in existence - the city may, at its discretion, require a different
subdivision name if there is potential for confusion by public safety officials or the general public);
(8) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, schools, playgrounds, other public uses or
for private facilities or amenities;
(9) Scale (including a graphic scale), date, north arrow oriented to the top or left side of the sheet,
and other pertinent informational data;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/720
(10) Contours with intervals of two feet (2) or less shown for the area, with all elevations on the
contour map referenced to sea level datum; and the limits of any portion of the 100-year floodplain
(pursuant to the flood study, if required by the city's engineer) that may be within or adjacent to (i.e.,
within 100 feet of) the property (final monumentation of the floodplain shall occur, and shall be
shown, on the final plat prior to approval and filing at the county) - if no floodplain present, then a
note stating this shall be shown on the plat;
(11) Areas contributing drainage to the proposed subdivision shall be shown in the engineering
plans; locations proposed for drainage discharge from the site shall be shown by directional arrows;
(12) All physical features of the property to be subdivided shall be shown, including the location
and size of all watercourses, 100-year floodplain according to Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) information, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers flowage easement requirements, ravines,
bridges, culverts, existing structures, drainage area in acres or area draining into subdivisions (only in
the engineering plans), the outline of major wooded areas or the location of major or important
individual trees, and other features pertinent to subdivision;
(13) Engineering plans of water and sewer lines and other infrastructure (including sizes) to be
constructed in the subdivision; the proposed connections to distribution mains shall be indicated;
(14) Proposed phasing of the development; where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the
applicant, in conjunction with submission of the construction plat, shall provide a schedule of
development; the dedication of rights-of-way for streets and street improvements, whether on-site or
off-site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision; the planning and zoning
commission shall determine whether the proposed streets and street improvements are adequate
pursuant to standards herein established, and may require that a traffic impact analysis be submitted
for the entire project or for such phases as the commission determines to be necessary to adjudge
whether the subdivision will be served by adequate streets and thoroughfares;
(15) All construction plats shall be submitted in a legible format that complies with Dallas or
Kaufman (as applicable) county requirements for the filing of plats, and shall be drawn on a good
grade blue line or black line paper;
(16) Existing or proposed zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
(17) Minimum finished floor elevations of building foundations shall be shown for lots adjacent to
a floodplain or within an area that may be susceptible to flooding;
(18) Traffic impact analysis (TIA), if applicable pursuant to section 23.03.001(e) of this chapter;
(19) Certificates and other language shall be included on the plat, pursuant to the following
subsections:
(A) A statement that the subdivided area is legally owned by the applicant.
(B) An accurate metes and bounds description by bearings and distances (including
necessary curve and line data), accurate to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, for all
boundary, block and lot lines, with descriptions correlated to a permanent survey monument.
(C) A statement signed by the property owner(s) and acknowledged before a Notary Public
as to the authenticity of the signatures, saying that the property owner(s) adopts the plat as
shown, described and named, and that he/she does dedicate, in fee simple, to the public use
forever the streets, alleys and easements shown on the plat. The property owner(s) further
reserves any easement areas shown for mutual use of all public utilities desiring to use the
same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or any part of any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/720
vegetative growth or other appurtenance for construction or maintenance, or efficiency of its
respective system in these easements and all or any part of any growth or construction which in
any way hinders or interferes with the right of ingress and egress to these easements for any
necessary use without asking anyone's permission.
(D) The registered professional land surveyor's certificate, with a place for his or her
signature and notarization of his or her signature.
(E) A place for plat approval signature of the Chairman of the planning and zoning
commission (or Vice-Chairman, in the Chairman's absence), a place for the city secretary to
attest such signature, and the approval dates by the planning and zoning commission (and city
council, in the instance of any type of appeal).
(F) Following are the certificates and languages to be used on the plat to accommodate the
above requirements:
(i) Property owner's certificate (required):
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF
WHEREAS, ( Name(s) ) is (are) the Owner(s) of a tract of land situated in the
(____________) Survey, Abstract No. (______), Dallas/Kaufman County, Texas and
being out of a (______) acre tract conveyed to him (them) by (____________), and a
(______) acre tract conveyed to him (them) by (____________), and being more
particularly described as follows:
(Enter accurate metes and bounds property description here, with total land area shown
in both acreage and square footage)
NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That ____________, acting herein by and through his (its) duly authorized officer(s),
does hereby adopt this plat designating the herein above described property as
____________, an addition to the city and does hereby dedicate, in fee simple, to the
public use forever, the streets, rights-of-way, and other public improvements shown
thereon. The streets and alleys, if any, are dedicated for street purposes. The easements
and public use areas, as shown, are dedicated, for the public use forever, for the purposes
indicated on this plat. No buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other improvements or
growths shall be constructed or placed upon, over or across the easements as shown,
except that landscape improvements may be placed in landscape easements, if approved
by the city. In addition, utility easements may also be used for the mutual use and
accommodation of all public utilities desiring to use or using the same unless the
easement limits the use to particular utilities, said use by public utilities being subordinate
to the public's and city's use thereof. The city and public utility entities shall have the right
to remove and keep removed all or parts of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other
improvements or growths which may in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance, or efficiency of their respective systems in said easements. The
city and public utility entities shall at all times have the full right of ingress and egress to
or from their respective easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing,
inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, reading meters, and adding to or removing all or parts
of their respective systems without the necessity at any time procuring permission from
anyone.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/720
This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions
of the City of Seagoville, Texas
WITNESS, my hand, this the ______ day of ____________, 20___.
BY:
Authorized Signature of Owner (use additional signature lines, if necessary)
Printed Name and Title
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on
this day personally appeared ____________, Owner, known to me to be the person whose
name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he executed
the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this ______ day of ____________, 20___.
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission Expires On:
(use additional Notary blocks, if necessary, for additional owners)
(ii) Surveyor's certificate (required):
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I, ____________, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and
accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon as “set” were
properly placed under my personal supervision in accordance with the Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Seagoville.
(seal)
Signature of Registered Public Land Surveyor
Registration No.
STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/720
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for the State of Texas, on
this day personally appeared ____________, Registered Public Land Surveyor, known to
me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and
acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein
expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this ______ day of ____________, 20___.
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission Expires On:
(iii) Approval block (required):
CITY APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PLAT
Approved for preparation of final plat following construction of all public
improvements (or appropriate sureties thereof) necessary for the subdivision shown on
this plat.
APPROVED BY: Planning and Zoning Commission
City of Seagoville, Texas
Signature of Chairperson Date of Approval
ATTEST:
City Secretary Date
(iv) Special notice (required):
NOTICE: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of city
ordinance and state law, and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and building
permits.
(v) Visibility, access and maintenance easements (to be used if applicable):
The area or areas shown on the plat as “VAM” (Visibility, Access and Maintenance)
Easement(s) are hereby given and granted to the city, its successors and assigns, as an
easement to provide visibility, right of access for maintenance upon and across said VAM
Easement. The city shall have the right but not the obligation to maintain any and all
landscaping within the VAM Easement. Should the city exercise this maintenance right,
then it shall be permitted to remove and dispose of any and all landscaping improvements,
including without limitation, any trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover and fixtures. The
city may withdraw maintenance of the VAM Easement at any time. The ultimate
maintenance responsibility for the VAM Easement shall rest with the property owner(s).
No building, fence, shrub, tree or other improvements or growths, which in any way may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/720
endanger or interfere with the visibility, shall be constructed in, on, over or across the
VAM Easement. The city shall also have the right but not the obligation to add any
landscape improvements to the VAM Easement, to erect any traffic-control devices or
signs on the VAM Easement and to remove any obstruction thereon. The city, its
successors, assigns, or agents shall have the right and privilege at all times to enter upon
the VAM Easement or any part thereof for the purposes and with all rights and privileges
set forth herein.
(vi) Fire lanes (to be used if applicable):
That the undersigned does hereby covenant and agree that he (they) shall construct
upon the fire lane easements, as dedicated and shown hereon, a hard surface in accordance
with the city's paving standards for fire lanes, and that he (they) shall maintain the same in
a state of good repair at all times and keep the same free and clear of any structures,
fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or obstruction, including but not limited to
the parking of motor vehicles, trailers, boats or other impediments to the accessibility of
fire apparatus. The maintenance of paving on the fire lane easements is the responsibility
of the owner, and the owner shall post and maintain appropriate signs in conspicuous
places along such fire lanes, stating “Fire Lane, No Parking or Standing.” The local law
enforcement agency(s) is hereby authorized to enforce parking regulations within the fire
lanes, and to cause such fire lanes and utility easements to be maintained free and
unobstructed at all times for fire department and emergency use.
(vii) Access easements (to be used if applicable):
The undersigned does covenant and agree that the access easement may be utilized by
any person or the general public for ingress and egress to other real property, and for the
purpose of general public vehicular and pedestrian use and access, and for fire department
and emergency use in, along, upon and across said premises, with the right and privilege
at all times of the city, its agents, employees, workmen and representatives having ingress,
egress, and regress in, along, upon and across said premises.
(viii) Other plat language. The plat shall include any other applicable language, such
as for drainage, floodway or other special types of easements, or such as for a private
street subdivision, as deemed appropriate and necessary by the city for the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Applicable plat languages are available
upon request at the city.
(i) Engineering Plans. Along with the construction plat application, the applicant shall submit the required
number of sets of the complete engineering plans for all streets, alleys (if any), storm sewers and drainage
structures, water and sanitary sewer facilities, screening and retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation, and any
other required public improvements for the area covered by the construction plat. The engineering plans shall
also contain any plans deemed necessary to show or document compliance with the city's ordinances pertaining
to nonpoint source pollution control, and any other applicable codes and ordinances of the city that are related to
development of a land parcel. The engineering plans shall be on sheets no larger than 24" by 36" in size. Cost
estimates for the completion of all public improvements shall also be submitted with the engineering plans for
review (and approval, if necessary) by the city's engineer.
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, complete sets of engineering plans shall include the following
plans or sheets (generally in this order), as well as any additional plans or sheets deemed necessary
and requested by the municipal development review committee or the city's engineer:
(A) Cover or title sheet (with list of all plans)
(B) Construction plat
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/720
(C) Final site plan (for nonresidential and multifamily projects only - see the zoning
ordinance for specific requirements and approval procedures)
(D) Existing conditions plan (unless these items are shown on the construction plat itself),
which shows existing topography, vegetation, tree inventory, existing natural and man-made
physical features, etc.
(E) Existing tree and vegetation protection plan
(F) Grading, erosion control, and water quality control plans (including a SWPPP)
(G) Paving and storm drainage plans (including lot drainage plans)
(H) Utility plans for water, sanitary sewer, etc.
(I) Traffic-control plans (if necessary)
(J) Screening and retaining wall plans
(K) Landscaping and irrigation plans (irrigation plan can be generalized, and must show
100% coverage of required landscape areas and use of double check valves, automatic
controllers, and automatic moisture and freeze sensors)
(2) The applicant shall have the complete sets of engineering plans (as described above) prepared
by their own professional engineer(s), and such engineering plans shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, as required by state law
governing such professions and in accordance with this chapter and the city's technical construction
standards and specifications (TCSS). All engineering plans submitted for city review shall be dated
(with any revision dates accurately noted thereon) and shall bear the responsible engineer's
registration number, his or her designation of “professional engineer” or “P.E.”, and the engineer's
seal. Engineering plans shall be approved by the city's engineer only when such plans meet all of the
requirements of this chapter and the TCSS.
(3) The city's engineer (or designee) shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the plans and
specifications and if approved, shall mark them “approved on ____________ (date), 20___” and shall
return one set to the applicant, and at least two (2) sets shall be retained in the city's files. If not
approved, then one set shall be marked with the objections noted (on the plans themselves and/or in
memo format) and returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the applicant's engineer shall
correct the plans as requested and shall resubmit them back to the city's engineer for re-review. Once
the engineering plans are approved by the city's engineer (as documented by an approval memo
addressed to the applicant and copied to the city), the property owner shall provide additional sets of
the approved plans to the city, as specified by the city's engineer, for use during construction. A full
set of the city-approved and stamped engineering plans must be available for inspection on the job
site at all times.
(j) After approval of the construction plat by the planning and zoning commission, approval of the engineering
plans and specifications by the city's engineer, and following procurement of all applicable permits from other
appropriate agencies (such as TxDOT, railroad authorities, TCEQ, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA and/or
Dallas or Kaufman County, as applicable), the applicant shall cause a contractor(s) to install or construct the
public improvements in accordance with the approved plans and the city's standard specifications, and at the
applicant's expense (also see article 23.06 of this chapter).
(1) The applicant shall employ engineers, Professional Registered Land Surveyors or other
professionals as necessary to design, stake, supervise, perform and complete the construction of such
improvements, and shall cause his or her contractor(s) to construct the said improvements in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/720
accordance with this chapter and with the city's, and any other applicable agency'(s), design
standards.
(2) If the project will require a FEMA map revision, then the proposed plans shall also be reviewed
for compliance with the city's Floodplain Management Ordinance (city Ordinance Number 650, as
amended) prior to approval of the construction plat and prior to any construction activities (including
but not limited to grading, clearing, grubbing, brush removal, etc.) on the site.
(k) Effect of approval. Approval of a construction plat authorizes the developer, upon fulfillment of all
requirements and conditions of approval and upon construction of all required improvements (or submission of
the proper assurances for construction of same, per article 23.06 of this chapter), to submit an application for
final plat approval (see section 23.02.004).
(l) Revisions to approved construction plat.
(1) It is generally recognized that minor revisions to the construction plat will probably be needed
before the final plat is approved and filed at the county. Such minor revisions as slight enlargement or
shifting of easements or lot lines, addition of private or franchise utility easements, correction of
bearings or distances, correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted
informational items and labels, etc. may occur on the final plat without having to reapprove the
construction plat. Whether or not revisions are “minor” in nature shall be determined by the
municipal development review committee.
(2) Major revisions, such as obvious reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of
driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the
property, and relocation or addition or deletion of any public improvement (including corresponding
easement), shall necessitate resubmission and reapproval of the plat as a “revised construction plat”
unless otherwise approved by the municipal development review committee. The procedures for such
reapproval shall be the same as for a construction plat, and such reapproval shall constitute a new
project thus necessitating submission of a new application form, payment of new fees, compliance
with amendments to this chapter which occurred since original construction plat approval, and other
requirements.
(m) Expiration and extension of construction plat and engineering plans. Refer to sections 23.02.001(g) and
23.02.001(h), respectively, for regulations related to the expiration and extension of a construction plat and
engineering plans.
Sec. 23.02.004 Procedures and submission requirements for final plat approval
(a) The final plat shall be in accordance with the construction plat, as approved, and shall incorporate all
applicable conditions, changes, directions and additions imposed by the planning and zoning commission upon
the construction plat. The final plat shall not be approved by the planning and zoning commission, until all
utilities, infrastructure, and other required improvements have been constructed in conformance with city
standards and the engineering plans, as approved by the city's engineer, unless provisions are made for the
completion of the improvements in accordance with article 23.06. The final plat shall not be submitted prior to
approval of the construction plat (but may be submitted simultaneously with the construction plat, see section
23.02.003(d)).
(b) Only final plat applications which include the required data, completed application form, submission fee,
number of copies of the plat, record drawings, letter stating satisfactory completion (of the public improvements)
from the city, and other required information, including documentation that all required public improvements
have been constructed and installed in accordance with city standards, letters from utility companies verifying
their easements, and submission of the proper assurances or escrow funds for the completion of the
improvements (per section 23.06.002) will be considered complete, shall be accepted for filing by the city, and
shall be scheduled on a planning and zoning commission agenda. Incomplete final plat applications will not be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/720
accepted for filing and will not be scheduled on a planning and zoning commission agenda until the proper
information is provided to city staff.
(c) Information required on a final plat:
(1) All information that is required for a construction plat (see section 23.02.003(h)), except for
submission of engineering plans, provided that such plans were already submitted and approved with
the construction plat; and except that physical features of or on the land (such as topography,
buildings, utility structures, water bodies and tree cover) shall not be shown on the final plat. In
addition to these items, the final plat shall also provide a place for the county clerk of Dallas or
Kaufman (as applicable) County to stamp the date and location where the plat will be filed (“Volume
or Cabinet ______, Page or Slide ______”) in the lower right-hand corner of all sheets of the plat
drawing near the title block.
(2) All aspects of the final plat shall conform to the standards of Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable)
county for plats with respect to clarity, sheet size, lettering size and reproducibility, and the county's
formatting requirements for same shall control if different from this chapter. It is the applicant's
responsibility to be familiar with the county's standards for filing plats and to comply with same.
(3) Approval block (required). The approval block used on the previously approved construction
plat shall be modified and shown on the final plat, as follows:
FINAL PLAT
Approved by the City of Seagoville for filing at the office of the County Clerk of
____________ (Dallas or Kaufman, as applicable) County, Texas.
APPROVED BY: Planning and Zoning Commission
City of Seagoville, Texas
Signature of Chairperson Date of Approval
ATTEST:
City Secretary Date
(4) Property location statement (if required by Dallas/Kaufman County):
This property is located in the corporate limits (or the extraterritorial jurisdiction) of
the City of Seagoville, ____________ (Dallas or Kaufman, as applicable) County,
Texas.
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
City of Seagoville
ATTEST:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/720
City Secretary Date
(d) Standards for approval. No final plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission unless the
following standards have been met:
(1) The plat substantially conforms with the approved construction plat and other studies and
plans, as applicable;
(2) The construction and installation of required public improvements and city utilities has been
completed and the improvements have been accepted by the city as conforming to the city's
regulations and design standards in the TCSS (or the proper assurances for construction of the
improvements have been submitted and approved by the city, per article 23.06); and
(3) The plat conforms to this subdivision ordinance, the Comprehensive plan (as amended), and to
applicable zoning, subdivision and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the city that are
related to development of a land parcel.
(e) When all of the improvements are found to be constructed and completed in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and with the city's standards, and upon receipt by the city of a maintenance bond or
certificate of deposit in accordance with article 23.06 of this chapter from each contractor, three (3) sealed sets
of “AS BUILT” (or “Record Drawing”) plans and one sealed (1) set of “As-Built” or “Record Drawing” mylars
and a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the city's engineer) shall be submitted with a letter
stating the contractors' compliance with this chapter, and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that
all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all city construction standards set forth in the
TCSS and other applicable city design documents. After such letter and certification are received, the city
manager (or designee) shall receive and accept for the city the title, use and maintenance of the improvements
according to article 23.06. The final plat shall not be approved or filed at the county prior to receipt of the above
letter and certification and any other required items, nor prior to acceptance of the improvements by the city.
(f) Timing of public improvements.
(1) Completion prior to final plat approval. Except as provided below, after approval of a
construction plat and before approval and recordation of a final plat, the installation of all public
improvements required to serve the subdivision, whether to be located off-site or on-site (including
but not limited to water, wastewater, drainage, street and park improvements), shall be finally
completed in accordance with approved engineering plans.
(2) Completion following final subdivision plat. The planning and zoning commission may permit
some or all of the required public improvements to be installed, offered for dedication, or accepted by
the city after approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission (see article 23.06).
The commission may permit or require the deferral of the construction of all or some public
improvements if, in its judgment, there exists a compelling reason that is consistent with the public
health, safety or welfare to do so; deferring the construction would not result in any harm to the
public; or deferring the construction would offer significant advantage in coordinating the site's
development with adjacent properties and off-site public improvements.
(A) A request for deferral of the completion of improvements shall be submitted along with a
construction plat. The deferred construction of any required public improvement(s) must be
approved by the planning and zoning commission during and as a part of construction plat
approval by the commission.
(B) The applicant must enter into a Subdivision Improvement Agreement, see section
23.06.002, to provide the necessary assurances, security, or escrowed funds for completion of
any deferred improvements. The city may assume responsibility for the completion of such
improvements as outlined in section 23.06.005.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/720
(g) Effect of approval. Approval of a final plat authorizes the developer, upon fulfillment of all requirements
and conditions of approval and upon completion of construction of all required improvements (or submission of
the proper assurances for construction of same, per article 23.06), to submit the final copies, or mylars, of the
plat for filing at Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) county. No conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the
property may occur until after the final plat is approved by the city in accordance with this chapter, and after the
plat has been filed for record at Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) county.
(h) Revisions to approved final plat prior to filing at the county. Occasionally, minor revisions are needed
before the final plat can be filed at the county. Minor revisions such as correction of bearings or distances,
correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, etc. may
occur on the record plat prior to filing it without the planning and zoning commission having to reapprove the
final plat. Whether or not revisions are “minor” in nature shall be determined by the municipal development
review committee. Major revisions, such as obvious corrections or reconfiguration of lot lines or easements,
relocation of driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the
property, and relocation or addition or deletion of any public improvement (including corresponding easement),
shall necessitate resubmission and reapproval of the plat as a “revised final plat” unless otherwise approved by
the municipal development review committee , as applicable. The procedures for such reapproval shall be the
same as for a final plat, and such reapproval may constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new
application form, payment of new fees, compliance with amendments to this chapter which occurred since
original final plat approval, and other requirements.
(i) Subsequent to final plat approval by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant shall return copies
of the final plat, as approved, along with any other required documents and necessary fees, to the municipal
development review committee within thirty (30) calendar days following approval, in accordance with
requirements established by the city.
(1) All easements shall be included on the final plat, including the recording information for those
easements that are filed or recorded as separate instruments, as required by utility companies and the
city prior to filing the final plat, and a copy of letters from each applicable utility company shall be
submitted stating that the plat contains the proper easements.
(2) All necessary filing materials as required by the county clerk of Dallas or Kaufman (as
applicable) county, in addition to the appropriate number of mylar copies and a computer disk
containing the digital plat file(s) required and returned to the city with the required fees.
(3) If the required copies and materials are not returned to the city within the specified 30-day time
frame, the approval of the final plat shall be deemed to expire and shall become null and void unless
an extension is granted by the commission.
(4) The city shall cause the final plat to be filed at the office of the county clerk of Dallas or
Kaufman (as applicable) county within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of all filing
materials, including filing fees.
Sec. 23.02.005 Development plats
(a) Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212,
Subchapter B, sections 212.041 through 212.050, as amended.
(b) Applicability. For purposes of this section, the term “development” means the construction of any
building, structure or improvement of any nature (residential or nonresidential), or the enlargement of any
external dimension thereof. This section shall apply to any land lying within the city or within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction in the following circumstances:
(1) The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the
effective date of this chapter, unless expressly exempted herein; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/720
(2) The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from
the city's subdivision ordinance, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly
provided for in such regulations; or
(3) The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street;
or
(4) The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five
(5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated or constructed.
(c) Exceptions. No development plat shall be required, where the land to be developed has received final plat
or replat approval prior to the effective date of this chapter or a final plat or replat has been filed in accordance
with this chapter.
(d) Prohibition on development. No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility
connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued, for any development or land division
subject to this section, until a development plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission and
submitted to the city for filing at the county. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city shall not
require building permits or otherwise enforce the city's Building Code in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction in
relation to any development plat required by this subdivision ordinance.
(e) Standards of approval. The development plat shall not be approved until the following standards have been
satisfied:
(1) The proposed development conforms to all city plans, including but not limited to, the
Comprehensive plan (as amended), utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans;
(2) The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the zoning ordinance (if located
within the city's corporate limits) and this subdivision ordinance;
(3) The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, parks and
open space in conformance with city regulations;
(4) The proposed development will not create a safety hazard on a public street (such as by not
providing adequate on-site parking or vehicle maneuvering space for a restricted access/gated
entrance);
(5) Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development
have been tendered; and
(6) The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in
this chapter and in the city's TCSS, and to any other applicable codes or ordinances of the city that
are related to development of a land parcel.
(f) Conditions. The planning and zoning commission may impose such conditions on the approval of the
development plat as are necessary to insure compliance with the standards in subsection (e) above.
(g) Approval procedure. The application for a development plat shall be submitted to the city in the same
manner as a final plat (see sections 23.02.001 and 23.02.004), and shall be approved, conditionally approved, or
denied by the planning and zoning commission in a similar manner as a final plat. Upon approval, the
development plat shall be filed at the county by the city in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat (see
section 23.02.001 and section 23.02.004), and approval of a development plat shall expire if all filing materials
are not submitted to the municipal development review committee and if the plat is not filed at the county within
the time periods specified for a final plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/720
(h) Submittal requirements - In addition to all information that is required to be shown on a final plat (see
section 23.02.004(c)), a development plat shall:
(1) Be prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor;
(2) Clearly show the boundary of the development plat;
(3) Be accompanied by a site plan showing all existing and proposed buildings, structures and
improvements, or any proposed modifications of the external configuration of the existing buildings,
structures and improvements involving a change therein;
(4) Show all easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the development plat; and
(5) Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form,
the required submission fee (per the city's current fee schedule), and a certificate or some other form
of verification from the Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) county appraisal district showing that all
taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in
accordance with section 23.01.010.
(6) A copy of all application materials for a development plat shall be simultaneously submitted to
the municipal development review committee for review in the same manner as for a final plat, or the
application shall be deemed incomplete.
Sec. 23.02.006 Replatting
(a) Replat required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a property owner who proposes to replat
any portion of an already approved and filed final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, must first obtain
approval for the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for the final platting of
land by this chapter. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the same requirements as for a
construction or final plat, as provided herein. The municipal development review committee may waive or
modify requirements for a replat under certain circumstances where the proposed replat does not involve a large
land parcel or an existing structure or business on the subject property, and where the proposed plat revisions are
relatively simple in nature.
(b) Replatting without vacating preceding plat. A replat of a final plat or portion of a final plat may be
recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that final plat if the replat:
(1) Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
(2) Is approved, after a public hearing on the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have
an opportunity to be heard by the planning and zoning commission; and
(3) Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in
the final plat.
(c) Special Public Notice Requirements for Residential Replats. In addition to compliance with (b) above, a
replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if:
(1) During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by a zoning
classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or
(2) Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more
than two (2) residential units per lot.
(d) Notice of the public hearing required under (b) above shall be given before the fifteenth (15th) calendar
day before the date of the hearing by publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/720
in Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) county. Notice of the public hearing shall also be given by written notice
before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the date of the hearing, with a copy or description of any
requested waivers/suspensions, sent to the property owners, as documented on the most recently approved ad
valorem tax roll of the city, of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within two hundred feet (200')
of the lot(s) to be replatted. In the case of a subdivision in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently
approved county tax roll shall be used. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly
addressed with appropriate postage paid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the city.
(e) If the property owner(s) of twenty percent (20%) or more of the total land area of lots to whom notice is
required to be given under subsection (d) above file with the city a written protest of the replatting before or at
the public hearing, or if the replat requires a waiver/suspension as defined in section 23.01.009, then approval of
the replat will require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the full planning and zoning
commission. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the
total land area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending
two hundred feet (200') from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the city prior to the
close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area subject to the “20% rule” described above,
the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(f) Compliance with subsection (c) above is not required for approval of a replat for any part of a preceding
plat if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single- or two-family (i.e., duplex)
residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the
plat. For example, for a replat involving nonresidential property, a public hearing must be held, pursuant to
subsection (b)(2) above, but notice of the hearing does not have to appear in the newspaper and written notices
do not have to be mailed to individual property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property.
(g) Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original subdivision and lot boundaries. If a replat is
submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the replat must reference the previous
subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the replat the specific lots which have changed
along with a detailed “Purpose for Replat” statement.
(h) If the previous plat is vacated as prescribed in section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, and as provided in section 23.02.008 of this chapter, a public hearing is not required for a replat of the
area vacated. It would, instead, be submitted as a “final plat” and reviewed accordingly.
(i) The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a final plat for a new subdivision that may
be pertinent, as provided for herein, including requirements that pertain to infrastructure, such as roadways and
utilities.
(j) The title shall identify the document as a “Final Plat” of the “____________ Addition, Block ______,
Lot(s) ______, Being a Replat of Block ______, Lot(s) ______ of the ____________ Addition, an addition to
the City of Seagoville, Texas, as recorded in Volume/Cabinet ______, Page/Slide ______ of the Plat Records of
Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) County, Texas”.
(k) An application submittal for a replat shall be the same as for a final plat, and shall be accompanied by the
required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee (per the city's
current fee schedule), and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 23.01.010. The replat shall also bear a
detailed “Purpose for Replat” statement which describes exactly what has been changed on the plat since the
original (or previous) plat was approved by the city and filed at the county. A copy of all application materials
for a replat shall be simultaneously submitted to the municipal development review committee for review in the
same manner as for a final plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete.
(l) The replat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval of a
replat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the municipal development review committee and if
the replat is not filed at the county within the time period specified for a final plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/720
Sec. 23.02.007 Amending plats
(a) An amending plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final plat,
and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the
required submission fee (per the city's current fee schedule), and a certificate from the Dallas or Kaufman (as
applicable) county appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 23.01.010.
(b) All application materials for an amending plat shall be the same as those required for a final plat, and shall
be submitted to the municipal development review committee for review in the same manner as for a final plat.
(c) An amending plat may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding or final plat without vacation of
that plat, if the plat being amended is signed by the applicants only and if the plat being amended is for one or
more of the purposes set forth in this section. The procedures for amending a plat shall apply only if the sole
purpose of amending the plat is to achieve at least one (1) of the following:
(1) Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or
RPLS responsible for setting monuments;
(5) Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or
that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names,
and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) or more adjacent lots if:
(A) Both/all lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) Neither lot(s) is abolished;
(C) The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions
or easements; and
(D) The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the
owners in the plat;
(8) Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) Relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions
or easements; and
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/720
(10) Make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision
or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
(A) The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the city;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions
or easements; and
(C) The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the planning and zoning
commission has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area.
9. [11.] Replat one (1) or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions
or easements; and
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
(D) The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary
the extension of municipal facilities.
(d) The city manager (or designee) shall be empowered to approve an amending plat if it meets all of the
criteria of this section. The city manager (or designee) may, at his or her discretion and for any reason, elect to
present the application for an amending plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. Any decision
made on the amending plat by the city manager (or designee) shall be approval of the plat. Should the city
manager (or designee) refuse to approve the amending plat, then the amending plat shall be referred to the
commission for approval within the time period required by state law.
(e) Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners within the original subdivision are not
required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat.
(f) The amending plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is an “Amending Plat”, and it shall include a
detailed “Purpose for Amending Plat” statement which describes exactly what has been changed on the plat
since the original (or previous) plat was approved by the city and filed at the county. It shall also state the
specific lots affected or changed as a result of the amending plat, and shall include the original subdivision plat
boundary.
(g) Other than noted above, the procedure for approval of plat amendment(s) shall be the same as in section
23.02.004.
(h) The amending plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and
approval of an amending plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city and if the plat is not
filed at the county within the time periods specified for a final plat.
Sec. 23.02.008 Plat vacation
(a) By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate, upon approval by the
planning and zoning commission, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when
a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed
for the original plat (instrument language is available from the city, upon request).
(b) By all lot owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the
plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner
prescribed for the original plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/720
(c) Criteria. The planning and zoning commission shall have the authority to consider, approve or deny the
petition for vacation on such terms and conditions as are in accordance with section 212.013 of the Texas Local
Government Code (as amended), and as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. As a
condition of vacation of the plat, the planning and zoning commission may direct the petitioners to prepare and
seek simultaneous approval of a revised final plat in accordance with this chapter such that the property does not
become “unplatted”.
(d) Effect of action. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat shall have no
effect. Regardless of the commission's action on the petition, the property owner will have no right to a refund of
any monies, fees or charges paid to the city nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or
delivered to the city except as may have previously been agreed to by the commission or city council.
(e) City-initiated plat vacation.
(1) General conditions. The planning and zoning commission, on its motion and following a public
hearing on the matter, may vacate the plat of an approved subdivision or addition when:
(A) No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five (5) years following the date
that the plat was approved by the city and filed for record at the county;
(B) The property owner has breached a subdivision improvement agreement (see section
23.06.002) and the city is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public
improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by property owner or its
successor; or
(C) The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years and the city determines that the
further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety or
welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its
successors.
(2) Procedure. Upon any motion of the planning and zoning commission to vacate the plat of any
previously approved subdivision or addition, in whole or in part, the city shall publish notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county before the fifteenth (15th) day prior to the date of the
public hearing at which the plat vacation shall be heard by the commission. The city shall also
provide written notice to all property owners within the subdivision or addition and to all members of
the city council. The notice shall state the time and place for a public hearing before the commission
on the motion to vacate the subdivision or addition plat. The commission shall approve the plat
vacation only if the criteria and conditions cited above are satisfied.
(3) Record of plat vacation. If the planning and zoning commission approves vacating a plat, the
city shall cause a copy of the plat vacation instrument to be recorded in the office of the county clerk
of Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable) County along with an exhibit showing a drawing of the area or
plat vacated. The county clerk shall write legibly on the vacated plat the word “vacated” and shall
enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page at which the vacating instrument is recorded. If
the planning and zoning commission vacates only a portion of a plat, it shall cause a revised final plat
drawing to also be recorded which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and
that portion that has not been vacated. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument the
vacated plat (or the vacated portion of the plat) has no effect.
Sec. 23.02.009 Minor plats
(a) A minor plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final plat, and
shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required
submission fee (per the city's current fee schedule), and a certificate from the Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/720
county tax assessor/collector showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with section 23.01.010.
(b) All application materials for a minor plat shall be the same as those required for a final plat, and shall be
submitted to the municipal development review committee for review in the same manner as for a final plat.
(c) The city manager (or designee) shall be empowered to approve a minor plat. The city manager (or
designee) may approve a minor plat, or may, for any reason, elect to present the minor plat to the planning and
zoning commission for consideration and approval. Any decision made on the minor plat by the city manager (or
designee) shall be approval of the plat. Should the city manager (or designee) refuse to approve the minor plat,
then the plat shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for review and approval, within the time
period required by state law.
(d) Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners in the original subdivision are not required
for the approval a minor plat.
(e) The minor plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is a “minor plat.”
(f) The minor plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat, and approval
of a minor plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the city and if the plat is not filed at the
county within the time periods specified for a final plat.
ARTICLE 23.03 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 23.03.001 Streets
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the city's
thoroughfare plan and TCSS, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets or
driveways (whether within the city, within its ETJ area, or within adjacent municipal or county areas), to
topographical conditions, to public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets. Reserve or residual strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to
or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision
purposes, or which will not be taxable or accessible for improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision
unless such are required by the city in the public interest (such as to enhance public safety or other public
interest). All streets shall be constructed in accordance with all of the design standards for streets contained in
this chapter and in the city's TCSS.
(b) Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, shall be properly related to the thoroughfare plan and any amendments thereto, and shall be
appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. All streets
shall be open and unobstructed at all times. The layout of the street network shall, to the greatest extent possible,
be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order
to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction, thereby helping to reduce stormwater
runoff and preserve natural, scenic characteristics of the land.
(c) Adequacy of streets and thoroughfares.
(1) Responsibility for adequacy of streets and thoroughfares. The developer shall ensure that the
subdivision is served by adequate streets and thoroughfares to accommodate the increased amounts
of traffic generated by his/her development, and shall be responsible for dedicating appropriate
rights-of-way and for his/her reasonable proportionate share of the costs of necessary street
improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards, and subject to the city's cost
participation policies on oversized facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/720
(2) General adequacy policy. Every subdivision shall be served by improved streets and
thoroughfares that are adequate to accommodate the vehicular traffic to be generated by the
development. Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for traffic
circulation; shall be properly related to the city's thoroughfare plan, road classification system,
Comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto; and shall be appropriate and adequate for the
particular anticipated traffic volumes and characteristics of each development. (Also see section
23.01.013, Adequate Public Facilities Policy.)
(3) Road network. New subdivisions shall be supported by a road network having adequate
capacity, ingress/egress, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. The adequacy of the road network
for developments of fifty (50) or more dwelling units, or for developments generating five hundred
(500) or more “one-way” trips per day, or for developments involving collector or arterial streets not
appearing on the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, shall be demonstrated by preparation and
submission, prior to or along with the construction plat application, of a traffic impact analysis
prepared in accordance with subsection (f), traffic impact analysis, which takes into consideration the
need to accommodate traffic generated by the development, land to be developed in common
ownership and other developed property. In the event that the property to be developed is intended as
a phase in a larger development project, or constitutes a portion of the land to be ultimately
developed, the commission may require a demonstration of adequacy pursuant to this section and
section 23.01.013 for additional phases or portions of the property as a condition of approval for the
proposed construction plat. In the event that the applicant submits a traffic impact analysis for an
entire phased development project, the city may require an update of the study for each subsequent
phase of the development which reflects any applicable changed conditions. If the construction plat is
in conformance with the thoroughfare plan and if the construction plat is for a development of less
than fifty (50) dwelling units or for a development generating less than five hundred (500) “one-way”
trips per day, then a traffic impact analysis is not required.
(4) Approach roads and access. All subdivisions, except for those comprised of an approved culde-
sac street(s), must have at least two (2) points of vehicular access (primarily for emergency
vehicles), and must be connected via improved roadways to the city's improved thoroughfare and
street system by one or more approach roads of such dimensions and improved to such standards as
are hereinafter set forth. Requirements for dedication of right-of-way and improvement of approach
roads may be increased depending upon the size or density of the proposed development, or if such
need is demonstrated by traffic impact analysis.
(A) “Two (2) points of vehicular access” shall be construed to mean that the subdivision has
at least two (2) improved roads accessing the subdivision from the city's improved thoroughfare
system, and the subdivision has at least two (2) road entrances. The city's planning and zoning
commission may, at its discretion and upon a finding that such will not compromise public
safety or impede emergency access, accept a single median-divided entrance from the city's
improved thoroughfare system for a nonresidential subdivision or for a residential subdivision
having no more than seventy-five (75) residential lots or dwelling units, provided that the
median extends into the subdivision for an unbroken length of at least one hundred feet (100')
to an intersecting internal street which provides at least two (2) routes to the interior of the
subdivision. For example, the entrance street is not a dead-end or cul-de-sac, and it does not
create a “bottleneck” allowing only one emergency route into the interior of the subdivision.
Residential lots may not front onto any median-divided street section, and residential driveways
may not be located in front of a median. (Also see section 23.03.001(u).)
(B) The subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public safety
vehicles. Each residential lot in the subdivision shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated
public street as required by applicable zoning or thirty-five feet (35'), whichever is greater,
unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval. Each
nonresidential and multifamily lot shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated public street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/720
as required by applicable zoning or fifty feet (50'), whichever is greater, unless other provisions
have been authorized through planned development approval.
(5) Off-site improvements. Where traffic impact analysis demonstrates the need for such facilities,
or where the city believes public safety is at risk, the property owner shall make such improvements
to off-site collector and arterial streets and intersections as are necessary to mitigate traffic impacts
generated by the development or in conjunction with related developments. The city may participate
in the costs of oversize improvements with the property owner as set out herein, and subject to the
city's cost participation policies on oversized improvements.
(6) Street dedications.
(A) Dedication of right-of-way. The property owner shall provide all rights-of-way required
for existing or future streets, and for all required street improvements, including perimeter
streets and approach roads, as shown in the thoroughfare plan and as required by the TCSS or
by other valid development plans approved by the planning and zoning commission. In the case
of perimeter streets, half of the total required right-of-way width for such streets shall be
provided unless the proposed development is on both sides of the street, in which case the full
right-of-way width shall be provided, or unless there is some other compelling reason to require
more than half of the right-of-way width (such as avoiding the infringement upon or demolition
of existing structures, avoiding crossing a creek or floodplain or some other obstacle, or other
similar circumstance). In some instances, more than half of the required width shall be required
when a half-street is impractical or unsafe and depending upon the actual or proposed alignment
of the street, such as in the case of a curved street, as may be required by the planning and
zoning commission.
(B) Perimeter streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision or
addition, the other half of the street shall be dedicated, and an appropriate amount of the street
shall be improved, by the developer of the new subdivision or addition.
(C) Slope easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to dedicated rights-of-way
shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall be no steeper than three feet (3') horizontal run to one
foot (1') vertical height, or a three-to-one (3:1) slope.
(7) Street construction. All streets and thoroughfares shall be constructed and paved to city
standards and within rights-of-way as required by the thoroughfare plan and this chapter, and in
accordance with the TCSS and other city standards as may be from time to time amended or adopted.
(8) Intersection improvements and traffic-control devices shall be installed as warranted in
accordance with the traffic impact analysis required by subsection (f), or as may be required by the
city for traffic safety and efficiency. Construction and design standards shall be in accordance with
city standards and the TCSS.
(9) Phased development. Where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the applicant, in
conjunction with submission of the construction plat, shall provide a schedule of development. The
schedule shall set forth the intended plan of development and dedication of rights-of-way for streets
and street improvements, whether on-site or off-site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the
subdivision. The city shall determine whether the proposed streets and street improvements are
adequate pursuant to standards herein established, and may require that a traffic impact analysis be
submitted for the entire project or such phases as the city determines to be necessary to adjudge
whether the subdivision will be adequately served by streets and thoroughfares.
(10) Private streets. New subdivisions may be constructed with private streets, if they meet the
following standards and the TCSS. Any private street subdivisions that were in existence (i.e., platted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/720
of record at the county) on the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to remain as private
street subdivisions provided that the conditions of the private streets and the maintenance thereof
continues to meet or exceed city standards, and provided that a viable homeowners' association
(HOA) continues to exist to maintain the private streets and all appurtenances. The city will not assist
in enforcing deed restrictions. The city may periodically inspect private streets, and may require any
repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency access and to protect the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare.
(A) Private streets: Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any portion
of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street.
(B) Private streets: Traffic-control devices. All private traffic-control devices and regulatory
signs shall conform to the “Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices”, as amended,
and to city standards.
(C) Private streets: Restricted access. The entrances to all private streets shall be clearly
marked with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, stating that the streets within the
subdivision are private, and that they are not maintained nor regularly patrolled by the city. All
restricted access entrances shall be manned twenty-four (24) hours every day, or they shall
provide a reliable, alternative means of ensuring access into the subdivision by the city, by
emergency service providers, and by other utility or public service providers, such as postal
carriers and utility companies, with appropriate identification. The method to be used to ensure
city and emergency access into the subdivision shall be approved by the city's fire department
and by any other applicable emergency service providers. If the association fails to maintain
reliable access as required herein, the city may enter the private street subdivision and remove
any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association.
(D) Private streets: Waiver of services. Certain city services may not be provided for private
street subdivisions. Among the services which may not be provided are: routine law
enforcement patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking regulations, and preparation of accident
reports. Depending upon the characteristics of the development and upon access limitations
posed by the design of entrances into the subdivision, other services (such as sanitation) may
not be provided, as well.
(E) Private streets: Petition to convert to public streets. The property owners' association may
petition the city to accept private streets and any associated property as public streets and rightof-
way upon written notice to all association members and upon the favorable vote of a
majority of the membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept said
streets as public. Should the city elect to accept the streets as public, then the city has the right
to inspect the private streets and to assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs
concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets. The city shall be the sole judge of whether
repairs are needed. The city may also require, at the association's or the lot owners' expense, the
removal of any guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities
located within the street lot or within any other common area.
(F) Private streets: Hold harmless. The property owners' association, as owner of the private
streets and appurtenances, shall release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any other
governmental entity, and any public utility entity for damages to the private streets that may be
occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by same, and for damages and injury
(including death) arising from the condition of the private streets, out of any use of access gates
or cross-arms, or out of any use of the subdivision by the city or governmental or utility entity.
(d) Escrow policies and procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/720
(1) Request for escrow. Whenever this chapter requires a property owner to construct a street or
thoroughfare, or other type of public improvement, the property owner may, if there exists unusual
circumstances, such as a timing issue due to pending roadway improvements by another agency such
as TxDOT or Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable), that would present undue hardships or that
would impede public infrastructure coordination or timing, petition the city to construct the street or
thoroughfare, usually at a later date, in exchange for deposit of escrow as established in this section.
If more than one street or thoroughfare must be constructed in order to meet adequacy requirements
for roadways, as demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis, the city manager (or designee) may
prioritize roadways for which escrow is to be accepted and require the deposit of all funds
attributable to the development in escrow accounts for one or more of such affected roadways. The
planning and zoning commission shall review the particular circumstances involved (a traffic impact
analysis may be required to facilitate the commission's deliberations on the matter), and shall make a
determination on the matter. The commission shall then review the issue, and shall make a final
determination, at its sole discretion, whether or not provision of escrow deposits will be acceptable in
lieu of the property owner's obligation to construct the street or thoroughfare with his or her
development during its review and approval of the construction plat for the development.
(2) Escrow deposit with the city. Whenever the commission agrees to accept escrow deposits in
lieu of construction by the owner of the property under this chapter, the property owner or developer
shall deposit in escrow with the city an amount equal to the share of the costs of design, construction,
permits, reviews and approvals, inspections, any additional land acquisition, and an appropriate (and
realistic) inflation factor to ensure that the actual “future dollar” costs will be covered when actual
construction occurs in the future. Such amount shall be reviewed by the city engineer and approved
by the city manager, and shall be paid prior to release of engineering plans by the city engineer. The
obligations and responsibilities of the property owner shall become those of the property owner's
transferees, successors and assigns; and the liability therefore shall be joint and several.
(3) Determination of escrow amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the
maximum comparable “turnkey” bid price of construction of the improvements (including design,
permits, reviews and approvals, inspections and any additional land acquisition that may be needed).
Such determination of the escrow amount shall be made as of the time the escrow is due hereunder,
and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager (or designee) and the city
engineer.
(4) Termination of escrow. Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which have been placed
with the city under this section and which have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date
of such payment or agreement, in the event that the city has not authorized the preparation of plans
and specifications for construction of such roadway facilities for which the escrow was made, shall,
upon written request, be returned to the property owner, along with one-half of its accrued interest.
Such return does not remove any obligations of the property owner for construction of the required
facilities if a building permit has not been issued on the subject lot or if a new building permit is
applied for.
(5) Refund. If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other
than the city, or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the city, the
escrowed funds and one-half of its accrued interest shall be refunded to the property owner or
applicant who originally paid the escrow amount after completion and acceptance of the public
improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the city and the other portion of the
cost by another party or governmental authority, the difference between the property owner's actual
proportionate cost and the escrowed funds, including one-half of its accrued interest, if any, shall be
refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements.
(6) Interest limitation. If money is refunded within six (6) months of deposit, only the principal
will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with one-half of its accrued
interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/720
(e) Traffic impact analysis. Any proposed development project or plat involving a significant change as
determined by the city engineer to a proposed roadway alignment from that shown on the city's thoroughfare
plan or involving a development of fifty (50) or more dwelling units, or for developments generating five
hundred (500) or more “one-way” trips per day shall be preceded by submission, city staff review, and planning
and zoning commission approval of a traffic impact analysis performed by a qualified traffic engineer and as
specified in subsection (f) below. Such a proposed roadway alignment change shall also be preceded by an
amendment to the city's thoroughfare plan showing the new proposed alignment. Failure to provide for such
approvals prior to submission of a construction plat shall be grounds for denial of the plat application.
(f) Required components of traffic impact analysis. Whenever this chapter (or the city, in certain instances
which do not meet the above criteria but which may significantly affect the public health, safety or welfare, such
as a proposed subdivision that will only be accessed via substandard roadways which may pose an impediment
to emergency response vehicles) requires submission and planning and zoning commission approval of a traffic
impact analysis, the following elements shall be included:
(1) General site description. The traffic impact analysis shall include a detailed description of the
roadway network within one (1) mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the
anticipated phasing of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land
development. This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items:
(1) all major intersections; (2) all proposed and existing ingress and egress locations; (3) all existing
roadway widths and rights-of-way; (4) all existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices; and (5)
all existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the
site.
(2) Proposed capital improvements. The traffic impact analysis shall identify any changes to the
roadway network within one (1) mile of the site that are proposed by any government agency or other
developer. This description shall include the above items as well as any proposed construction project
that would alter the width or alignment of roadways affected by the proposed development.
(3) Roadway impact analysis.
(A) Transportation impacts:
(i) Trip generation. The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends), the average
weekend trip generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional), the highest
average a.m. and p.m. hourly weekday trip generation rates, and the highest hourly
weekend generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional) for the proposed
development shall be determined based upon the trip generation rates contained in the
most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation book; or
shall be based upon data generated by actual field surveys of area uses comparable to the
proposed use and approved by the city.
(ii) Trip distribution. The distribution of trips to arterial and collector roadways within
the study area identified in subsection 23.03.001(f)(1) (general site description) above
shall be in conformity with accepted traffic engineering principles, taking into
consideration the land use categories of the proposed development; the area from which
the proposed development will attract traffic; competing developments (if applicable); the
size of the proposed development; development phasing; surrounding existing and
anticipated land uses, population and employment; existing and projected daily traffic
volumes; and existing traffic conditions identified pursuant to subsection 23.03.001(f)(1)
above.
(B) Adequacy determination. The roadway network included within the traffic impact
analysis shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing roadways
identified as arterials and collectors can accommodate the existing service volume, and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/720
service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt
developments holding valid, unexpired building permits at a level of service “C” or above.
(4) Intersection analysis.
(A) Level of service analysis. For intersections within the roadway traffic impact analysis
area described in subsection 23.03.001(f)(1) herein (general site description), a level of service
analysis shall be performed for all arterial to arterial, arterial to collector, collector to arterial,
and collector to collector intersections, and for any other pertinent intersections identified by
the city. Also, level of service analyses will be required on all proposed site driveway locations
for all nonresidential developments. The city may waive analysis of minor intersections and site
driveway locations within the one-mile radius. The level of service analysis shall be based upon
the highest hourly average a.m. or p.m. peak weekday volume or highest average hourly peak
weekend volume as determined from a two-day survey of weekday volumes and, where
necessary, a one-day survey of weekend volumes. The level of service analysis shall take into
consideration the lane geometry, traffic volume, percentage of right-hand turns, percentage of
left-hand turns, percentage (and typical size) of trucks, intersection width, number of lanes,
signal timing and progression, roadway grades, pedestrian and bicycle flows, school routes,
number of accidents, and peak hour factor.
(B) Adequacy analysis. The intersections included within the traffic impact analysis shall be
considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing intersections can
accommodate the existing service volume, the service volume of the proposed development,
and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired building
permits at level of service “C” or above.
(5) Effect of adequacy determination. If the adequacy determination for roadways and intersections
indicates that the proposed development would cause a reduction in the level of service for any
roadway or intersection within the study area identified in subsection 23.03.001(f)(1) herein that
would cause the roadway to fall below the level of service required hereby, the proposed
development shall be denied unless the developer agrees to one of the following conditions:
(A) The deferral of building permits until the improvements necessary to upgrade the
substandard facilities are constructed;
(B) A reduction in the density or intensity of development;
(C) The dedication or construction of facilities needed to achieve the level of service required
herein; or
(D) Any combination of techniques identified herein that would ensure that development will
not occur unless the levels of service for all roadways and intersections within the traffic impact
analysis study are adequate to accommodate the impacts of such development.
(g) Arrangement of streets not shown on the thoroughfare plan. For streets that are not shown on the city's
thoroughfare plan, such as local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets within a subdivision shall:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets from or into
surrounding areas;
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city to meet a particular
situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets
impractical;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/720
(3) Provide for future access, such as by stubbing streets for future extension, to adjacent vacant
areas which will likely develop under a similar zoning classification or for a similar type of land use;
and
(4) Not conflict in any way with existing or proposed driveway openings (including those on the
other side of an existing or planned median-divided arterial, in which case new streets shall align
with such driveway openings such that median openings can be shared).
(h) Residential collector streets and minor residential streets shall be laid out such that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged, such as via circuitous routes or multiple turns or offsets, but such that access is
provided to adjacent subdivisions.
(1) Wherever the right-of-way width of a collector or residential street must transition to a greater
or lesser width, such transition shall occur along the front, side or rear lot lines of adjacent lots (for a
reasonable distance) and shall not occur within the street intersection itself. In other words, the rightof-
way width shall be the same on both sides of the street intersection.
(2) To the greatest extent possible, the number of lots fronting along residential collector streets
shall be minimized in order to ensure adequate traffic safety and efficiency. No more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total centerline length of a collector street may have residential lots fronting
onto the collector on each side of the street. For example, a collector street having a total centerline
length (from one terminus to another) of 1,000 feet may have lots fronting onto it with a total
frontage distance of 250 feet on each side of the street. Calculations shall be submitted with the
construction plat application (and provided to the municipal development review committee)
verifying that lots fronting onto a collector street do not exceed the above.
(3) At least fifty percent (50%) of the total centerline length of all streets (including collector
streets) within a residential subdivision containing 30 lots or more (or within each phase of a
residential subdivision, unless otherwise approved by city to apply to the subdivision in its entirety
rather than each individual phase) shall be curvilinear in design (see definition for “curvilinear street”
in section 23.01.016), and the minimum centerline radius for residential streets shall be one hundred
and fifty feet (150'). Calculations shall be submitted with the construction plat application (and
provided to the municipal development review committee) verifying that the above curvilinear street
requirement is being met.
(i) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage (lots which back onto the arterial), or such treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(j) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where this type of control is required
by the city.
(k) Intersecting, undivided streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and fifty feet (150') shall be
avoided. Intersecting streets onto an existing or future divided roadway must be configured such that the
centerline offset will accommodate the appropriate median opening and left turn lanes (with required transition
and stacking distances) on each divided roadway, and shall be aligned with any existing or proposed streets or
driveways on the opposite side of the divided roadway (in order to share the median opening).
(l) A street intersection with a major thoroughfare shall be at a ninety-degree (90°) angle and shall be tangent
to the intersecting street for at least one hundred feet (100'). All other street intersections shall be laid out so as
to intersect as nearly as possible at a ninety-degree (90°) angle or radial to the centerline of the intersecting street
for the full right-of-way width of the intersecting street, and tangent to the intersecting street for at least fifty feet
(50'). No street shall intersect at an angle that is less than eighty-five degrees (85°).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/720
(m) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the thoroughfare plan and as defined by the
corresponding roadway cross-sections on the thoroughfare plan and in the city's TCSS Manual.
(n) Construction of half-streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of
the subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of this chapter and the thoroughfare plan, and where
the city makes a determination that there is no immediate need to be gained by constructing the full street section
since no access from the street will be needed by the subdivision in question. The city may determine that it
would be more practical, or cost effective, to delay construction of the other half of a street until when the
adjoining property is developed.
If the property owner is responsible for one-half (1/2) of the street, then the property owner shall either construct
the facility along with his or her development, or shall provide escrow for the construction cost of his or her
share of the facility (including all applicable street appurtenances such as median openings, left turn lanes into
the development, sidewalks with barrier-free ramps, drainage structures, etc.) unless the city participates in the
construction of the facility. Whenever a partial street has been previously platted along a common property line,
the other portion of the street right-of-way shall be dedicated such that the right-of-way is increased to the
street's ultimate planned width. Improvements shall be made to all on-site facilities as defined herein (see
definitions, section 23.01.013).
(o) The maximum length of any block or street segment (including a looped street) shall be one thousand three
hundred and twenty feet (1,320') and the minimum length of any block or street segment shall be four hundred
feet (400'), as measured along the street centerline and between the point(s) of intersection with other through,
but not dead-end or cul-de-sac, streets.
(p) A cul-de-sac street shall not be longer than six hundred feet (600'), and at the closed end shall have a
turnaround bulb with an outside pavement diameter of at least eighty feet (80') and a right-of-way diameter of at
least one hundred feet (100'). The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting
street to the centerpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb.
(q) The planning and zoning commission may approve waivers/suspensions for specific overlength streets or
cul-de-sacs, whether temporary or permanent, upon considering the following:
(1) Alternative designs which could reduce street or cul-de-sac length;
(2) The effect of overlength streets upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services, and
upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in traveling to and from their homes; and
(3) Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional midblock street connections,
limitation on the number of lots to be served along an overlength street segment or cul-de-sac,
temporary (or permanent) points of emergency access, and additional emergency access measures.
(r) Except in unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved unless such dead-end streets are provided to
connect with future streets on adjacent land. In the case of dead-end streets which will eventually be extended
into the adjacent subdivision, no more than one lot (per side) can front onto the dead-end street stub unless a
temporary turnaround bulb (with the appropriate temporary street easement) is provided at the end. A temporary
dead-end street shall not exceed the maximum allowed length of a normal cul-de-sac, and the temporary
turnaround bulb must be constructed like a cul-de-sac, as provided in subsection (p) above (the city engineer
may authorize the use of asphalt or other durable paving material than concrete for the arc, or “wing”, portions
of the temporary turnaround bulb in order to minimize the cost of removing those portions later on). A note shall
be placed on the final plat clearly labeling any temporary dead-end streets (if any) that will at some point be
extended into the adjacent property, and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as
on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the future. Signage and lettering must be large
enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a twenty-foot (20') distance. Any required temporary
turnaround easements shall be shown on the final plat along with their appropriate recording information, if they
are off-site or established by separate instrument.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/720
(s) New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets, and shall be
dedicated at equal or greater right-of-way widths than the existing streets for an appropriate transition length, if
applicable.
(t) Construction of streets. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with paving widths and specifications
as set forth in the TCSS of the city at the time at which the construction plat application is officially submitted
and deemed a complete application.
(u) Points of access. All developments (including multifamily and nonresidential) and subdivisions shall have
at least two (2) points of access from improved public roadways (also see section 23.03.001(c)(4)). All
residential developments shall provide no less than one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) lots or dwelling
units, or portion thereof, including temporary dead-end stubbed streets that will eventually provide connections
into adjacent future developments and thence to an arterial or collector street. Driveway access onto roadways
shall be provided and designed in accordance with the city's TCSS and construction standards that are in effect
at the time the construction plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application.
Residential driveway cuts shall not be allowed on roadways that are, or that are shown to become on the city's
adopted thoroughfare plan, larger than a residential collector street (60-foot right-of-way) unless specifically
approved by city with the construction plat application.
Sec. 23.03.002 Alleys
(a) Service alleys in nonresidential districts, if provided or constructed by the developer, shall be a minimum
right-of-way width of thirty feet (30') and a pavement width of twenty-four feet (24'), and shall be constructed to
public alley or fire lane standards, as determined to be appropriate by the city engineer and the fire chief. In
residential districts, alleys, if provided, shall be parallel, or approximately parallel, to the frontage of the street.
Alleys in residential districts shall provide a minimum of fifteen feet (15') of right-of-way and ten feet (10') of
pavement.
(b) General design standards for alleys (if provided).
(1) Alleys shall be paved in accordance with the city's TCSS and construction standards that are in
effect at the time the construction plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete
application.
(2) Where the deflection of alley alignment occurs, the design of the paving and property line shall
be as established by the TCSS.
(3) Dead-end or “hammerhead” alleys shall not be allowed. Alleys must have adequate turnouts
and street entrances such that vehicular traffic flow is continuous and efficient. Where a temporary
dead-end alley situation is unavoidable, a temporary turnaround bulb or turnout onto a street, either
of which will need a temporary easement for street or alley purposes, shall be provided as determined
by the city's municipal development review committee.
(4) Alleys may not exceed a maximum length of one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), as
measured along the centerline of the alley and between intersections with other alleys or entrances
onto streets (at the right-of-way line of the street at the alley entrance). The planning and zoning
commission may approve waivers/suspensions for specific overlength alleys, as part of approval of
the construction plat, upon consideration of the following:
(A) Alternative designs which would reduce alley length;
(B) The effect of overlength alleys upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services,
and upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in accessing rear driveways and in driving
around to the front of their homes; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/720
(C) Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional midblock alley turnouts,
limitation on the number of lots to be served along a single alley segment, temporary points of
access, and additional fire protection measures.
(5) Alley intersections shall be perpendicular and at a ninety-degree (90°) angle or radial to the
intersecting alley centerline for the full alley right-of-way width. Intersection pavement design shall
be of sufficient width and inside radius to accommodate waste collection and emergency vehicles.
Intersections shall be three-way wherever possible, and four-way intersections shall be avoided. No
alley intersection serving more than four directions shall be allowed.
Sec. 23.03.003 Easements
(a) The minimum width for city utility easements shall be fifteen feet (15') or as otherwise required by the city
engineer. The minimum width for city drainage easements shall be as required by the city engineer. The width of
easements for other utility providers, such as for gas, electric, telephone or cable television, shall be as required
by that particular entity. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths
required by other utility companies (also see section 23.03.008). Wherever possible, easements shall be centered
or along front or side lot lines rather than across the interior or rear of lots, particularly where no alleys will be
provided behind the lots.
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or channel, there shall be provided a
storm drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width
as may be designated by the city engineer, subject to determination according to proper engineering
considerations. The required width shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the city. Parallel streets or parkways
shall be required adjacent to certain portions of creek[s] or drainageways to provide maintenance access and/or
public access and visibility into public open space or recreation areas (see article 23.04). The number of lots that
back or side onto creeks, drainageways, public parks and open spaces, and public school sites shall be strictly
limited, and possibly prohibited, such that public access, visibility, safety and security within these areas are
maximized. Other utilities may be permitted within a drainage or floodway easement only if approved by the
city engineer and any other applicable entity requiring the drainage or floodway easement.
(c) Where alleys are not provided in a residential subdivision, a minimum ten-foot (10') wide utility easement
shall be provided along the front of all lots, adjacent to and flush with the street right-of-way line for the
potential placement of utility facilities.
(d) For new development, all necessary on-site easements shall be established on the subdivision plat and not
by separate instrument, and they shall be labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity if other than
the city, for which they are being provided. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: a water,
sanitary sewer or drainage easement, which is dedicated to the city for a water or sanitary sewer line or for a
drainage structure; an access easement, which is dedicated to the public for unrestricted access purposes; a fire
lane easement, which is dedicated to the city and its fire suppression and emergency medical service providers
for access purposes; an electrical, gas or telephone easement, which is dedicated to the specific utility provider
that requires the easement; and so on.
(e) Fire lane easements. Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations as
determined by the city manager (or designee) and the city's fire department. Fire lane and emergency access
easements shall have a minimum paved width of twenty-four feet (24') and a minimum height clearance of
fourteen feet (14'), unless a greater or different width or height clearance is required by the city's fire department
and is allowed by the city's fire code. Any such dead-end easement that is more than one hundred feet (100') in
length shall be provided a paved cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of eighty feet (80') with an additional
clear distance of ten feet (10') around its entire perimeter that is clear of any buildings, trees or other permanent
objects or structures. Emergency access roads and fire lanes shall be paved to city standards, in accordance with
the TCSS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/720
(f) Visibility easements. Whenever an intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way occurs, a triangular
visibility area shall be created. The visibility easement for each type of intersection shall be as follows:
(1) Intersection of two major or minor arterials, or a minor arterial onto a major arterial: forty feet
(40') from the intersection right-of-way on each side (i.e., a 40' x 40' clip);
(2) Intersection of a collector or residential street onto a major or minor arterial, or of a private
multifamily or nonresidential driveway onto any type of street: twenty-five feet (25') from the
intersection right-of-way on each side (i.e., a 25' x 25' clip);
(3) Intersection of two collector or residential streets (or one of each): ten feet (10') from the
intersection right-of-way on each side (i.e., a 10' x 10' clip);
(4) Intersection of an alley onto any type of street: ten feet (10') from the intersection right-of-way
on each side (i.e., a 10' x 10' clip); and
(5) Intersection of two alleys: twenty feet (20') from the intersection right-of-way on each side
(i.e., a 20' x 20' clip).
The maximum height of fences, walls, signs, and other similar fixed items shall be thirty inches
(30") within the visibility easement. All landscaping (and any other fixed feature) within the
triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between
thirty inches (30") and eight feet (8'). A limited number of single-trunked trees may be permitted in
this area provided they are trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the crossvisibility
area. Landscaping, except grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than three
feet (3') from the edge of any street pavement.
Sec. 23.03.004 Blocks
(a) The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated;
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks and dimensions (if within the city's corporate
limits); and
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and for pedestrians
or bicyclists traveling to a public park or school site or other facility within or close to the
neighborhood.
(b) Intersecting streets, which determine the lengths and widths of blocks, shall be provided at such intervals
as to serve cross-traffic adequately, to provide adequate fire protection, and to conform to customary subdivision
practices. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the block lengths shall not exceed
one thousand three hundred and twenty feet (1,320') in length. Where no existing subdivision or topographical
constraints control, the blocks shall not be less than four hundred feet (400') in length; however, in cases where
physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied,
the length may be increased or decreased (through issuance of a waiver/suspension by the city with construction
plat approval) to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and
public safety.
Sec. 23.03.005 Sidewalks
(a) Pedestrian concrete walkways (sidewalks) not less than four feet (4') wide shall be required within a
residential subdivision on both sides of residential and collector streets, and sidewalks not less than five feet (5')
wide shall be provided within all nonresidential developments and along all perimeter arterials, for both
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/720
residential and nonresidential developments, as set forth in the city's TCSS. Root barriers may be required
underneath, and along with the construction of, all public sidewalks per the city's TCSS, particularly in locations
where trees are (or will be) in close proximity to the sidewalk. Barrier-free ramps shall be constructed at all
street intersections and at any other locations deemed appropriate by the city due to anticipated pedestrian travel
patterns. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way, one foot (1') away from the right-of-way
line, and at least five feet (5') away from the street curb. In certain instances, the planning and zoning
commission may, at its sole discretion, approve placement of the sidewalk adjacent or closer than five feet (5') to
the curb provided that such placement benefits the general public by allowing more space for landscaping, such
as for street trees, screening shrubs, and decorative walls and fences, and provided that the width is increased to
a minimum of five feet (5') of sidewalk pavement or to such a width as may be needed in the interest of public
safety.
(b) All sidewalks along a perimeter roadway or arterial are considered part of the overall development's
required public improvements and shall be installed prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city and prior
to final plat approval, unless surety is provided, per article 23.06. In any event, a certificate of occupancy will
not be issued for any lot within the subdivision until the required sidewalks are in place or appropriate surety is
provided.
The cost and provision of any perimeter sidewalks, such as along major thoroughfares, may be escrowed as a
part of a developers agreement, if approved by the planning and zoning commission. The city has the right, but
not the obligation, to refuse escrow and to require paving of the sidewalks if, in its sole opinion, immediate
provision of the sidewalks is necessary for safe pedestrian circulation or if it would otherwise protect the public
health, safety, convenience or welfare.
Sec. 23.03.006 Lots
(a) Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district, if located within the
city's corporate limits, or to the minimum requirements set forth herein, whichever is greater. Lots that are
located outside of the city's corporate limits shall conform with all of the minimum requirements set forth herein.
(b) Each lot on a subdivision plat shall front onto a dedicated, improved public street unless platted as an
approved private street subdivision in accordance with this chapter (see section 23.03.001(c)(10)). Lot width and
access shall conform with this chapter, the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance (if within the city's limits),
comprehensive plan, and any other applicable city code or ordinance. In all cases, single-family residential lots
shall have a minimum of thirty-five feet (35') of frontage, and multifamily and nonresidential lots shall have a
minimum of fifty feet (50') of frontage, along a dedicated, improved street.
(c) Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line, and all the way out to the
property/right-of-way line, to meet lot width and frontage requirements of the appropriate zoning district (if
within the city's limits) and this chapter, and shall provide a reasonable building pad without encroachment into
front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement (see section 23.03.003)(c)). Also, the rear width
shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities, including access for driveways and solid waste
collection when alleys are present (minimum 20-foot alley frontage). In general, triangular, severely elongated or
tapered, “flag” or “panhandle” lots shall be avoided, and the city reserves the right to disapprove any lot which,
in its sole opinion, will not be suitable or desirable for the purpose intended, which is an obvious attempt to
circumvent the purpose and intent of lot configuration or lot width minimums, or which is so oddly shaped as to
create a hindrance to the logical lot layout of surrounding properties.
(d) Side lot lines shall be at ninety-degree (90°) angles or radial to street right-of-way lines to the greatest
extent possible. The city reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, is shaped or oriented
in such a fashion as to be unsuitable or undesirable for the purpose intended, or which is not attractively or
appropriately oriented toward its street frontage.
(e) Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where they may be essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arterials, as defined in section 23.03.001, or to overcome a specific
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/720
disadvantage or hardship imposed by topography or other factors. Where lots have double frontage, building
setback lines shall be established for each street side, and rear yard screening shall be provided in accordance
with section 23.05.007. Residential lots shall not back onto any residential street or collector street within a
residential area or neighborhood, and shall not have more than one-half (1/2) of its perimeter boundaries along
streets.
(f) All lots (both within the city's corporate limits and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction) shall have a
depth that is at least the minimum depth required by the applicable zoning district (if within the city's limits) or
one hundred and twenty feet (120') if no zoning applies, and no lot's depth shall be greater than three (3) times
its width unless special circumstances pertaining to the land or surrounding geography exist that represent a true
hardship. In this instance, the applicant may request, and the planning and zoning commission may grant, a
waiver of this requirement with review and approval of the construction plat.
(g) A lot's area shall be computed inclusive of all easements. However, there shall be a minimum buildable
area, exclusive of required easements, buffer zones and setbacks for each lot. The minimum buildable area shall
be an area one-half (1/2) of the required minimum lot size. If the city disputes the buildable area of any lot, the
applicant shall submit verification in writing that the buildable area is adequate for the type of housing product
(or nonresidential building) proposed for that lot. Final approval of the allowed buildable area for any lot shall
be by the city.
Sec. 23.03.007 Building lines
(a) Front building lines shall be shown on a concept plan and on any type of plat for all lots, and shall be
consistent with the zoning ordinance requirements for the district in which the development is located (if subject
to the city's zoning regulations) and with any other applicable city ordinance, respectively. For property that is
not subject to the city's zoning regulations, such as property that lies within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
the minimum front building line (for residential and nonresidential lots) shall be fifty feet (50').
(b) Key corner lots (i.e., corner lots where both neighboring lots have front yard setbacks adjacent to the
corner lot on both sides) shall observe the same front yard setback on both sides such that the front yard setbacks
of the key corner lot and its two neighboring lots are the same on each respective street frontage. For property
that is not subject to the city's zoning regulations, such as property that lies within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, the minimum front building line (for residential and nonresidential key corner lots) shall be fifty
feet (50').
Sec. 23.03.008 Utility services (not provided by the city)
(a) For purposes of this section, the following meanings shall apply:
(1) “Utility services” - The facilities of any person, firm or corporation providing electric, natural
gas, telephone, cable television, or any other such item or service for public use approved but not
provided by the city.
(2) “Feeder or feeder/lateral line” - High voltage supply electric lines carrying more than 69,000
volts that emanate from substations used to distribute power through an area to an unspecified
number of customers.
(3) “Lateral lines” - Those electric or telephone lines used to distribute service from a feeder line to
a single subdivision. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a
sectionalizing device such as a fuse.
(4) “Service lines” - Those lines used to connect between the utilities' system or lateral lines and
the end user's meter box.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/720
(b) All subdivision plats and engineering plans submitted to the city for approval shall provide for utility
services such as electrical, gas, telephone and cable television utility lines, including lateral or service
distribution lines, and wires to be placed underground. Feeder and other major transmission lines may remain
overhead within the appropriate easements. However, an applicant shall endeavor and, whenever practical, the
city shall require that feeder lines are placed away from major or minor thoroughfares or arterials, as shown on
the thoroughfare plan. Whenever practical, feeder lines which are to be placed overhead shall not be placed
along both sides of the street right-of-way. Verification of acceptance of easement locations and widths by the
public utilities shall be provided to the city, by the applicant, prior to final plat approval by the city, and all
easements shall be reviewed by the utility companies and by the city engineer (for those to the city) prior to
granting final approval for any residential subdivision affected by this section. The applicant shall also, prior to
final plat approval, provide a letter of commitment from each utility provider, such as those providing electricity,
gas, telephone and cable television, who will serve the development that said utility providers will ensure the
provision of necessary infrastructure and service to all portions of the proposed development within twelve (12)
months following final plat approval. Failure to submit such letters of commitment from utility providers shall
constitute grounds for denial of the final plat application on the basis that there is no written assurance that the
development can be served by essential utility services.
(c) Each of the utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies, criteria for
easement size, and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of their underground
utilities. Nothing herein shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference in cost of
overhead facilities and underground utilities from the property owner in accordance with the provisions of such
utility's approved tariff. No utility company shall be required or permitted to begin construction of underground
facilities unless and until the property owner or developer of the subdivision has made arrangements satisfactory
to the specific utility company for the payment of such difference between the cost of overhead facilities and
underground facilities.
(d) All electrical and telephone support equipment, including amplifiers and switching devices necessary for
underground installations, shall be pad- or ground-mounted, or shall be placed underground and not overhead,
unless the subdivision is served from existing perimeter overhead electrical facilities. Pad- and ground-mounted
utility equipment shall be completely screened from view of any public roadway, and shall not be located within
any required front, side or rear yard setback or within any required visibility area, such as at street intersection
corners or at driveway openings.
(e) Temporary construction service may be provided by overhead electric lines and facilities without obtaining
a waiver/suspension or special exception, provided that when the underground utility service to any portion of a
subdivision is completed, such overhead electric lines and facilities are promptly removed.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any existing facilities in place prior to the effective
date of this chapter to be placed underground.
(g) The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on the individual lots to be
served, not grouped together in a centralized location(s), such as “gang-box” style metering stations, which shall
not be permitted.
(h) The locations, widths and configurations of easements for any utility service provider other than the city
shall be determined, approved and acquired (if necessary) by the applicable utility service provider.
(i) All utility installations shall be subject to inspection by the city, and shall be in conformance with any
applicable city design standards related to their placement within public rights-of-way within easements, or
elsewhere in the city (including on private property).
Sec. 23.03.009 Water and wastewater facility design
(a) All new subdivisions shall be connected with the city's water system or other water supply system
approved by both the city and TCEQ, and shall be capable of providing water for health and emergency
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/720
purposes, including adequate fire protection per the city's minimum standards for fire flows. An alternative
source of water may be used for irrigation purposes only and for a nonresidential use only (e.g., a public park, a
public school, etc.), subject to city approval and provided that all appropriate permits are procured from the city,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the TCEQ and any other applicable agency(s). Such alternative water source
may not be used for potable (i.e., drinking) water supply under any circumstances or be connected to the city's
supply system. The design and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall
comply with the following standards:
(1) Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable
regulations of the TCEQ and with any applicable city requirements.
(2) Design and construction of water service from the city shall be in accordance with the
standards in the city's TCSS Manual, and in accordance with TCEQ standards, whichever is the most
stringent requirement.
(3) Design and construction of a fire protection and suppression system shall be in accordance with
the standards in the TCSS Manual, and in accordance with the city's fire department and fire code,
whichever is the most stringent requirement.
(b) All new subdivisions shall be served by the city's wastewater collection and treatment system. The design
and construction of the wastewater system improvements shall be in accordance with the standards in the city's
TCSS Manual, and in accordance with TCEQ standards, whichever is the most stringent requirement. If a
development, or any portion of a development, is otherwise approved (as a waiver/suspension of these
regulations) for an alternative means of wastewater collection (such as an on-site system, etc.), then all lots shall
be designed and underground wastewater improvements (i.e., sewer laterals - “dry lines”) constructed that can be
eventually easily tied onto the city's wastewater collection system when it is available to that area in the future.
(c) The subdivider shall be responsible for:
(1) Phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain adequate water and wastewater
services (including fire flows);
(2) Extensions of utility lines (including any necessary on-site and off-site lines) to connect to
existing utility mains of adequate capacity;
(3) Providing and/or procuring all necessary easements for the utilities (whether on-site or offsite);
(4) Providing proof to the city of adequate water and wastewater service;
(5) Providing provisions for future expansion of the utilities if such will be needed to serve future
developments, subject to the city's oversize participation policies, if applicable;
(6) Providing all operations and maintenance of the private utilities, or providing proof that a
separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the utilities;
(7) Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the utilities;
(8) Obtaining approvals from the applicable utility providers if other than the city; and
(9) Complying with all requirements of the utility providers, including the city.
(d) Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the subdivision
adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities
shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions, as
determined by the city. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/720
physical constraints, the planning and zoning commission may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line
construction at the time of construction plat approval and prior to construction of the subdivision.
(e) Installation, operations and maintenance of utilities not specifically referenced herein shall comply with
regulations of the TCEQ and with any other applicable city, county, state or federal rules and regulations,
whichever is the most stringent requirement.
Sec. 23.03.010 Stormwater collection and conveyance systems
(a) System design requirements. Drainage improvements shall accommodate runoff from the proposed
development and from the upstream drainage area in its anticipated maximum “build-out” condition, and shall
be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city may require the
phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of
off-site drainage improvements in order to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. No stormwater
collection system shall be constructed unless it is designed in accordance with the city's TCSS Manual by a
licensed professional engineer, and unless it is reviewed and approved by the city engineer. All plans submitted
to the city engineer for approval shall include a layout of the drainage system together with supporting
calculations for the design of the system.
(b) All erosion and sedimentation controls shall conform to the TCSS Manual and to TCEQ requirements,
whichever is the most stringent requirement. For erosion and sedimentation control, the city uses the latest
edition of “Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities in North Central Texas”
(by the NCTCOG), a copy of which is on file at the city.
(c) No person, individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reclaim, reroute or change
the course or location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainageway without first obtaining written
permission of the city engineer and any other applicable agency (such as FEMA, TCEQ or the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers) having jurisdiction. The city engineer may, at his or her discretion, require preparation and
submission of a CLOMAR or other detailed flood study for a proposed development if there are concerns
regarding storm drainage on the subject property or upstream or downstream from the subject property. The
costs of such study, if required, shall be borne by the developer.
(d) In order to help reduce stormwater runoff, and resulting erosion, sedimentation and conveyance of
nonpoint source pollutants, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes
in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction.
(e) No cross-street flow (i.e., perpendicular to traffic flow) of stormwater runoff shall be permitted unless
approved by the city engineer. When and if such drainage flow is allowed, it must be across a concrete street
(i.e., valley gutter) and as approved by the city engineer.
(f) All stormwater retention or detention facilities which are not located underground shall be designed using
materials and techniques as established in the city's TCSS Manual or as may be required by the city engineer.
ARTICLE 23.04 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
Sec. 23.04.001 Areas for public use
The applicant shall provide suitable and adequate sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other areas for
public use or service so as to conform with the recommendations contained in the city's Comprehensive Plan;
Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan; and other applicable plans. Schools, parks or other public
facilities shall be indicated on the construction and final plat, and shall be subject to approval by planning and
zoning commission.
Sec. 23.04.002 Protection of drainage and creek areas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/720
(a) All creeks and drainage channels shall be preserved and protected in their natural condition wherever
possible, unless significant storm drainage improvements are required by the city in these areas. All
development adjacent to creeks and drainage channels shall be in accordance with the city's TCSS Manual, and
with any other city policies or ordinances related to aesthetics or public access or enjoyment of creeks and
waterways.
(b) Definitions and methodology for determining the floodway management area (FMA). The definitions for
“floodway” and “floodway fringe” shall correspond to those set forth by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA). For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the concept of a floodway is used as a
tool to assist the local community in the aspect of floodplain management. Under this concept, the area of the
100-year flood is divided into a floodway and floodway fringe. The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any
adjacent floodplain areas that must be kept free of encroachment in order that the 100-year flood may be carried
without substantial increases in flood heights as defined by FEMA. The area between the floodway and
boundary of the 100-year flood is termed the floodway fringe. The floodway fringe is the area which can be used
for development by means of fill according to FEMA and city engineering criteria and if such is approved by the
city following review and approval of a CLOMAR or other detailed flood study, as to be determined by the city
engineer.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Floodway Management Area (FMA) will correspond to the floodway, as
defined by FEMA, or as may be modified pursuant to a flood study that is approved by FEMA.
(c) Areas where an FMA is required. The East Fork of the Trinity River and its related tributaries, and all
other streams and creeks within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (i.e., all drainage areas or regulated
floodways as referenced on the applicable floodway and flood boundary map, Flood Insurance Rate Map/FIRM)
shall be included in the FMA. If FEMA does not specify a floodway zone in any of the creeks or their
tributaries, it shall be the developer's responsibility to establish and identify the FMA, subject to approval by the
city. The determination shall be made by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the city engineer.
Where improvements to a drainage area are required by other ordinances of the city for the purpose of safety or
other reasons related to drainage, those ordinances shall also be observed. The FMA is intended to apply to a
creek or channel which is to remain open or in its natural condition unless otherwise approved by the city. The
creek shall remain in its natural state unless improvements are permitted or required by the city due to the
pending development of properties adjacent to or upstream of the required improvements.
(d) Ownership and maintenance of the FMA. The area determined to be the FMA shall be designated on the
construction plat. Approximate locations shall be shown on zoning change requests and concept plans - accurate
locations of the FMA shall be established on the construction plat and prior to site construction. At the city's
option, the FMA shall be protected by one of the following methods:
(1) Dedicated to the city (with appropriate language on the construction and final plats); or
(2) Easement(s). Creeks or drainageways on tracts which have private maintenance provisions,
other than single- or two-family platted lots, can be designated as the FMAs by an easement to the
city on the construction and final plats (with the appropriate plat language, as required by the city).
Subdivisions with platted single-family or two-family lots may designate the FMA by easement
provided there are adequate maintenance provisions (such as by a mandatory homeowners'
association), but no lots or portions of lots may be platted in the easement unless specifically allowed
by the city on the approved plat. The area designated as FMA shall be identified on the plat as a
recorded lot with appropriate dedication/ownership and maintenance language; or
(3) Certain recreational uses normally associated with or adjacent to floodprone areas (no
structures allowed in the FMA), such as golf courses or certain types of parks. The uses allowed shall
be in conformance with the zoning ordinance, if within the city's corporate limits, and shall be
approved by the planning and zoning commission on the construction and final plats.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/720
Prior to acceptance of any drainageway as an FMA by the city, the area shall be cleared of
all debris and brush (except for mature trees) and placed in a maintainable state. Floodway
management areas dedicated to the city shall be left in a natural state except those areas
designated for active recreational purposes and unless storm drainage requirements do not
permit this to occur.
(e) Design criteria. The following design criteria shall be required for development adjacent to the FMA:
(1) Adequate access shall be provided to and along the FMA for public and/or private
maintenance. An unobstructed area a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide with a maximum 5:1 slope
(five feet horizontal to one foot vertical), the length of the floodway shall be provided adjacent to or
within the FMA. On the opposite side of the drainage area, an unobstructed area having a minimum
width of five feet (5') shall be provided. If ownership is to the centerline of the drainage channel then
the developer shall only be required to provide adequate access to one side, and the developer of the
other side of the drainage channel shall be required to provide applicable access to that side when it
develops. If the opposite side of a drainage channel was previously developed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, and if adequate access was not provided on that side, then the developer of the
newly developing side (i.e., under this chapter) shall be required to provide any needed access on
his/her side in accordance with this chapter.
(2) Lots in a single-family, PD single-family, or duplex residential zoning district shall not be
platted within the FMA, and no more than ten percent (10%) of the linear length of the FMA (on
each side) shall be allowed to have lots backing or siding onto it. If lots back or side onto an FMA, at
least two (2) reasonable points of access to the FMA, each a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width,
shall be provided. Streets, alleys and open-ended cul-de-sacs may qualify as access points if designed
such that they are navigable by maintenance vehicles (e.g., alleys must be twenty-foot width). All
areas of the FMA shall be accessible from the access points and shall be visible from access points.
Lots used for multifamily dwellings may include the FMA in the platted lot for the development
(such as for open space) if the FMA is identified as an easement and is maintained as open space for
use by the residents, and provided that access to the FMA is possible by city maintenance vehicles,
should that need arise. If the FMA is to be public park land, then adequate public access and good
public visibility shall also be provided to all portions of it.
(3) Public streets may be approved in the FMA by the city on the plat (if they conform to
applicable engineering standards).
(4) Linear public streets may be required to be constructed adjacent to some (or all) portions of the
FMA to allow access for maintenance or recreational opportunities, and/or to allow increased
visibility into creek areas for public safety and security purposes.
(5) Alternate designs to facilitate equal or better access may be permitted if approved by the city on
the plat.
(f) Drainage channels which have been altered prior to the effective date of this chapter and are not in a
natural condition can be exempted from an FMA and this section at the discretion of the planning and zoning
commission on the construction and final plats, upon recommendation of city staff, if such exemption is deemed
to be nondetrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 23.04.003 Property owners' or homeowners' associations
(a) Applicability. When a subdivision contains either common open space or other improvements which are
not intended to be dedicated to the city for public use, such as private streets or screening walls, a private
recreation facility, landscaped entry features or other private amenities, a property owners' or homeowners'
association agreement consistent with state and other appropriate laws, must be submitted to and approved by
the city attorney. The Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CCRs) and the association documents, such as the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/720
articles of incorporation and association bylaws, shall be submitted to the city for review and approval along
with the construction plat application, and shall be filed of record at the county prior to final plat approval in
order to ensure that there is an entity in place for long-term maintenance of these improvements (also see section
23.03.001(c)(10)(e)). Said documents must, at a minimum, include provisions which allow the city to take over
the maintenance of common property, including but not limited to private streets and private recreation facilities,
using association funds, if such action becomes necessary due to nonperformance or inaction by the association
or if the association goes defunct. Provisions shall also be included which would, in the latter instance, convey
ownership of the private streets (if any) and all other common areas to the city, and which would allow the city
to remove any improvements or amenities from the common areas and sell any buildable land area, as residential
lots, to recoup the city's expenses for maintenance or demolition of the improvements. Any monies that remain
after the city has recovered all of its expenses shall be retained for future maintenance or upgrading of the
streets, common areas (if any remain), screening walls, or other improvements within the subdivision. These
provisions are not intended to allow the city to profit in any way from taking over the association's
responsibilities or funds; they are only intended to allow the city to recoup its actual incurred expenses such that
the general public, the taxpayers of the city, does not have to bear these costs.
(b) Membership. A property owners' or homeowners' association shall be an incorporated nonprofit
organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
(1) Each lot owner within the described land area is automatically a mandatory member; and
(2) Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the
property owners' or homeowners' association's activities, such as maintenance of common open
spaces or private streets, or the provision and upkeep of common recreational facilities.
(c) Legal requirements. In order to ensure the establishment of a proper property owners' or homeowners'
association, including its financing, and the rights and responsibilities of the property or home owners in relation
to the use, management and ownership of common property, the subdivision plat, dedication documents,
covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must:
(1) Legally create an automatic membership, nonprofit property owners' or homeowners'
association;
(2) Place title to the common property in the property owners' or homeowners' association, or give
definite assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time;
(3) Appropriately limit the uses of the common property;
(4) Give each lot owner the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property;
(5) Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in the property
owners' or homeowners' association;
(6) Place an association charge on each lot in a manner which will both ensure sufficient
association funds and which will provide adequate safeguards for the lot owners against undesirable
high charges;
(7) Give each lot owner voting rights in the association; and
(8) Identify land area within the association's jurisdiction including but not limited to the
following:
(A) Property to be transferred to public agencies;
(B) The individual residential lots;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/720
(C) The common properties to be transferred by the developer to the property owners' or
homeowners' association; and
(D) Other parcels.
(9) Any governmental authority or agency, including, but not limited to, the city and the county,
their agents, and employees, shall have the right of immediate access to the common elements at all
times if necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Should the property
owners' or homeowners' association fail to maintain the common elements to city specifications for
an unreasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days after written request to do so, then the city shall
have the same right, power and authority to enforce the association's rules and to levy assessments
necessary to maintain the common elements. The city may elect to exercise the rights and powers of
the property owners' or homeowners' association or its Board, or to take any action required and levy
any assessment that the property owners' or homeowners' association might have taken, either in the
name of the property owners' or homeowners' association or otherwise, to cover the cost of
maintenance (or the possible demolition, if such becomes necessary to preserve public safety or to
ease maintenance burden) of any common elements.
(10) The property owners' or homeowners' association must register with the municipal
development review committee a contact person authorized to receive and distribute information to
the association's Board of Directors and shall notify the city of any change in said contact person.
(d) Protective covenants. Protective covenants shall be developed which, among other things, shall make the
property owners' or homeowners' association responsible for:
(1) The maintenance and operation of all common property;
(2) The enforcement of all other covenants;
(3) The administration of architectural controls (if included); and
(4) Certain specified maintenance of exterior improvements of individual properties (if included).
The city is not responsible (i.e., has no jurisdiction) for enforcing protective covenants or deed
restrictions.
(e) The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city council.
(f) No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of screening walls, private streets
and alleys, and assessments therefor, may be amended without the written consent of the city council.
(Ordinance 22-06 adopted 10/19/06)
Sec. 23.04.004 Park land and public facility dedication
(a) Areas for public use.
(1) The applicant shall provide suitable sites for parks, playgrounds and other areas for public use
so as to conform with the recommendations of the city's parks, recreation and open space master
plan. Parks and public open space areas shall be indicated on the construction and final plat, and shall
be subject to approval by the city's planning and zoning commission upon approval of the
construction and final plats.
(2) No individual, partnership, firm, or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reroute or change the
course or location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainageway, without first obtaining
written permission of the city and any other agency having jurisdiction. Any such alterations must be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/720
in compliance with the city's stormwater and drainage regulations, including but not limited to article
19.10 and article 23.03 of this code.
(Ordinance 36-16 adopted 12/19/16)
(b) Parkland dedication.
(1) The purpose of this section is to provide recreational areas and amenities in the form of
neighborhood parks as a function of subdivision development in the city. This section is enacted in
accordance with the Home Rule powers of the city, granted under the Texas Constitution and statutes
of the State of Texas, including, without limitation, TEX. LOC. GOV'T. CODE § 51.071 et seq. and §
212.001 et seq.
It is hereby declared by the city council of the city that recreational areas, in the form of
neighborhood parks and related amenities and improvements, are necessary and in the public interest
and welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a
requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property of a residential subdivision in
the city, whether such development consists of new construction on previously vacant land or
rebuilding and redeveloping existing residential areas.
(2) Neighborhood parks are those parks providing for a variety of outdoor recreational
opportunities and within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby,
the standards for which are set forth in the Seagoville Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan.
The neighborhood parks shown on the official Seagoville Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master
Plan, shall be prima facie evidence that any park located therein is within such a convenient distance
from the majority of residences to be served thereby. The cost of the neighborhood parks should be
borne by the ultimate residential property owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to
such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Therefore, the following requirements
are adopted to effect such purposes.
(Ordinance 22-06 adopted 10/19/06)
(c) General requirement: Dedication of land and payment of park development fee.
(1) Prior to a plat being filed with the county clerk of Dallas or Kaufman (as applicable), Texas for
a development of any type of residential development within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, and in accordance with the planning and zoning commission ordinances of the city (as
applicable), such plat shall contain clear, fee simple dedication of one (1) area of land for each two
hundred and fifty (250) proposed dwelling units. As used in this ordinance, a “dwelling unit” means
each individual residence, including individual residences in a multifamily structure, designed and/or
intended for inhabitation by a single family. Any proposed plat submitted to the city for approval
shall clearly show the area proposed to be dedicated under this section as a platted lot.
(2) The city council of the city declares that development of an area of less than five (5) acres for
neighborhood park purposes is impractical. Therefore, if fewer than two hundred and fifty (250)
dwelling units are proposed by a plat filed for approval, no dedication of parkland will be necessary.
In such case, the planning and zoning commission shall require the developer to only pay the
applicable park development fees, as provided herein.
(3) A park development fee shall be paid to the city as a condition of subdivision plat approval for
all residential plats. Such park development fee shall be set from time to time by ordinance of the city
council of the city sufficient to provide for the development of amenities and improvements on the
dedicated land to meet the standards for a neighborhood park to serve the area in which the
subdivision is located. Unless and until changed by an ordinance amendment of the city council of
the city, the park development fee shall be calculated on the basis of $500.00 per dwelling unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/720
(4) In lieu of payment of the required park development fee, a developer shall have the option to
construct the neighborhood park amenities and improvements, subject to city approval. All plans and
specifications for the construction of such amenities and improvements must be reviewed and
approved by the city, and shall conform with the city's design standards for amenities, equipment and
improvements that apply in public city parks. The developer shall financially guarantee the
construction of the amenities and improvements, and the city must approve same, prior to the filing
of a plat in the case of platted subdivisions[.] Once the amenities and improvements are constructed,
and after the city has accepted such amenities and improvements, the developer shall dedicate by plat
such amenities and improvements to the city with a condition or covenant providing for HOA
maintenance of the neighborhood park(s), amenities and improvements located within the respective
development.
(5) The city shall have the right to accept or reject the dedication, if the city determines that
sufficient park area is already in the public domain for the area of the proposed development, or if the
recreation potential for that area would be better served by expanding or improving existing
neighborhood parks. If the city rejects dedication of parkland, the developer shall be required only to
pay the applicable park development fee.
(d) Special fund, right to refund.
(1) All funds collected through park development fees will be deposited in the city's park
development fund and used solely for the purchase of new park equipment in the city's parks. All
expenditures from the said fund will be reviewed and approved by the city council.
(2) The city shall account for all sums paid into the park development fund with reference to the
individual plats involved. Any monies paid into the said fund must be expended by the city within ten
(10) years from the date received by the city. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in,
first out basis in a park located within the particular subdivision, or within five (5) miles thereof. If
not so expended within the ten-year period, the owners of the property will, on the last day of such
period, be entitled to a refund of the remaining fees plus one-half of the accrued interest. The current
owners of the property within the subdivision must request such a refund within one (1) year of
entitlement, in writing, or such right is waived.
(e) Additional requirements, definitions.
(1) Any land dedicated as parkland under this article must be suitable for park and recreation uses.
The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable:
(A) Any area primarily located in the 100-year floodplain; or
(B) Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders same unusable for organized
recreational activities (see subsection (e)(2) below).
The above characteristics of a parkland dedication area may be grounds for refusal of any plat.
(2) Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is to remain predominantly in
its natural state or constructed in accordance with city engineering standards, if no significant area of
the park is cut off from access by such channel, if not less than five (5) acres of the site is above the
100-year floodplain, or if the dedication is in excess of ten (10) acres, not more than fifty percent
(50%) of the site shall lie within the 100-year floodplain unless otherwise approved by the city.
(3) Each park must have direct, adequate vehicular and pedestrian access to one or more public
streets. Street access shall be required to ensure vehicular access to parkland.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/720
(4) Unless provided otherwise herein, an action by the city shall be by the planning and zoning
commission.
(5) Any construction plat approved prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be exempt from
these requirements set forth herein; however, when such construction plat approval expires, any
resubmission of such plat shall meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Ordinance 36-16 adopted 12/19/16)
ARTICLE 23.05 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBDIVISION
BY THE CITY
Sec. 23.05.001 Improvements, in general
(a) The requirements of the subdivision ordinance as set forth below are designed and intended to ensure that,
for all subdivisions of land within the scope of the subdivision ordinance, all improvements as required herein
are installed properly and:
(1) The city can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services;
(2) All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land
that can be served by essential public facilities and services; and
(3) All required improvements are constructed in accordance with city standards.
(b) Adequate public facilities policy. The land to be divided or developed must be served adequately by
essential public facilities and services. No subdivision shall be approved unless and until adequate public
facilities exist or provision has been made for water facilities, wastewater facilities, drainage facilities,
electricity, gas and street facilities which are necessary to serve the development proposed, whether or not such
facilities are to be located within the property being platted or located off-site. This policy may be defined
further and supplemented by other ordinances adopted by the city. Wherever the subject property adjoins
undeveloped land, or wherever required by the city to serve the public good, utilities shall be extended to
adjacent property lines to allow connection of these utilities by adjacent property owners when such adjacent
property is platted and/or developed.
(c) Public improvements that are required by the city for the acceptance of the subdivision by the city shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Water and wastewater facilities;
(2) Stormwater drainage, collection and conveyance facilities;
(3) Water quality, erosion and sedimentation controls;
(4) Streets;
(5) Streetlights;
(6) Street signs;
(7) Alleys (generally not required in single-family residential subdivisions);
(8) Sidewalks, including barrier-free ramps at street intersections and other appropriate locations;
(9) Screening and/or retaining walls;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/720
(10) Traffic-control devices required as part of the project;
(11) Electricity and gas service (by utility providers) - underground natural gas service is required
for all lots unless a waiver/suspension is granted due to unavailability of natural gas in the area of the
development (any on-site gas facility that is approved for any lot shall be underground, not at-grade
or elevated, tanks that are in full compliance with all local, county, state and federal regulations); and
(12) Appurtenances to the above, and any other public facilities required as part of the proposed
subdivision.
(d) All aspects of the design and implementation of public improvements shall comply with the city's current
design standards and any other applicable city codes and ordinances, including preparation and submittal of
engineering plans and construction inspection. The construction of all of the improvements required in this
chapter shall conform to the latest edition of the city's TCSS, as may be amended, and to any other applicable
city standards.
(e) Changes or amendments to the TCSS and other construction or design documents. The Technical
Construction Standards and Specifications (TCSS) will, from time to time, require revisions and updates to
allow for changing construction technology. When changes are required, the TCSS may be amended by separate
resolution. It is the applicant's responsibility to be aware of, and to conform with, all TCSS requirements
(including amendments) that are in place as of the time a complete development application for a construction
plat (including required engineering/construction plans) is received by the city.
Sec. 23.05.002 Monuments
(a) In all subdivisions and additions, monuments shall be established at the corner of each block in the
subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than three-quarters inch (3/4") in diameter and twenty-four
inches (24") in length, and set flush with the top of the ground. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot
corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less
than one-half inch (1/2") and twenty-four inches (24") in length, and set flush with the top of the ground. In
addition, curve point markers shall be established of the same specifications as lot corners. Each block corner
monument shall include a cap with the surveyor's name and registration number attached to it. All block and lot
corners shall be installed prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision by the city and prior to filing the plat at
the county. All survey work around the boundary area, as well as within the subdivision, shall have an error of
closure of one in 7,500 or less.
(b) A subdivision containing five (5) acres or more shall have at least two (2) concrete monuments set by the
surveyor, if not already existing, for two corners of the subdivision, and such monuments shall be located at
opposite ends (or at widely separated corners) of the subdivision and clearly shown on the final plat prior to
filing at the county. The final plat shall also show clear ties to existing concrete monuments in the vicinity of the
subdivision. The design and installation of all monuments shall be in accordance with the city's TCSS.
Sec. 23.05.003 Streetlights
All street lighting shall be in conformance with the city's TCSS, lighting ordinance (when and if enacted), and
any other applicable city codes. Street lighting shall be of a design that casts light downward to the greatest
extent possible, and shall minimize light overspill onto adjacent properties.
Sec. 23.05.004 Street names and signs
(a) Street names must be submitted to the city for review and approval in accordance with the city's guidelines
for the naming of streets. Proposed street names shall be submitted for review along with (and as a part of) the
construction plat application, and shall become fixed at the time of approval of the construction plat. On the final
plat, street names shall not be changed from those that were approved on the construction plat unless special
circumstances have caused the major realignment of streets or a proposed street name(s) is discovered to have
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 599/720
already been used elsewhere in the city (or some other similar eventuality). If additional street names are needed
for the final plat, then they must be submitted for review and approval by the city, along with the final plat
application. A fee may be established by the city for the changing of street names after approval of the
construction plat.
(b) The names of corporations or businesses shall not be used as street names, unless approved by the
planning and zoning commission. The city will maintain a list of existing street names (and “reserved” street
names that have been approved on a plat), and will update the list as new streets are platted.
(c) New street names shall not duplicate existing street names either literally or in a subtle manner (for
example, Smith Street vs. Smythe Street; Oak Drive vs. Oak Place vs. Oak Court vs. Oak Circle; Cascade Drive
vs. Cascading Drive); shall not be so similar as to cause confusion between names (for example, Lakeside Drive
vs. Lake Side Drive vs. Lake Siding Drive); and shall not sound like existing street names when spoken (for
example, Oak Drive vs. Doak Drive vs. Cloak Drive; Lantern Way vs. Land Tern Way).
(d) New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Streets crossing
thoroughfares or other roadways shall bear the same name on both sides of the thoroughfare, wherever practical,
unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission on the construction or final plat.
(e) The property owner shall provide payment for street name signs for the development (two signs for fourway
intersections, and one sign for three-way intersections). The cost of each street name sign installation shall
include the cost of the sign assembly, pole and all costs associated with installation. Payment by the property
owner will be due prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city.
(f) Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the city's guidelines before issuance of a building
permit for any structure on the streets approved within the subdivision.
Sec. 23.05.005 Street and alley improvements
(a) All on-site facilities, such as internal streets and alleys, shall be constructed by the developer at the
developer's expense, unless otherwise allowed by this chapter. If the subdivision is adjacent to a planned or
future or substandard arterial or collector street, as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, and derives access,
whether direct or indirect, from said roadway, then the developer shall be required to design and construct
his/her share of the roadway as well as any required median openings and left turn lanes needed to serve his/her
subdivision (see section 23.05.009). The planning and zoning commission may, at its option, accept escrow
funds in lieu of immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another
improved roadway and if delaying construction or improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise
inconvenience neighboring property owners or the general public.
(b) All streets and alleys shall be constructed using reinforced concrete, unless otherwise approved by the city,
and per the specifications in the city's TCSS.
(c) The minimum street and alley paving standards for which the construction shall be made by the developer
are shown in the TCSS.
(d) In addition to the above-mentioned minimum standards, barrier-free ramps for physically challenged
persons shall be constructed at all street corners, driveway approaches, appropriate midblock crosswalks, and in
locations where accessible parking spaces are provided. All barrier-free ramps and other accessibility
considerations shall comply with section 228 of the Highway Safety Act, as amended, and with the Americans
With Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended.
(e) All signs and barricades shall be in conformity with the TCSS, with ADA standards, and with
specifications for uniform traffic-control devices, as adopted by the city, by Dallas or Kaufman County (as
applicable), by the Texas Department of Transportation, and by the Texas Department of Public Safety, as
applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 600/720
(f) Approval is required prior to the installation of any driveway connecting to a public street. The city
engineer shall approve all (other than single-family) driveway cuts. The minimum distance, as measured from
the edge or curb of an intersecting street to the edge or curb of driveways, and not from the centerlines of the
driveways, between driveway openings for multifamily and nonresidential developments shall be as set forth in
the city's TCSS Manual. Driveways shall not be within the transition or stacking portion of a right turn lane, and
shall be no closer than one hundred feet (100') to an intersecting thoroughfare or arterial street, as measured from
the intersecting street's curbline, and no closer than fifty feet (50') to an intersecting residential or collector
street. Residential driveway cuts shall not be allowed on roadways that are, or that are shown to become on the
city's adopted thoroughfare plan, larger than a residential collector street (60-foot right-of-way) unless
specifically approved by city with the construction plat application.
Sec. 23.05.006 Retaining wall requirements, construction regulations, and design criteria
(a) Retaining wall requirements. In general, the use of retaining walls shall be minimized, wherever possible,
through minimal and balanced cut and fill on property. When property within or directly adjacent to a
subdivision contains changes in elevation exceeding two and one-half feet (2.5') and the slope exceeds one unit
vertical in two units horizontal, a retaining wall shall be required at the locations specified herein prior to the
acceptance of the subdivision:
(1) Location A. The grade change roughly follows a side or rear lot line.
(2) Location B. The grade change is adjacent to a proposed building site boundary.
(3) Location C. The grade change is adjacent to a watercourse or drainage easement.
(b) Retaining wall design and construction. All retaining wall design and construction shall be in compliance
with the provisions of the TCSS of the city, and shall be approved by the city engineer.
(c) Retaining wall maintenance. Retaining walls shall be maintained by the owner of the property where such
retaining wall is located.
(d) Retaining walls shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility or drainage easement, unless
approved by the city engineer. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to maintain the retaining wall.
Sec. 23.05.007 Screening and landscaping construction regulations, requirements and design criteria
(a) Screening.
(1) Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear and/or side yards of single-family or two-family
residential lots are adjacent to an arterial thoroughfare (greater than sixty feet (60') in right-of-way
width on the thoroughfare plan); a four-lane collector street; are separated from a thoroughfare by an
alley; or back up to a collector or residential street (which is not allowed unless specifically approved
by the planning and zoning commission on the plat), the developer shall provide, at his or her sole
expense, a minimum six-foot (6') tall masonry screening wall, or some other alternative form of
screening, if approved by the commission, according to the following alternatives and standards. All
screening shall be adjacent to the right-of-way or property line and fully located on the private lot(s),
including columns and decorative features. All forms of screening shall conform to the requirements
of city ordinances and policies that govern sight distance for traffic safety. Any required screening
device that is wholly or partially destroyed or damaged shall be replaced or repaired with the same
materials and shall be finished such that its appearance is restored to how it was before being
destroyed or damaged.
(2) Screening alternatives. Screening shall be provided in accordance with, and shall be
constructed to, standards and criteria as set forth in the city's TCSS and other related city code(s) and
policy(s). An alternative form of screening, in lieu of the six- to eight-foot-tall masonry wall, may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 601/720
approved by the planning and zoning commission on a landscaping/screening wall plan submitted
with the construction plat application. Such possible alternatives may include, but may not be limited
to, the following:
(A) Living/landscaped screen with decorative metal (e.g., wrought iron) fence sections with
masonry columns;
(B) A combination of berms and living/landscaped screening, either with or without a
decorative metal or “WoodCrete” type of fence with masonry columns;
(C) A combination of berms, decorative masonry retaining walls (no taller than six feet in
height where facing or visible to a public street) and living/landscaped screening, either with or
without a decorative metal or “WoodCrete” type of fence with masonry columns; or
(D) Some other creative screening alternative may be approved if it meets the spirit and
intent of this section, if it is demonstrated to be long-lasting and generally maintenance-free,
and if the commission finds it to be in the public interest to approve the alternative screening
device.
Any required screening device shall be, or shall achieve, at least six feet (6') in height and at least
ninety percent (90%) opacity within three (3) years of initial installation/planting. Any landscaping
used to achieve the purpose of required screening shall be equipped with an underground irrigation
system with appropriate double check valve(s), automatic controller(s), and automatic moisture and
freeze sensors. Trees used for overstory screening shall be on a separate bubbler irrigation system
that can be programmed to provide deep watering of trees at intervals that may differ from the rest of
the irrigation system.
The use of wood or other privacy fences immediately behind or abutting an alternative screening
device that utilizes living screening elements (i.e., landscaping), berms, retaining walls and/or open
(i.e., non-opaque) fence sections shall not be permitted due to the creation of a “no man's land” and
subsequent maintenance nuisance in the area between the two devices/fences, and due to the
detrimental visual appearance of this type of arrangement.
The use of any alternative form of screening in lieu of the masonry wall, particularly a device
utilizing landscaping, shall require formation of a property/homeowners' association in accordance
with section 23.04.003 of this chapter.
(3) A wall/screening maintenance easement at least five feet (5') in width shall be dedicated to a
property owners' or homeowners' association on the private lot side and adjacent to the entire length
of the screening wall or device.
(4) The screening wall/device shall be installed prior to approval of the final plat and prior to final
acceptance of the subdivision (or appropriate surety provided, per article 23.06). Landscape materials
may be installed after the subdivision is accepted, upon approval of the municipal development
review committee, but in no case later than ninety (90) days following acceptance of the subdivision.
Failure to properly install all components of a required screening wall or device within the allowed
time frame, and without the appropriate developer's agreement and surety, shall constitute a violation
of this article and the developer may be subject to a penalty pursuant to article 23.08 of this chapter.
(5) All plants, such as trees, shrubs and ground covers, shall be living and in sound, healthy,
vigorous and growing condition, and they shall be of a size, fullness and height that is customary for
their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the “American Standard for Nursery Stock”, by
the American Association of Nurserymen, as may be amended. All trees and shrubs that are intended
for the purpose of “screening” shall be of species that are listed for such purpose on the city's
Approved Plant List (in the zoning ordinance).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 602/720
(6) All masonry, wrought iron, steel or aluminum screening wall or fence plans and details must be
designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, and must be approved by the city engineer.
Masonry walls shall be in accordance with the city's design standards, and the use of “ThinWall” type
of construction (i.e., that may not conform with the TCSS) shall be prohibited due to problems with
inferior strength and the higher cost of long-term maintenance unless otherwise approved by the city.
Decorative metal fencing shall be solid stock, not tubular, and shall have masonry columns at a
minimum spacing of forty (40) feet on center unless otherwise approved by the city.
(7) The height of required screening devices, including spans between columns, shall be a
minimum of six feet (6') and shall be no more than eight feet (8') tall. Decorative columns, pilasters,
stone caps, sculptural elements, and other similar features may exceed the maximum eight-foot (8')
height by up to two feet (2') for a total maximum height of ten feet (10') for these features, provided
that such taller elements comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the total wall length in
elevation view. Features that are taller than ten feet (10') in height shall require planning and zoning
commission approval on the landscaping/screening plans submitted with the construction plat.
(8) Screening fences, walls and devices shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility or
drainage easement unless specifically authorized by the city and by any other applicable utility
provider(s).
(9) All screening walls shall be maintained by a city-approved property owners' or homeowners'
association.
(b) Entryway features (neighborhood identification).
(1) Subdivisions in excess of ten (10) platted lots may provide a low maintenance landscaped
entryway feature at access points from streets and thoroughfares into the subdivision. The entryway
feature shall be placed on private property and within an easement identified for such use (limited
portions of the feature or landscaping may be placed within the right-of-way, but only with city
approval on the landscaping/screening plans), and shall observe all sight visibility requirements.
Most of the feature or landscaping shall be located on private property so that long-term maintenance
responsibility will be borne by the property owner or an approved homeowners' association (see
section 23.04.003). Entryway features that are located mostly or entirely within city right-of-way
shall only be allowed with planning and zoning commission approval. Prior to commission approval,
the city may require the applicant to execute an agreement with the city that relieves the city of
maintenance responsibility and that indemnifies and holds the city harmless for damage or injury
incurred by or in conjunction with such features in the right-of-way.
(2) Design requirements. The entryway feature shall include low maintenance, living landscaped
materials as approved by the city. The design of the entryway feature shall also include an automatic
underground irrigation system that is equipped with moisture and freeze sensors, and may also
include subdivision identification, such as signage located on the wall. All plants shall be living and
in a sound, healthy, vigorous and growing condition, and they shall be of a size, fullness and height
that is customary for their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the “American Standard
for Nursery Stock”, by the American Association of Nurserymen, as may be amended. Any walls or
structures used in the entryway feature must conform to the city's regulations pertaining to maximum
height within the front yard of residential lots (see the zoning ordinance) wherever the adjacent lot
sides onto the arterial street and the wall will be located within the front yard setback area.
(3) The design of the entryway shall be in accordance with design policies in the city's TCSS. The
design of the entry shall be reflected on the landscape, screening and irrigation plans submitted along
with the engineering plans and the construction plat, and shall be approved by the city.
(4) The maintenance of the entryway shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a period of at
least two (2) years or until building permits have been issued for eighty percent (80%) of the lots in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 603/720
the subdivision, whichever date is later. Following that period of time, maintenance responsibility
shall be borne by the private property owner(s) upon whose lot(s) the entryway feature is located, or
by an approved homeowners' association (see section 23.04.003). If, at some point in time, the
maintenance responsibility shifts to the city, the city shall have the right to upgrade, reduce or
eliminate entirely, at its sole option, the landscaping and other amenities in order to simplify or
minimize the amount of time, effort and cost that maintenance of the entryway will require.
(c) Landscaping. All landscaping shall be in conformance with the city's landscape ordinance, as amended.
(d) Signage. All signage shall be in conformance with the city's sign ordinance, as amended.
Sec. 23.05.008 Water and wastewater requirements
(a) The installation of all water and wastewater lines shall be in conformance with section 23.03.009 of this
chapter.
(b) No final plat shall be approved for any subdivision within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until
the applicant has made adequate provision for a water system and a sanitary sewer system of sufficient capacity
to adequately provide service to all tracts and lots within the area to be subdivided. The design and construction
of the water system and of the sanitary sewer system to serve the subdivision shall be in conformance with the
city's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and with the TCSS, and shall be approved by the city
engineer (also see section 23.03.009).
(c) Water system mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate and
safe domestic water supply and to furnish fire protection to all lots shall be provided. Water mains shall extend
to the property line in order to allow future connections into adjacent undeveloped property.
(d) Services for utilities shall be made available to the property line of each lot in such a manner as will
minimize the necessity for disturbing the street pavement and drainage structures when connections are made.
(e) Fire protection shall be provided in accordance with section 23.03.009 of this chapter, with the city's TCSS
Manual, and with any other city policy or ordinance pertaining to fire protection or suppression. The fire chief
shall have the authority to approve the locations and placement of all fire hydrants and fire lanes and he/she may,
at his/her discretion, modify fire hydrant spacing or fire lane placement based upon special design or distance
circumstances. All required fire lanes shall be shown as “fire lane easements” on the construction and final plats,
along with the applicable fire lane language block. Vertical construction (i.e., any building construction above
foundation/slab level) shall not commence until all required fire lanes are properly installed and accepted by the
city, nor until all fire hydrants have been installed, inspected, tested and accepted by the city.
Sec. 23.05.009 Improvement of adjacent (perimeter) streets and utilities
(a) When a proposed subdivision, whether residential or nonresidential, abuts on one or both sides of an
existing substandard street, or on a planned or future road as shown on the thoroughfare plan, being substandard
according to the then existing current thoroughfare plan, the developer shall be required to improve the
subdivider's proportionate share of the existing on-site facility as that term is defined herein, including
appurtenant sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, storm drainage structures, screening and landscaping, median
openings and/or left turn lanes (if a divided thoroughfare), water quality or erosion controls, and other utilities as
defined in section 23.01.013, to bring the same to city standards, or to replace it with a standard city street as
determined by the traffic impact analysis, if required, at no cost to the city.
(b) The developer's share of improvements to a substandard perimeter road shall be eighteen and one-half feet
(18.5') of pavement (including curb, if any), which is approximately equivalent to half of a collector street width
(i.e., two through traffic lanes), along the entire front footage of the subdivision, unless the traffic impact
analysis, if required, indicates that some other pavement width is needed to achieve and maintain an acceptable
level of service on the roadway. If the subdivision is to be located on both sides of the roadway, eighteen and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 604/720
one-half feet (18.5') of pavement shall be constructed by the developer on each side of the road along the entire
front footage of the subdivision on each respective side of the road, unless the traffic impact analysis determines
otherwise. Design and construction of the roadway shall be in accordance with the city's thoroughfare plan (with
respect to right-of-way width and general location), the TCSS Manual, and with any other applicable city codes
and ordinances. Depending upon the specific roadway in question, and upon the traffic impact analysis results,
any oversizing above the eighteen and one-half foot (18.5') width shall be borne by the city, the county, the state
or by some other entity. The planning and zoning commission may, at its option, accept escrow funds in lieu of
immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another improved roadway and
if delaying construction and improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise inconvenience neighboring
property owners or the general public. The city may defer construction for other reasons and request escrow or
require the construction of a larger roadway section. If a larger roadway section is required, the city shall
participate in the cost of oversize construction in conformance with adopted policies or ordinances.
(c) The developer's share for major bridges and similar region-serving drainage structures and for railroad
crossings (including the appurtenant roadway paving, sidewalks/pedestrian pathways, abutments, safety railings
and cross-arms, median areas, etc.) shall be in accordance with the city's policies for the construction of such
facilities.
(d) Streets which dead end at power lines or similar rights-of-way or easements, and which are intended for
future extension across these rights-of-way or easements, shall be constructed in the right-of-way or easement
for the entire distance across the right-of-way or easement, and shall be further restricted as set forth in section
23.03.001 of this chapter. As with any other dead-end street, a note shall be placed on the final plat clearly
labeling the dead-end streets that will, at some point, be extended across the power line easement (or right-ofway),
and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating
that the street will be extended in the future. Signage size and lettering shall be large enough to be legible by a
person with normal vision at a distance of twenty feet (20').
Sec. 23.05.010 Storm drainage and water quality controls
(a) An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground structures with
approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be
accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent
stormwater retention, such as standing or pooling water, as established by the city engineer, will not be
considered for development until adequate drainage has been provided.
(b) The criteria for use in designing storm sewers, culverts, bridges, drainage channels, and drainage facilities
shall conform to section 23.03.010 of this chapter. In no case shall drainage areas be diverted artificially to
adjacent properties or across roadways. Stormwater drainage from one lot onto another shall not be allowed
unless such does not pose any harm or inconvenience to the downstream property owner(s), unless specifically
approved by the city engineer, and unless the necessary off-site drainage easement is procured on the affected
property(s).
(c) The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are
functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The developer shall be responsible for
removing any significant buildup of sediment or debris from drainage improvements, with the exception of
back-lot and side-lot drainage swales, at the eleventh month of the second year for the required two-year
maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The city shall inspect the improvements to determine any
maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period.
ARTICLE 23.06 REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISIONS BY THE CITY OF
SEAGOVILLE
Sec. 23.06.001 Withholding city services and improvements until acceptance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 605/720
The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city services and improvements of
whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of all other city services from any
subdivision or property until all of the street, utility, storm drainage and other public improvements, as well as
lot improvements such as retaining walls and grading and installation of improvements required for proper lot
drainage and prevention of soil erosion on the individual residential lots, are properly constructed according to
the approved engineering plans and to city standards, and until such public improvements are dedicated to and
accepted by the city.
Sec. 23.06.002 Guarantee of public improvements
(a) Property owner's guarantee. Before approving the final plat of a subdivision located all or partially within
the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the planning and zoning commission must be satisfied that all required
public improvements have been (or soon will be) constructed in accordance with the approved engineering plans
and with the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Improvement agreement and guarantee. The planning and zoning commission may waive the requirement
that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final plat, and may
permit the property owner to enter into an improvement agreement by which the property owner covenants to
complete all required public improvements no later than two (2) years following the date upon which the final
plat is approved. The commission may also require the property owner to complete or dedicate some of the
required public improvements prior to approval of the final plat, and to enter into an improvement agreement for
completion of the remainder of the required improvements during such two-year period. The improvement
agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property owner and the city.
(c) Improvement agreement required for oversize reimbursement. The city shall require an improvement
agreement pertaining to any public improvement for which the developer shall request reimbursement from the
city for oversize costs. The commission has the authority to authorize the approval of such agreement as meeting
the requirements of the city, and the city shall not withhold approval as a means of avoiding compensation due
under the terms of this chapter. The city manager (or designee) is authorized to sign an improvement agreement
on behalf of the city.
(d) Security. Whenever the city permits an applicant to enter into an improvement agreement, it shall require
the applicant to provide sufficient security, covering the completion of the public improvements. The security
shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the city, a performance bond or letter of credit or
other security acceptable to the planning and zoning commission, city manager (or designee) and the city
attorney, as security for the promises contained in the improvement agreement. Security shall be in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements
and lot improvements. The issuer of any surety bond and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the
city engineer and the city attorney.
(e) Performance bond. If the commission authorizes the applicant to post a performance bond as security for
its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the city engineer and the city
attorney;
(2) All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of
“Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as
Acceptable Reinsuring Companies”, as published in Circular 570, as may be amended, by the
Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury;
(3) All performance bonds must be signed by an agent, and must be accompanied by a certified
copy of the authority for him or her to act;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 606/720
(4) All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly
licensed or authorized in the State of Texas to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage
required.
If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the applicant is declared bankrupt, or becomes insolvent, or
its right to do business is terminated in the State of Texas, or the surety ceases to meet the requirements listed in
Circular 570, the developer shall, within twenty (20) calendar days thereafter, substitute another performance
bond and surety, both of which must be acceptable to the city.
The city may withhold building permits, certificate or occupancy permits or utility connections until such
improvements are completed or other surety is provided to the city.
(f) Letter of credit. If the commission authorizes the applicant to post a letter of credit as security for its
promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall:
(1) Be irrevocable;
(2) Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods, but in no
event less than two (2) years; and
(3) Require only that the city present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an
authorized representative of the city certifying to the city's right to draw funds under the letter of
credit.
(g) As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the TCSS and the approved
engineering plans, the applicant may make written application to the municipal development review committee
to reduce the amount of the original security. If the city is satisfied that such portion of the improvements has
been completed in accordance with city standards, the city manager (or his/her designee) may, but is not required
to, cause the amount of the security to be reduced by such amount that he or she deems appropriate, so that the
remaining amount of the security adequately insures the completion of the remaining public improvements.
(h) Upon acceptance by the city of all required public improvements, the city shall authorize a reduction in the
security to ten percent (10%) of the original amount of the security if the applicant is not in breach of the
improvement agreement. The remaining security shall be security for the applicant's covenant to maintain the
required public improvements and to warrant that the improvements are free from defects for two (2) years
thereafter. If the required security for maintenance and warranty is otherwise provided by the contractors or by
others, the city will release the entire amount of the developer's security.
Sec. 23.06.003 Temporary improvements
(a) The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city, and shall
maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the city. Prior to construction of any
temporary facility or improvement, the applicant shall file with the city a separate improvement agreement and
escrow or, where authorized, a letter of credit, in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which
agreement and escrow or letter of credit shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed,
maintained and removed.
(b) Any temporary public improvement (e.g., a temporary cul-de-sac, alley turnout, drainage swale, erosion
control device, etc.) shall be placed within an easement established specifically for that purpose. The recording
information of the instrument establishing the temporary easement shall not be shown on the final plat unless the
easement is a permanent easement for the subdivision prior to approval of the final plat. A temporary easement
for a required public improvement shall not be abandoned without the city engineer's approval and without
written consent by the city.
Sec. 23.06.004 Government units
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 607/720
Governmental units to which these contract and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and
security, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agents authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 23.06.005 Failure to complete improvements
For plats for which no improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the public
improvements are not completed within the period specified by the city, the plat approvals shall be deemed to
have expired. In those cases where an improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted,
and the required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the city may:
(1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed
regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be
in default;
(2) Suspend final plat approval until the public improvements are completed, and may record a
document to that effect for the purpose of public notice;
(3) Obtain funds under the security and complete the public improvements itself or through a third
party;
(4) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent
owner of the subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in
exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete the public improvements on the property;
or
(5) Exercise any other rights or remedies available under the law.
Sec. 23.06.006 Acceptance of dedication offers
Acceptance of formal offers for the dedication of streets, public areas, easements or parks shall be by
authorization of the city manager (or designee). The approval by the planning and zoning commission of a
construction or final plat shall not, in and of itself, be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city of
any public improvements required by the plat. The city may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate
notes to this effect.
Sec. 23.06.007 Maintenance and guarantee of public improvements
The property owner shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of two (2) years following
acceptance of the subdivision by the city, and shall also provide a two-year maintenance bond (warranty) for
twenty (20%) percent of the cost of improvements that all public improvements will be free from defects for a
period of two (2) years following such acceptance by the city.
Sec. 23.06.008 Construction procedures
(a) A site development permit or other written authorization is required from the city prior to beginning any
site development related work, including any grading, soil disturbance and vegetation removal, in the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction which affects erosion control, storm drainage, vegetation or tree removal, or a
floodplain.
(b) Preconstruction conference. The city shall require that all contractors participating in the construction meet
for a preconstruction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading permit and before any filling,
excavation, soil disturbance, clearing or removal of vegetation or any trees of any size. All contractors shall be
familiar with, and shall conform with, applicable provisions of the city's landscape ordinance and tree
preservation requirements as may be applicable (in the zoning ordinance or any other applicable city code).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 608/720
(c) Conditions prior to authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a site development permit, the city
engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met:
(1) The construction plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission (and any
conditions of such approval have been satisfied);
(2) All required engineering documents are completed and approved by the city's engineer;
(3) All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for city-maintained facilities and not
shown on the plat must be conveyed solely to the city, such as by filing of a separate instrument, with
the proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents and the appropriate fees for filing the
documents at the county (per Dallas or Kaufman County (as applicable) requirements and the city's
submission guidelines, as may be amended from time to time) shall be returned to the municipal
development review committee prior to approval and release of the engineering plans by the city's
engineer;
(4) All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved plans
bearing the stamp of approval of the city's engineer, and at least one set of these plans shall remain on
the job;
(5) A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers
where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the city, and shall be kept
updated at the city should any changes in contractors or contact persons occur during construction;
and
(6) All applicable fees must be paid to the city.
(d) Nonpoint Source Pollution Controls and Tree Protection. All nonpoint source pollution controls, erosion
controls, and tree protection measures and devices shall be in place, to the city's engineer satisfaction, prior to
commencement of construction on any property.
Sec. 23.06.009 Inspection and acceptance of public improvements
(a) General procedure. The subdivider shall provide inspection service through his/her engineer to ensure that
construction is being accomplished in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city
engineer. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of
construction. This notice shall give the location and date of the start of construction. If the city engineer
determines it necessary, he/she shall have the right to inspect any construction work being performed to ensure
that it is proceeding in accordance with the intent of the provisions of this ordinance. Any change in design that
is required during construction should be made by the licensed professional engineer whose seal and signature
are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized
by the owner of the plans, and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents. All revisions shall be
approved by the city engineer. If the city's engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required public
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's standards and TCSS, then the property
owner shall be responsible for completing and correcting the deficiencies (at his/her expense) such that they are
brought into conformance with the applicable standards.
Testing laboratory services will be arranged and paid for by the city. The city will pay for testing services only
for those tests which indicate conformance with the approved specifications. All expenses for tests that fail to
meet these specifications shall be borne by the developer. It shall be the responsibility of the developer's
engineer to coordinate the scheduling of all required tests with the testing laboratory. Testing shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedures set forth in TCSS for like work at the frequency specified thereon as directed
by the city engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 609/720
(b) Letter of satisfactory completion. The city will not deem required public improvements satisfactorily
completed until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the city engineer, through submission of
detailed sealed “as-built”, or record, drawings of the property which indicate all public improvements and their
locations, dimensions, materials and other information required by the city engineer, and until all required public
improvements have been completed. The “as-builts” shall also include a complete set of sealed record drawings
of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer and other public improvements, showing that the layout of the
lines and grades of all public improvements are in accordance with engineering plans for the plat, and showing
all changes made in the plans during construction, and containing on each sheet an “as-built” stamp bearing the
signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer and the date. One reproducible drawing of the utility
plan sheets containing the as-built information shall also be submitted. The engineer or surveyor shall also
furnish the city with a copy of the approved final plat and the engineering plans, if prepared on a computer-aided
design and drafting (CADD) system, in such a digital format (on disk) that is compatible with the city engineer's
CADD system. When such requirements have been met to the city engineer's satisfaction, the city engineer (or
designee) shall thereafter make a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission for consideration of
satisfactory completion of the public improvements. Once the planning and zoning commission votes its
approval of satisfactory completion, the city engineer (or designee) shall issue a letter of satisfactory completion.
Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has transferred all rights to all the public
improvements to the city for use and maintenance. The planning and zoning commission may, at its option,
accept dedication of a portion of the required public improvements if the remaining public improvements are not
immediately required for health and safety reasons, and if the property owner has posted a performance bond,
letter of credit or cash bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of those
remaining improvements for a length of time to be determined by the city. If the remaining public improvements
are greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and are not completed within the determined length of time,
the city will impose a penalty that equals ten percent (10%) of the performance bond, letter of credit, or cash
bond. The obligation to complete the improvements remains with the developer, and all future building permits
or certificates of occupancy will be withheld until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public
improvements are less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the developer shall pay the actual dollar amount.
The length of time may be extended due to inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual agreement
between the developer and the city.
Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the city engineer (or designee) shall submit a certificate
to the developer stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
Sec. 23.06.010 Deferral of required improvements
(a) The planning and zoning commission may, upon petition of the property owner and favorable
recommendation of the city engineer, defer at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the
provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not required in the immediate interests of the
public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) Whenever a petition to defer the construction of any public improvements required under this chapter is
granted by the commission, the property owner shall deposit in escrow his or her share of the costs (in
accordance with city participation and oversizing policies) of the future public improvements with the city prior
to approval of the plat, or the property owner may execute a separate improvement agreement secured by a cash
escrow or, where authorized, a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred public improvements
upon demand of the city.
Sec. 23.06.011 Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy
No building permit shall be issued for a lot, building site, building or use unless the lot or building site has been
officially recorded by a final plat approved by the commission and filed for record at Dallas or Kaufman County
(as applicable), and unless all public improvements, as required by this chapter for final plat approval, have been
completed, except as may be permitted below:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 610/720
(1) No building permit shall be issued, including a “foundation-only” permit, and building
construction shall not be allowed to commence until all fire lanes and other fire safety improvements
(including fire hydrants) are completed, and they have been inspected and tested by the city. In other
words, building construction shall not surpass the construction of all required fire protection
improvements.
(2) No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building or the use of
property unless all subdivision improvements have been completed and a final plat has been
approved by the commission and recorded at the county. Notwithstanding the above, the municipal
development review committee may authorize the conditional occupancy of a structure provided that
an agreement providing cash escrow, a letter of credit, or other sufficient surety is approved by the
municipal development review committee for the completion of all remaining public improvements,
and provided that the structure is safely habitable in accordance with the city's Building Codes.
ARTICLE 23.07 FILING FEES AND PLAT RESUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 23.07.001 Schedule of fees and resubmission requirements
(a) Fees and charges, as well as other submission requirements, for the submission of applications for the
approval of any type of plat and for engineering review and inspection shall be as provided in the city's current
fee schedule, and may be amended from time to time. It is the applicant's responsibility to obtain and comply
with the city's current fee schedule and submission requirements.
(b) Such fees and charges shall be imposed and collected on all applications for approval of any type of plat,
regardless of the action taken by the city planning and zoning commission thereon. Such fees shall be collected
for the purpose of defraying the costs of administrative, clerical, engineering, materials testing necessary to
properly review and investigate plats and subdivision construction.
(c) Should a development proposal or plat application lapse or expire, or should it be denied by the
commission, then that application ceases “pending” status and the project, and its corresponding series of
development approvals and permits, shall be deemed to be ended, or “completed”. Any reapplication for any
type of development approval for that property shall be considered commencement of a new project, and shall
be accompanied by new application materials, including new submission fees, and shall conform to all
applicable city ordinances in effect at the time of submission of the new application.
ARTICLE 23.08 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
Sec. 23.08.001 Enforcement; violations; penalties
In addition to all other remedies and relief available to the city at law or in equity for a violation of this
subdivision ordinance, the following nonexclusive forms of relief shall be available to the city:
(1) Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any of these regulations for lands within the
corporate boundaries of the city shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) per day, with each day constituting a separate violation, pursuant to the Texas Local
Government Code, Chapter 54, as amended.
(2) Civil enforcement. Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in
equity to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to impose additional penalties, to
restrain, correct or abate a violation of these regulations, whether such violation occurs with respect
to lands within the corporate boundaries of the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
(3) Withholding of subdivision acceptance. Pursuant to the provisions of article 23.06, the city may
refuse to grant final acceptance of a subdivision that does not fully and completely comply with all
terms and conditions of this subdivision ordinance including, but not limited to, the refusal to issue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 611/720
building permits and certificates of occupancy, and the refusal to connect the property to city utilities
and services.
(Ordinance 22-06 adopted 10/19/06)
CHAPTER 24
RESERVED
CHAPTER 25
ZONING
ARTICLE 25.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 25.02 ZONING ORDINANCE*
Division 1. Purpose
Sec. 25.02.001 Purpose
It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of the city council in enacting the ordinance codified in this
article that the zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a
comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. They
have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to
provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things for the character of the
district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive
plan.
Secs. 25.02.002–25.02.020 Reserved
Division 2. Districts
Sec. 25.02.021 Districts
The city is hereby divided into 15 districts. The use, height, and area regulations are uniform within each district.
They shall be known as:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 612/720
“R-1” Single-Family Dwelling District
“R-2” Single-Family Dwelling District
“R-3” Single-Family Dwelling District
“R-4” Single-Family Dwelling District
“R-5” Single-Family Dwelling District
“D” Duplex Dwelling District
“A” Apartment Dwelling District
“TH” Townhouse District
“O” Office District
“LR” Local Retail District
“C” Commercial District
“LM” Light Manufacturing District
“HM” Heavy Manufacturing District
“PD” Planned Development District
“AG” Agricultural District
Secs. 25.02.022–25.02.040 Reserved
Division 3. Newly Annexed Territory
Sec. 25.02.041 Temporary classification
All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be temporarily classified for agricultural purposes only, until
permanently zoned by the governing body of the city. The city planning and zoning commission shall, as soon as
practicable after annexation of any of the territory to the city, institute proceedings on its own motion to give the
newly annexed territory a permanent zoning, and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as is provided
by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
Sec. 25.02.042 Zoning procedure
The procedure for establishing the permanent zoning on any annexed territory shall be the same as is provided
by law for the amendment of the zoning ordinance.
Sec. 25.02.043 Permits for construction
In an area temporarily classified for agricultural purposes only, no permit for the construction of a building other
than authorized under Agricultural District Regulations shall be issued until such permit has been specifically
authorized by the governing body of the city. An application for any use or building, other than permitted by
Agricultural District Regulations, shall be accompanied by a plat showing the size of the lot or tract of land
being used, and the location of and the size and type of buildings to be constructed, and shall be referred to the
city planning and zoning commission for consideration and recommendation to the governing body, after due
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 613/720
consideration to the type of permanent zoning to be applied to the area, and upon such recommendation the
governing body may grant or deny the permit as the facts may justify.
Secs. 25.02.044–25.02.060 Reserved
Division 4. R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.061 Use restrictions
In an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or
converted to any use other than:
(1) A single-family residence.
(2) A church or school, public or denominational, having a curriculum equivalent to a public
elementary or high school.
(3) Public park, playgrounds or neighborhood recreation centers owned and operated by the city.
(4) Telephone exchange, provided no public business and no repair or storage facilities are
maintained, fire stations, public museums, public libraries, water supply reservoir, water pumping
plant, tower or artesian well.
(5) Railway right-of-way and tracks, passenger station but not including railroad yards, team tracks
or storage yards.
(6) Golf course, but not including miniature golf course, driving range or any forms of commercial
amusement.
(7) Farm, truck garden, normal household pets, orchard or nursery and greenhouse for the growing
of plants, shrubs and trees, provided no retail or wholesale business is maintained on the premises.
(8) Accessory buildings, including a private garage, bona fide servants' quarter, not for rent but for
the use of servants employed on the premises, when located not less than 60 feet from the front lot
line, nor less than five feet from any other street line, nor less than five feet from either side line,
provided said accessory building shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the minimum required rear
yard in the case of a one-story building or 40 percent in the case of a two-story building. When the
accessory building is directly attached to the main building it shall be considered an integral part of
the main building. When the accessory building is attached to the main building by a breezeway, the
breezeway is considered a part of the accessory building.
(9) Temporary buildings to be used for construction purposes only, and which shall be removed
upon completion or abandonment of construction work. Field offices for the sale of real estate which
shall be removed upon request of the building inspector.
(10) Day nursery where not more than four children, not related by blood, are kept at one time.
Sec. 25.02.062 Height regulations
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.063 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 614/720
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than 30 feet, except [as]
hereinafter provided in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front
yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each portion of the lot that is not defined as a front or rear yard.
Each side yard shall have a minimum lot width of 6-feet. When a lot has a property line along more than one
street right-of-way, each yard along a street shall meet the requirements of a front yard.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but
the required rear yard shall not be greater than 30 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 9,600 square feet; however, a lot having an area of
less than 9,600 square feet that was of record prior to passage of this section may be used for any purpose
permitted in this article.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 80 feet.
(f) The above area regulations apply to the R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District and do not apply to lots
which may be of 9,600 square feet or larger in other districts.
(g) Minimum depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(h) Parking regulations. Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate two motor
cars for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile storage
structure shall be located within the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide off-street
parking at the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(i) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 2,200 square feet.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(k) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(l) Garage. Each dwelling unit must provide a two-car garage with a minimum of 400 square feet. Except,
however, the city council may grant a special use permit in accordance with division 26 of this article to alter an
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, as defined by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), 42 USCA § 3601 et seq., as amended, if such modification is necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of said premises.
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 4-2000, sec. 1,
adopted 3/16/00; Ordinance 11-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02; Ordinance 10-04, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/04; Ordinance
05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/16; Ordinance 16-2019, sec. 1, adopted
2/25/19)
Sec. 25.02.064–25.02.080 Reserved
Division 5. R-2 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.081 Use regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 615/720
In an R-2 Dwelling District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use
other than uses permitted in an R-1 Use District.
Sec. 25.02.082 Height regulations
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.083 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 30 feet, except as hereinafter provided
in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have a double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each portion of the lot that is not defined as a front or rear yard.
Each side yard shall have a minimum lot width of 6-feet. When a lot has a property line along more than one
street right-of-way, each yard along a street shall meet the requirements of a front yard.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but
the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 9,000 square feet; however, a lot having an area of
less than 9,000 square feet, that was of record prior to the passage of this section, may be used for any use
permitted in this article.
(e) Width of lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 75 feet.
(f) The above area regulations apply to the R-2 Single-Family Dwelling District and do not apply to lots
which may be 9,000 square feet or larger in other districts.
(g) Minimum depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(h) Parking regulations. Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate two motor
cars for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile storage
structure shall be located within the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide off-street
parking at the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(i) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 2,000 square feet.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(k) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(l) Garage. Each dwelling unit must provide a two-car garage with a minimum of 400 square feet. Except,
however, the city council may grant a special use permit in accordance with division 26 of this article to alter an
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, as defined by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), 42 USCA § 3601 et seq., as amended, if such modification is necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of said premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 616/720
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 4-2000, sec. 1,
adopted 3/16/00; Ordinance 11-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02; Ordinance 10-04, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/04; Ordinance
05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 2, adopted 12/19/16; Ordinance 16-2019, sec. 2, adopted
2/25/19)
Sec. 25.02.084–25.02.100 Reserved
Division 6. R-3 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.101 Use regulations
In an R-3 Dwelling District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use
other than uses permitted in an R-1 Use District.
Sec. 25.02.102 Height regulations
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.103 Area regulations.
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 30 feet, except as hereinafter provided
in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have a double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each portion of the lot that is not defined as a front or rear yard.
Each side yard shall have a minimum lot width of 6-feet. When a lot has a property line along more than one
street right-of-way, each yard along a street shall meet the requirements of a front yard.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but
the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 8,400 square feet; however, a lot having an area of
less than 8,400 square feet, that was of record prior to passage of the ordinance codified in this article, may be
used for any use permitted in this article.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 70 feet.
(f) The above area regulations apply to the R-3 Single-Family Dwelling District and do not apply to lots
which may be 8,400 square feet or larger in other districts.
(g) Minimum depth of the lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(h) Parking regulations. Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate two motor
cars for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile storage
structure shall be located in the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide off-street parking at
the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(i) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 1,800 square feet.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 617/720
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(k) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(l) Garage. Each dwelling unit must provide a two-car garage with a minimum of 400 square feet. Except,
however, the city council may grant a special use permit in accordance with division 26 of this article to alter an
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, as defined by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), 42 USCA § 3601 et seq., as amended, if such modification is necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of said premises.
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 4-2000, sec. 1,
adopted 3/16/00; Ordinance 11-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02; Ordinance 10-04, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/04; Ordinance
05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 3, adopted 12/19/16; Ordinance 16-2019, sec. 3, adopted
2/25/19)
Secs. 25.02.104–25.02.120 Reserved
Division 7. R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.121 Use regulations
In an R-4 Dwelling District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use
other than uses permitted in an R-1 Use District.
Sec. 25.02.122 Height regulations
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.123 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 30 feet, except as hereinafter provided
in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have a double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each portion of the lot that is not defined as a front or rear yard.
Each side yard shall have a minimum lot width of 6-feet. When a lot has a property line along more than one
street right-of-way, each yard along a street shall meet the requirements of a front yard.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the lot, but the required
rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 7,800 square feet; however, a lot having an area of
less than 7,800 square feet, that was of record prior to passage of the ordinance codified in this article, may be
used for any use permitted in this article.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 65 feet.
(f) The above area regulations apply to the R-4 Single-Family Dwelling District and do not apply to lots
which may be 7,800 square feet, or larger in other districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 618/720
(g) Minimum depth of the lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(h) Parking regulations. Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate two motor
cars for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile storage
structure shall be located in the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide off-street parking at
the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(i) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 1,700 square feet.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(k) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(l) Garage. Each dwelling unit must provide a two-car garage with a minimum of 400 square feet. Except,
however, the city council may grant a special use permit in accordance with division 26 of this article to alter an
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, as defined by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), 42 USCA § 3601 et seq., as amended, if such modification is necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of said premises.
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 544, sec. 1, adopted 9/16/82; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1,
adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 4-2000, sec. 1, adopted 3/16/00; Ordinance 11-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02;
Ordinance 06-03, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/03; Ordinance 10-04, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/04; Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1,
adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 4, adopted 12/19/16; Ordinance 16-2019, sec. 4, adopted 2/25/19)
Secs. 25.02.124–25.02.150 Reserved
Division 8. R-5 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.151 Use regulations
In an R-5 Dwelling District, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use
other than uses permitted in an R-1 Use District.
Sec. 25.02.152 Height regulations
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.153 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of thirty feet, except as hereinafter
provided in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have a double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each portion of the lot that is not defined as a front or rear yard.
Each side yard shall have a minimum lot width of 6-feet. When a lot has a property line along more than one
street right-of-way, each yard along a street shall meet the requirements of a front yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 619/720
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but
the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be 7,200 square feet; however, a lot having an area of
less than 7,200 square feet, that was of record prior to passage of the ordinance codified in this article, may be
used for any use permitted in this article.
(e) Width of lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet.
(f) The above area regulations apply to the R-5 Single-Family Dwelling District and do not apply to lots
which may be 7,200 square feet or larger in other districts.
(g) Minimum depth of lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(h) Parking regulations. Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate two motor
cars for each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile storage
structure shall be located in the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide off-street parking at
the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(i) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 1,600 square feet.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(k) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(l) Garage. Each dwelling unit must provide a two-car garage with a minimum of 400 square feet. Except,
however, the city council may grant a special use permit in accordance with division 26 of this article to alter an
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, as defined by Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1968 (Fair Housing Act), 42 USCA § 3601 et seq., as amended, if such modification is necessary
to afford such person full enjoyment of said premises.
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 544, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/16/82; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1,
adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 4-2000, sec. 1, adopted 3/16/00; Ordinance 11-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02;
Ordinance 06-03, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/03; Ordinance 10-04, sec. 1, adopted 6/17/04; Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1,
adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 5, adopted 12/19/16; Ordinance 16-2019, sec. 5, adopted 2/25/19)
Secs. 25.02.154–25.02.170 Reserved
Division 9. R-6 Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations*
Secs. 25.02.171–25.02.190 Reserved
Division 10. D Duplex Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.191 Use restrictions
In the “D” District no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than:
Any use permitted in an R-5 District.
Two-family dwelling or residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 620/720
Sec. 25.02.192 Height restrictions
No building shall exceed 2-1/2 standard stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.193 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard of 25 feet, except as hereinafter provided in the division on
variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have a double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten feet or ten
percent of the average width of the lot, whichever is smaller, but the side yard shall not be less than five feet;
except that the side yard of a corner lot adjacent to a side street shall not be less than ten feet, and when adjacent
lots are platted to have or have structures fronting on two sides, there shall be a side yard of 25 feet to maintain
the front setback of such adjacent structures.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but
the required rear yard shall not be greater than 20 feet.
(d) Area of the lot.
(1) The minimum area of the lot shall be 7,000 square feet for a two-family dwelling or a singlefamily
dwelling.
(2) Where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record prior to passage of the
ordinance codified in this article, that lot may be used only for one single-family dwelling.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet.
(f) Minimum depth of the lot. The minimum depth of the lot shall be 100 feet.
(g) Parking regulations.
(1) Off-street parking space[s] shall be provided on the lot to accommodate 1-1/2 motor cars for
each dwelling unit; however, no supporting member of any garage, carport or other automobile
storage structure shall be located in the required front yard. Places of public assembly shall provide
off-street parking at the ratio of one space for each five seats.
(2) Whenever a structure is erected, converted, or structurally altered for a two-family dwelling, 1-
1/2 parking spaces shall be provided on the lot for each dwelling unit in the structure. No supporting
members of any garage, carport, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the
required front yard.
(h) Area of dwelling unit. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet.
(i) Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot area.
(j) Exterior wall materials required. All exterior side walls and 80 percent of the front and rear exterior walls
below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as
described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the
city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 621/720
(Ordinance 483, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 16-98, sec. 1, adopted 11/19/98; Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1,
adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 35-16, sec. 6, adopted 12/19/16)
Secs. 25.02.194–25.02.220 Reserved
Division 11. TH Townhouse District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.221 Use regulations
In a “TH” Townhouse District, no land shall be used and no buildings shall be erected for or converted to any
other use than:
(1) One-family attached dwellings where each dwelling is separated by an appropriate firewall.
(2) Churches.
(3) Schools, including elementary schools, high schools, and institutions of higher education.
(4) Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds, swimming facilities not deemed to constitute a
nuisance, hazard, or otherwise interfere with the public health, welfare, and safety.
(5) Gardening.
(6) Farming except that which in form and type is prohibited by other ordinances and laws.
(7) Fire stations.
(8) Temporary buildings necessary to new construction provided they are razed and removed
within 30 days after substantial completion of the new construction or failing completion of the new
constructions then within 60 days from the commencement of such temporary construction.
(9) One attached garage with one or more compartments and with front and side walls complying
with the requirements of the front and side walls of the main portion of the building as to the
distance, etc.; or, one detached private garage with one or more compartments located not less than
15 feet back from the main building and not less than 20 feet back from any street line. Provided, that
each entrance to any garage shall not be less than 20 feet back from any corner lot line it faces. A
detached private garage shall not exceed more than 600 square feet.
(10) An accessory building necessary to store equipment for several dwelling units or provide a
service function for several dwelling units. No such accessory building shall be occupied as a place
of abode or located on a lot having a place of abode.
(11) One-family detached dwellings if in accordance with all provisions of the R-1 Residential
District Regulations.
Sec. 25.02.222 Building regulations
(a) Minimum size. The minimum area of the main building constituting a single-family unit shall be 1,300
square feet, exclusive of garages and breezeways. (Ordinance 35-16, sec. 7, adopted 12/19/16)
(b) Type of material.
(1) All buildings shall be constructed of standard masonry construction as described in division 32,
Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 622/720
code, as amended, and fire code, as amended. Vertical exterior walls to the top plate line shall not
contain more than ten percent non-masonry materials, excluding windows and door openings.
(2) “Chateau” or “mansard” type construction in which over 50 percent of a second story is
enclosed by a surface of the roof must be approved by the city plan commission.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 25.02.223 Height regulations
No dwelling unit shall exceed two standard stories in height. No detached garage or accessory building to the
dwelling unit shall exceed one standard story.
The structural height of attached single-family dwellings shall be limited to a height of one story for a distance
of 150 feet from the boundary of any single-family detached residential area, inclusive of streets and alleys.
Sec. 25.02.224 Area regulations
(a) Lot area and dimensions.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 2,200 square feet.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width on a lot containing a dwelling unit shall be 22 feet.
(3) Lot depth. The minimum lot depth on a lot containing a dwelling unit shall be 100 feet.
(b) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a landscaped front yard on lots containing dwelling units having a minimum
depth of 20 feet. On lots or areas containing other than dwelling units, there shall be a landscaped
front yard having a minimum of 50 feet.
(2) On corner lots, the required front yard shall be required on both streets.
(3) Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front
yard shall be provided on both streets.
(4) No structures shall be located in the front yard unless [as] an element of permissible
landscaping.
(5) No off-street parking shall be allowed on any front yard area. However, drives of ingress and
egress from the public street to a parking area shall be allowed to cross the front yard from front to
rear.
(c) Side yard. On lots having attached dwelling units no side yard is required providing a suitable firewall is
provided except that no contiguous attached structure shall exceed 180 feet in length and the minimum
separation between structures shall be 20 feet.
(d) Rear yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard area extending the full width of the lot of a depth of not less than
20 feet.
(e) Unusable land areas. No pond, creek or other unusable terrain shall be changed without the approval of
such plan by the city building official. All required setback areas shall be measured from the edge of the usable
land available for development as determined by the city plan commission. Such unusable land area shall be
planned an [as] open greenbelt area to the maximum extent possible.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 623/720
(f) Overhang and fireplaces. The maximum setback requirements shall apply in all cases, except that
fireplaces, eaves, bays, and balconies may extend up to a maximum of 3-1/2 feet into the required front, side or
rear yards.
(g) Parking regulations.
(1) On lots having dwelling units, adequate off-street parking space shall be provided to meet the
requirements of the residents and their guests; but in no event shall the number of off-street parking
spaces provided to serve a lot be less than 2-1/2 off-street [parking] spaces per lot for motor cars; it is
envisioned that these spaces may be on the lot proper or on common or community property located
in the immediate vicinity of the lot or lots to be served. However, no supporting member of any
garage, carport, or other automobile storage structure shall be located within the required front yard.
(2) Additional and adequate off-street parking spaces as determined by the city plan commission
shall be provided adjacent to all swimming pools, parks[,] service buildings, and recreational areas.
(3) All off-street driveways and parking areas; other than those on lots having dwelling units, shall
be curbed, paved, and maintained to the city specifications so as to eliminate dust or mud and shall be
so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water.
(h) Lighting. All parking areas on other than lots having dwelling units, all recreational areas, all service
facilities, etc. shall be lighted and such lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect light away from lots containing
dwelling units and away from adjacent districts.
(i) Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings in the district and uses of such shall be permitted only
to the extent necessary and normal to the limited types of use permitted in the district. All accessory buildings
shall be separated from each other and from dwelling units by a minimum of 20 feet except for separation from
main dwelling units and detached garages which shall be a minimum of 15 feet. The site plan shall show all
accessory buildings and their planned use.
(j) Coverage.
(1) On lots containing dwelling units the main structure and any accessory buildings (exclusive of
parking shelters) shall not cover more than 60 percent of the lot.
(2) For each lot platted for a single-family attached dwelling a minimum of 800 square feet outside
the limits of the platted lot must be provided for open space, recreational and service areas, exclusive
of dedications for the site plan and landscape plan.
(3) In no event shall the number of dwelling units exceed ten units per acre exclusive of all streets,
alleys, and sidewalks but inclusive of open space, recreational, and service area.
(k) Access. Alleys within or abutting a “TH” District may be used for ingress and egress to parking and
service areas provided a minimum paved alley width of 20 feet is provided from a street to the parking or service
area. Such ingress and egress shall be approved by the city plan commission giving consideration to adjacent
properties and appropriate screening.
(l) Refuse and waste. Storage areas shall conform to standards as required by the city.
(m) Swimming pools.
(1) [Approval; location; lighting; fencing.] Swimming pools shall be subject to approval by the city
plan commission after taking into consideration the location and size of the plot; the site; the detailed
plans of such swimming pool and any required accessories; and other such factors as may be required
for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. In addition, the city plan commission
may require that any swimming pool, including mechanical equipment, be located at such distance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 624/720
from any property line as not to interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of the occupant(s) of
any adjoining building or residence. Any lights illuminating such swimming pools shall be so erected
as to eliminate direct rays of light on adjoining premises. A four-foot permanent fence or wall must
be erected and maintained around each pool. The fence or wall must be provided with a gate which
must be locked when the pool is not in use.
(2) Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be constructed, located and screened so as
not to interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose of the occupant(s) of any adjoining building or
residence.
Sec. 25.02.225 Site plan approval
(a) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, there shall be submitted to the city plan commission for its
approval a site plan drawn to an acceptable scale and with adequate copies. The scale and number of copies shall
be that deemed necessary by the city manager, or other designated city official.
(b) The site plan shall show but not be limited to, the arrangement of the proposed improvements in detail,
together with the essential requirements such as parking facilities, location of buildings and other structures, and
the uses to be permitted, means of ingress and egress and areas to be landscaped.
(c) The city plan commission's consideration shall include paving and layout of street, alley, and sidewalks;
means of ingress and egress, provisions for drainage; parking spaces, protective screening and open spaces;
areas designated for landscaping; any other request deemed by the city plan commission necessary to consider in
the interest of promotion the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
(d) It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit prior to the approval of the site plan by the city plan
commission. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the approved site plan including all
conditions of approval applied by the city plan commission.
(e) If during the course of considering the site plan, the city plan commission is of the opinion that proper
approval or disapproval cannot be granted without a detail landscape plan, the city plan commission is
authorized to request the applicant to submit a landscape plan and further authorized to withhold action on the
site plan until the submission of the landscape plan for the city plan commission's consideration.
(f) For the purpose of assisting in-process planning, a preliminary site plan may be submitted for city plan
commission consideration. Such preliminary site plan may contain any or all of the site plan requirements and
must be drawn to scale, submitted in adequate quantity and titled “PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN”. The approval
of a preliminary site plan will not imply approval of all elements of a site plan. It shall be unlawful to issue a
building permit on a preliminary site plan.
Sec. 25.02.226 Landscaping plan approval
(a) Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, there shall be submitted to the city plan commission for its
approval a landscape plan drawn to the same scale as the site plan and submitted with the same number of copies
as the site plan.
(b) Except where otherwise provided, all yard, setback, parking, service, and recreational areas shall be
landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs, or other live or artificial plant materials and shall be permanently
maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition for use.
(c) Where the use of a living screen is proposed, such screen must be included as an element of the landscape
plan.
(d) There shall be permitted fountains, ponds, sculptures, planters, walkways, flagpoles, light standards and
decorative screen type walls as elements of landscaping in areas designated for landscaping. Decorative type
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 625/720
walls, planters, and sculptures shall be 30 inches or less in height. The city plan commission shall be authorized
to permit heights in excess of 30 inches where such is in the best interest of landscaping and will not in the city
plan commission's opinion create a problem relative to public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare.
(e) With respect to landscaping parking areas, a minimum of two percent of all parking areas shall be
landscaped. On parking areas having not more than two rows, the two percent requirement can be met in
perimeter landscaping; for lots having more than two rows, at least one-half of the landscaping requirement must
be internal to the lot.
(f) The landscape plan shall show in detail but not be limited to the location of each element of landscaping, a
description or name of each landscape element or group of elements, the number and size of each tree and the
height of any proposed planter, sculpture, or decorative screen.
(g) The city plan commission shall consider the adequacy of the proposed landscaping in the interest of
promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
(h) It shall be unlawful to issue an occupancy permit prior to the approval of the landscape plan by the city
plan commission. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, all approved screening and landscaping must be
in place or if seasonal considerations prohibit the completion of the landscaping, a temporary occupancy permit
may be issued for such time as is reasonable to complete the landscaping.
Sec. 25.02.227 Special requirements
(a) All areas for locating dwelling units shall be platted into individual lots and located on dedicated streets;
and each of said lots shall be served individually by water, sewer, electric and gas utility services.
(b) The areas for recreational, open space, and service use may be platted into one or more lots.
(c) No building permit shall be issued in a “TH” Townhouse District until evidence of satisfactory provision
for the handling of areas not platted for dwelling units is submitted to the city plan commission and they accept
such.
(d) Street pavement in dedicated rights-of-way in a “TH” Townhouse District shall have a minimum width of
30 feet, face of curb to face of curb; and shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the city.
(e) All utilities shall be underground. This includes in addition to those normally installed underground,
electric distribution facilities, telephone cables, and individual house services.
Secs. 25.02.228–25.02.250 Reserved
Division 12. A Apartment Dwelling District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.251 Use regulations
Land and buildings in the “A” District may be used for any of the following listed uses but no land shall
hereafter be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, relocated, reconstructed, or
converted which is arranged or designed or used for other than the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in the “D” District.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings (apartments).
(3) Community, social or hobby buildings for tenants as part of a multiple-family dwelling or
housing project.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 626/720
(4) Accessory buildings including a private laundry, utility or storage building and carports as part
of a multiple-family dwelling or housing project.
(5) A single nameplate or sign for an apartment building or housing project when such sign is
affixed flat against the building and does not exceed any [an] area of 40 square feet and when the
sign is not of a flashing, intermittently lighted, revolving or similarly lighted type.
Sec. 25.02.252 Height regulations
No building shall exceed two standard stories for living purposes. Where basement areas are used for off-street
parking or other service facilities, the maximum height of the building above grade shall not exceed 28 feet.
Sec. 25.02.253 Area regulations
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet except where circular or similar
entrance drives across the lot in front of the main building are used, in which event the minimum front yard
depth shall be 35 feet and no parking space or vehicle storage area shall be located closer to the front property
line than 25 feet.
(b) Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having minimum dimensions as follows:
(1) For single-family and two-family dwellings the required side yard shall be the same as in the
“D” Duplex Dwelling District.
(2) Where multiple-family dwellings or housing projects are arranged on a lot where the long
dimension of any building is parallel to the side lot line, or where the long dimension of such
building is parallel to another building in a project, a side yard of 15 feet shall be provided on each
side of each building so that the walls of buildings arranged as parallel structures shall be a minimum
of 30 feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such side yard or space for a distance
greater than five feet.
(3) For multiple-family dwellings which are arranged with the long dimension of the building
parallel to the front lot line and where the building end adjacent and parallel to the side lot line does
not exceed 35 feet in width, a minimum side yard of ten feet shall be provided.
(4) Where the end of a multiple-family dwelling or building does not exceed 35 feet in width and is
located opposite another building end or building side or exposed wall face and where such building
ends or wall faces do not contain openings for light, air or access in the areas which are opposite,
such building ends or wall faces may be placed a minimum distance of ten feet apart. Where
openings for light, air or access exist in building end or wall faces arranged as described above, the
minimum distance between such ends or wall faces shall be 20 feet.
(5) A side yard on a corner lot adjacent to a street shall not be less than 15 feet and no balcony or
porch or any portion of the building may extend into such required side yard except that a roof may
overhang such side yard not to exceed five feet.
(c) Rear yard required. No main building may be constructed nearer than 15 feet to the rear property line. The
main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than 50 percent of that portion of the lot lying to
the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint of the opposite side lot line. Carports or other detached accessory
buildings shall be located within the rear portion of the lot as heretofore described and shall not exceed one story
in height nor shall such structures be located closer than 15 feet to the main building nor closer than three feet to
any side lot line, nor closer than 15 feet to any side street.
(d) Courts. When an apartment building or buildings are erected so as to create inner courts or outer courts as
defined in division 37, Definitions, the faces of all opposite walls in such courts shall be a minimum distance of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 627/720
30 feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five feet.
(e) Area of lot. All buildings hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed or converted shall be located
on lots containing the following areas:
(1) A lot on which is erected or placed a single-family dwelling shall contain a minimum of 7,000
square feet.
(2) A lot on which there is erected or converted a two-family dwelling shall contain a minimum of
7,000 square feet.
(3) A lot on which there is erected or converted a multiple-family dwelling shall contain a
minimum of 7,000 square feet, and there shall be not less than 1,200 square feet of lot area for each
family unit.
(4) Where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record prior to passage of the
ordinance codified in this article, that lot may be used for single-family dwelling purposes only.
(f) Width of lot. The minimum lot width for single-family, two-family and multiple-family use shall be 60
feet.
(g) Lot coverage. Not more than 50 percent of the total area of the lot may be covered by the main and
accessory buildings.
(h) Parking regulations.
(1) The parking regulations for single-family and duplex uses are the same as those in the “D”
Duplex Dwelling District.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings shall provide paved off-street parking at a ratio of 1-1/2 spaces per
dwelling unit, and no such off-street parking space shall be located within the required 25-foot front
yard nor within four feet of any building when such off-street parking is located in the side yard.
Whenever off-street parking spaces are located in the side yard, a curb or equivalent barrier shall be
placed so as to prevent any vehicle from parking within a minimum distance of four feet from the
building.
(Ordinance 483, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
(i) Area of dwelling. Each dwelling unit shall provide for a minimum of 850 square feet of living area for a
one-bedroom apartment, 1,000 square feet of living area for a two-bedroom apartment and 1,100 square feet of
living area for a three-bedroom apartment. (Ordinance 35-16, sec. 8, adopted 12/19/16)
(k) Building materials. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction having exterior walls
constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section
25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended. (Ordinance
483, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/79; Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Secs. 25.02.254–25.02.270 Reserved
Division 13. O Office District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.271 Use regulations
Land and buildings in the “O” District may be used for any of the following listed uses, but no land shall be
altered or used and no building or structure shall be altered, erected, relocated, reconstructed or converted which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 628/720
is arranged or designed or used for other than the following uses, none of which is intended to permit retail sales
of any commodity other than services:
Financial offices.
Professional offices.
Doctors' and dentists' offices.
Personal services.
Real estate offices.
Business offices.
Consultants' offices.
Architect or engineers' offices.
Attorneys' offices.
Salesman's offices.
Political offices.
General offices.
Accessory buildings shall be limited to the parking of automobiles and the storage of records
and the equipment used and not items for sale.
Sec. 25.02.272 Signs
Signs shall be limited to the marquee, flat wall or parapet type and shall not be of the flashing or intermittently
lighting or rotary type.
Sec. 25.02.273 Height regulations
No building or structure shall exceed 2-1/2 standard stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.274 Area requirements
(a) Yards.
(1) Front yard:
(A) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than 30 feet, except as
hereinafter provided in the article on variances and exceptions.
(B) Where lots have double frontage running through from one street to another, the required
front yard shall be provided on both sides.
(2) Side yard: There shall be a side yard having a minimum width of 15 feet on both sides of the
tract or lot or a minimum of 30 feet between buildings if more than one is created on a single lot or
tract.
(3) Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 629/720
(b) Area of the lot. No minimum area.
(c) Width of lot. No minimum width.
(d) Depth of lot. No minimum depth.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
(e) Parking regulations.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio of one space for each 200 square feet
of building, unless otherwise provided in section 25.02.714.
(2) On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714.
(Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
(f) Building materials. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction having exterior walls
constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section
25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as amended. (Ordinance
05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Secs. 25.02.275–25.02.300 Reserved
Division 14. MHP Mobile Home Park District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.301 Establishment of mobile home park; general requirements
The city council may authorize the establishment of a mobile home park in any “MHP” zoning district in
accordance with the provisions of this article. The sanitary regulations prescribed by the authority having
jurisdiction, and as may be otherwise required by law, shall be complied with, in addition to the following
regulations. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.302 Area requirements
Mobile home parks shall have a minimum land area of 20 acres and a maximum of 30 acres. (Ordinance 16-89,
sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.303 Parking
All areas used for automobile access and parking shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article,
provided that there shall be at least two off-street parking spaces for each three lots to accommodate guests.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.304 Entrance to mobile home parks
No vehicular entrance to or exit from any mobile home park shall be within 200 feet along the street(s) from any
school, public playground, hospital, or church, except where such property is in another block or another street
which the premises in question do not abut. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.305 Landscaping
All areas not used for access, parking, circulation, buildings, and service shall be completely and permanently
landscaped and the entire site maintained in good condition by the mobile home park manager. (Ordinance 16-
89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 630/720
Sec. 25.02.306 Screening
Screening shall be provided by the property owner according to the following requirements:
(1) Required locations. Whenever a mobile home area is platted, the developer shall separate the
mobile home park from all areas and major thoroughfares with a six-foot masonry screening fence.
(2) No such screening fence shall be so erected as to obstruct the vision of motorists at alley, street,
and drive intersections.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.307 Enlargement; existing facilities to comply
No enlargement or extensions to any mobile home park shall be permitted unless the existing facility is made to
conform with all the requirements for a new construction for such an establishment. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2,
adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.308 Mobile homes and manufactured homes prohibited
No person shall park or occupy any mobile home or manufactured home on any premises in any district outside
an approved mobile home park. The parking of any unoccupied recreational trailer or recreational vehicle in an
accessory private garage building or in a rear yard shall be permitted in any district, provided no living quarters
shall be maintained or any business conducted in such trailer or recreational vehicle while so parked or stored.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.309 Submission of plans
Application for the establishment of a mobile home park shall be filed with the city Planner and must be
accompanied by a plat, drawn to scale and certified by a licensed land surveyor, civil engineer, landscape
architect, or architect. The city Planner shall check the plat and if he finds it to be in compliance with
requirements of this section, shall forward the proposed plat to the planning and zoning commission. The city
Planner shall also advise the commission of the pending application. The planning and zoning commission shall
review the plat for the mobile home park and submit a recommendation to the city council. The plat shall
contain the following information:
(1) Accurate dimensions of the proposed mobile home park.
(2) All roads and approaches and the method of ingress to and egress from public streets.
(3) Detailed plans for lighting and electrical power systems, all underground.
(4) Detailed plans of any natural gas system to serve the park.
(5) Complete layout of spaces for each mobile home unit and number of square feet therein,
together with dimensions.
(6) Detailed plans of the water and sewage systems, including but not limited to, location of water
mains, wells for water supply outlet for resident water users, sanitation facilities, washaterias, fire
hydrants, protection stalls, and other buildings or structures contemplated to be used by such
applicant in connection with the mobile home park.
(7) Such other information as the reviewing official(s) may reasonably require.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 631/720
Sec. 25.02.310 Mobile home lots and living area; minimum requirements
The minimum requirements for mobile home and manufactured home lots and living area are as follows:
Area: 5,000 square feet.
Front yard: 30 feet minimum from back of curb.
Rear yard: Ten feet minimum.
Side yard: Ten feet minimum.
Lot width: 36 feet minimum.
Living area: 600 feet minimum.
Building height: One standard story.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.311 Mobile home park permanent structure height restriction
The maximum building height for a permanent structure in a mobile home park shall be 2-1/2 standard stories.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.312 Street access; interior street specifications
(a) Access. Each mobile home park shall abut a public street and each mobile home and manufactured home
lot shall have direct access to a private interior street.
(b) Interior streets. The minimum roadway width of interior streets will comply with the subdivision
regulations and current development standards for the city. Such streets shall be paved according to the city
specifications for residential streets, and maintained by owner in good condition and have lights at night.
(Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.313 Concrete slab
Each mobile home lot shall be equipped with a concrete slab of sufficient size to support the wheels and front
parking jack. Said slab shall have minimum thickness of four inches. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted
10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.314 Installation of utilities; fire hydrants
A municipal sanitary sewer and municipal water system shall be installed in accordance with city specifications
to every lot. Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with the specifications of the fire marshal. (Ordinance
16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.315 Recreational areas
There shall be provided within each mobile home park an adequate site or sites for recreation for the exclusive
use of the park occupants. Such recreational site or sites shall have a minimum area of at least five percent of the
gross land area of the mobile home park. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.316 Connection to water and sewer system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 632/720
No mobile home or manufactured home shall remain in a mobile home park a period exceeding ten days without
connection to the permanent water and sanitary sewer system of the park. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted
10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.317 Storage of recreational vehicles and boats
A storage area must be provided within each mobile home park for the parking and storage of boats and
recreational vehicles. This storage area shall have a minimum area of the aggregate of 100 square feet for each
mobile home lot and [be] enclosed with a six-foot chain-link fence. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.318 Tie-down anchors
Tie-down anchors shall be provided for each mobile home and manufactured home to secure the structure from
uplift, sliding, rotating, or overturning. Tie-down [anchors] shall be installed according to state mobile home
standards within ten days of location of mobile home or manufactured home in park. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2,
adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.319 Skirting or underpinning
Skirting around all mobile homes and manufactured homes within the park shall be installed within ten days and
maintained. The design, color, and materials shall be of like characteristics as the mobile home or manufactured
home. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.320 Additional requirements
In addition to the foregoing, the city council may impose such other conditions, requirements, or limitations
concerning the design, development, and operation of such mobile home park as it shall seem necessary for the
protection of adjacent properties and public interest. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.321 Development fees
Each application for a mobile home park shall be $20.00 per acre payable to the city; said payment required to
accompany each application. (Ordinance 16-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Secs. 25.02.322–25.02.350 Reserved
Division 15. LR Local Retail District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.351 Use regulations
In an “LR” District, no land shall be used and no building shall be used, erected or converted to any use other
than those listed below or those of a like and/or similar use:
Any use permitted in the “O” Office District. (Dwellings of all types are excluded.)
Ambulance service.
Antique shop.
Aquarium.
Art gallery.
Auto laundry without boiler, heating and steam-cleaning facilities, in which all washing
operations are carried on within a building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 633/720
Auto repair garage where all work is conducted inside the building and not including the open
storage of vans, trailers or trucks.
Auto seat covering.
Bakery, retail.
Bank, office, wholesale sales office, or sample room.
Barber and beauty shop.
Bird and pet shops, retail.
Book or stationery store.
Bowling alley - if air-conditioned and soundproofed.
Camera shop.
Candy shop.
Caterer.
Cleaning, dyeing and laundry pickup station for receiving and delivery of articles to be cleaned,
dyed and laundered, but no actual work to be done on premises.
Cleaning and pressing shops having an area of not more than 6,000 square feet.
Curtain cleaning shop having an area of not more than 6,000 square feet.
Department store, novelty or variety shop, retail sales.
Dying plant with not more than 6,000 square feet of floor space.
Electrical goods, retail sales only.
Electrical repairing - domestic equipment and autos, retail sales only.
Electric substation.
Exterminating company, retail.
Film developing and printing.
Fix-it shops, bicycle repairs, saw filing, lawn mower sharpening, retail only, but without outside
storage.
Florist, retail sales only.
Furniture store - retail.
Furniture repairs and upholstering, retail sales only, and where all storage and display is within
the building.
Frozen food lockers, retail.
Gasoline/motor fuel sales.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 634/720
Gasoline/motor fuel sales, automated.
Grocery store (over 5,000 square feet).
Hardware, sporting goods, toys, paints, wallpaper[,] clothing, retail sales only.
Household and office furniture, furnishings and appliances, retail.
Ice delivery station.
Job printing.
Jewelry, optical goods, photographic supplies, retail.
Laundry, automatic equipped with machines of the type customarily found in the home, where
custom laundering and finishing may be done. The shop shall not exceed 6,000 square feet in
area and no pickup and delivery shall be operated.
Letter and mimeograph shop.
Library, rental.
Meat market, retail sales only.
Moving picture theater.
Nursery, retail sale of plants and trees.
Office building.
Outside display, new materials only.
Outside storage units, portable (PODs).
Parking lot without public garage of [or] other automobile facilities for the parking of passenger
cars and trucks of less than one ton capacity only.
Pharmacy/drug store.
Photographer's or artist's studio.
Professional offices for architect, attorney, engineer and real estate.
Public garage.
Piano and musical instruments, retail sales only.
Plumbing shop, retail sales only, without warehouse facilities (to include storage for ordinary
repairs, but not storage for materials for contracting work).
Restaurant, dine-in only (over 4,000 square feet).
Restaurant, dine-in/convenience (over 4,000 square feet).
Retail store or shop for custom work or the making of articles to be sold for retail on the
premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 635/720
Rug cleaning shop having an area of not more than 6,000 square feet, chemical type, where all
cleaning operations are carried on within a building, where rugs are laid flat on the floor, the
chemical mixed with water, applied with a brush, and removed by vacuum cleaning, entirely
without the generation of dust.
Seamstress, dressmaker, or tailor.
Seed store.
Shoe repair shop, retail sales only.
Studios, dance, music, drama, health massage and reducing.
Studio for the display and sale of glass, china, art objects, cloth and draperies.
Taxi stand.
Washateria, equipped with automatic washing machines of the type customarily found in a
home and where the customer may personally supervise the washing and handling of his
laundry.
Wearing apparel including clothing, shoes, hats, millinery and accessories.
(Ordinance 12-89, sec. 2a, adopted 9/14/89; Ordinance 09-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/02; Ordinance 10-02, sec. 2,
adopted 7/18/02; Ordinance 06-05, sec. 1, adopted 3/3/05; Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10; Ordinance 03-2017,
sec. 1, adopted 3/6/17)
Sec. 25.02.352 Height regulations
No building or structure shall exceed 2-1/2 standard stories in height.
Sec. 25.02.353 Area regulations
(a) Front yard.
(1) There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of not less than 25 feet except as
hereinafter provided in the division on variances and exceptions [division 27].
(2) Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front
yard shall be provided on both streets.
(b) Side yard. On the side of a lot in an “LR” District adjoining a single-family, duplex, or an Apartment
District, there shall be a side yard. No side yard shall be required where the LR District is separated from a
residential district by an alley. The minimum width of the side yard shall be ten feet or ten percent of the average
width of the lot, whichever is smaller, but a side yard shall not be less than five feet. The side yard adjacent to a
side street shall not be less than ten feet.
(c) Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required for a retail use except where a lot adjoins a single-family, duplex,
or an apartment district, and is not separated therefrom by an alley in which event there shall be a rear yard on
the rear of the lot equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but the required rear yard shall not be greater than
24 feet. Where a lot or any portion of a lot is used for single-family dwelling, two-family or multiple-family use,
there shall be a rear yard on the rear of the lot equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but the required rear
yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum lot area requirements for single-family, two-family, or multiple-family
dwellings shall be the same as those for the Apartment District. Where dwelling facilities are provided above or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 636/720
behind stores, the lot area requirements shall be the same as those required for multiple-family dwellings in the
Apartment District.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet for single-family, two-family or multiplefamily
use. For other uses, the width may be less than 60 feet.
(f) Parking regulations.
(1) The parking regulations for single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings are the
same as those in the Apartment Multiple Dwelling District.
(2) Furniture stores shall provide off-street parking space at the ratio of one space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area.
(3) Medical or dental clinics shall provide off-street parking space at the ratio of one space for each
250 square feet of floor area.
(4) Banks, professional offices, business offices, other than medical or dental clinics, shall provide
off-street parking space at a ratio of one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
(5) Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food or refreshments shall
provide off-street parking space at a ratio of one space for each 150 square feet of floor area.
(6) Bowling alleys shall provide off-street parking space at the ratio of three spaces for each lane.
(7) Any building hereafter erected, altered or converted for local retail or personal service use not
listed above shall provide off-street parking space at the following ratio:
(A) Buildings having less than 5,000 square feet of floor area shall provide one space for
each 500 square feet of ground floor building area.
(B) Buildings having over 5,000 square feet, but not more than 10,000 square feet of ground
floor area shall provide ten spaces plus one space for each 333 feet of ground floor area in
excess of 5,000 square feet.
(C) Buildings having over 10,000 square feet of ground floor area shall provide 25 parking
spaces plus one space for each 200 square feet of ground floor area in excess of 10,000 square
feet.
(D) Buildings having local retail or professional office uses on floors above the ground floor
shall provide off-street parking spaces at the ratio of one space for each 500 square feet of floor
area about the ground floor.
(E) Where more than one building is located upon a lot the parking requirements shall be
based upon the total floor area of all such structures.
(8) Retail, office and service buildings shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the
loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot adjacent to a public
alley or private service drive to facilitate the movement of traffic on the public streets. Such space
shall consist of a minimum area ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 square feet of floor space or
fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet in the building or on the lot used for retail, storage or
service purposes.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 637/720
(9) On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714. (Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
(g) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction
having exterior walls constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all
Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as
amended. (Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 25.02.354–25.02.370 Reserved
Division 16. C Commercial District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.371 Use regulations
In an “C” District, no land shall be used and no building shall be used, erected or converted to any use other than
those listed below or those of a like and/or similar use:
Any use permitted in the “LR” Local Retail District.
Artificial flower manufacture.
Artificial limb manufacture.
Automobile dealers.
Automobile laundry.
Auto painting, auto upholstering.
Awning manufacture, cloth, metal, wood.
Aquarium, wholesale.
Book printing, binding, bindery.
Bottling works with syrup manufacture.
Bowling alley.
Bus and truck storage.
Cabinet shop.
Candy manufacture.
Canvas awning manufacture.
Car barns.
Carpenter shop.
Carpet cleaning - washing and scouring if dustproof room and dust-catching equipment is
provided.
Carting, express, hauling or storage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 638/720
Cement storage.
Ceramic products, handcraft shop having an area of not more than 6,000 square feet.
Clothing manufacture.
Cold storage plant.
Commercial amusement.
Commercial colleges.
Cleaning and dry cleaning establishment having an area in excess of 6,000 square feet.
Contractor's storage yard.
Driving range.
Dry goods, wholesale and storage.
Dyeing plant having more than 6,000 square feet.
Egg candling and grading.
Electrical and neon sign manufacture.
Electrical repairing.
Electro-plating; electro-tying.
Engraving plant.
Envelope manufacture.
Feed store, wholesale and storage.
Florist, wholesale.
Food products manufacture, frozen food lockers, wholesale.
Furniture repair and upholstering - wholesale.
Furniture auction sales.
Hauling, light or heavy.
Household goods, storage.
Ice cream manufacture; ice manufacture.
Job printing and book printing.
Laundry, commercial.
Leather products manufacture.
Lithographing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 639/720
Loading or storage tracks.
Looseleaf book manufacture.
Lumberyard (building material).
Market - public.
Mattress making and renovating - where dust precipitating equipment is used.
Milk depot, wholesale.
Millinery manufacture.
Miniature golf course.
Mirror resilvering.
Motion-picture studio, commercial films.
Motorcycle repairing.
Moving and storage company.
Newspaper printing.
Optical goods manufacture.
Paint mixing, but excluding all cooking or baking operations of paints, varnish and lacquers.
Paper products and paper box manufacture.
Photoengraving plant.
Plastic products, molding, casting and shaping.
Penal or correctional institutions for insane, feebleminded, liquor or narcotic.
Printing equipment, supplies, repairs.
Print shop.
Publishing company.
Schools - all types including trade and commercial colleges.
Secondhand furniture.
Seed store, wholesale sales and storage.
Sheetmetal shop.
Shoe store, wholesale sales and storage.
Skating rink.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 640/720
Storage and sales of used auto parts and accessories when located inside building and in which
no automobile or parts of automobiles for sale is stored or displayed in the open.
Storage of trucks, and gravel.
Stone monument works - retail.
Streetcar barns.
Taxicab storage and repairs.
Team tracks and unloading docks, railroads.
Tire retreading and recapping.
Tourist camp.
Trade schools of all types.
Transfer and baggage company.
Trunk manufacturing.
Typesetting.
Used car lot.
Venetian blind manufacturing.
Warehouse, wholesale offices, sales and storage.
Water distillation.
(Ordinance 12-89, sec. 2b, adopted 9/14/89; Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10; Ordinance 22-2017 adopted
10/2/17)
Sec. 25.02.372 Height regulations
No building shall exceed six standard stories in height unless setback from all lot lines or any required yard lines
[is] one foot for each two feet of building height above such six-story limit.
Sec. 25.02.373 Area requirements
(a) Front yard. Where all the frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets is located in
the “C” District, no front yard shall be required. When the frontage on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets is located partly in the “C” District and partly in a more restricted use district, the front yard
shall conform to the more restricted use district.
(b) Side yard. No side yard shall be required for commercial or retail use, except:
(1) For a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, or a multiple-family dwelling use, a side
yard shall be required on each side of the lot as in the “A” District.
(2) On the side of the lot adjoining a single-family, two-family, or Apartment District, there shall
be a side yard. No side yard shall be required where the “C” District is separated from any residential
district by an alley. The minimum width of the side yard shall be ten feet or ten percent of the average
width of the lot, whichever is smaller but a side yard shall not be less than five feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 641/720
(c) Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required for commercial or retail use except where a lot abuts singlefamily,
two-family, or Apartment District and is not separated therefrom by an alley, in which event there shall
be a rear yard on the rear of the lot equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot but in no case shall such rear yard
be less than ten feet, but the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet. For a single-family, two-family,
or multiple-family dwelling use, there shall be a rear yard on the rear of the lot equal to 20 percent of the depth
of the lot, but the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum lot area requirements for single-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwellings shall be the same as those in the Apartment District. Where dwelling facilities are provided above
stores, the lot area requirements shall be the same as those required for multiple-family dwellings in the
Apartment District.
(e) Width of lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet for a single-family dwelling, two-family, or
multiple-family dwelling use, for other uses the width may be less than 60 feet.
(f) Parking regulations.
(1) The parking regulations for single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings are the
same as those in the Apartment Multiple Dwelling District.
(2) The parking regulations for all local retail uses are the same as those in the “LR” Local Retail
District.
(3) Motels shall provide off-street parking space at the ratio of one space for each guestroom.
(4) Dance halls, commercial amusement establishments, nightclubs, and skating rinks shall provide
off-street parking at a ratio of one space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for dancing,
amusement or skating.
(5) Driving range, amusement parks, miniature golf courses shall provide off-street parking at the
ratio of one space for each five persons. The maximum number of patrons which can be served shall
be the basis in determining parking requirements.
(6) Manufacturing, industrial, and processing establishments, repair shops, warehouses, storage
buildings, lumber and supply yards shall provide off-street parking space at a ratio of one space for
each five employees. The maximum number of employees on duty at any time, day or night, shall be
the basis determining [for] parking requirements for any establishment. Where the number of
employees is indeterminate, off-street parking space shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each
1,000 square feet of floor area.
(7) Retail, office service, industrial and manufacturing buildings shall provide and maintain offstreet
facilities for loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot
adjacent to a public alley or private service drive to facilitate the movement of traffic on the public
streets. Such space shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 square feet
of floor space or fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 feet in the building or on the lot used for retail,
storage or service purposes.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
(8) On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714. (Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
(g) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction
having exterior walls constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 642/720
Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as
amended. (Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Secs. 25.02.374–25.02.390 Reserved
Division 17. Reserved*
Secs. 25.02.391–25.02.420 Reserved
Division 18. LM Light Manufacturing District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.421 Use regulations
In an “LM” District, no land shall be used and no building shall be used, erected or converted to any use other
than those listed below or those of a like and/or similar use:
Any use permitted in the “C” Commercial District.
Adding machine manufacture.
Aircraft parts manufacture.
Airplane repair and manufacturing.
Agricultural implement manufacturing.
Automobile assembly.
Automobile parts manufacturing.
Bag manufacturer and cleaning.
Bakery, commercial.
Bank equipment manufacture.
Blacksmith.
Boiler manufacture and repair of boilers not exceeding 15 h.p.
Bolt and nut manufacture.
Boot and shoe manufacture.
Broom manufacture.
Building material machinery, or supplying having outside storage.
Box and crate manufacture (other than paper).
Canning and preserving factory.
Carbon battery manufacture.
Carpet cleaning - if no dustproof cleaning rooms in which dust catching, washing and scouring
equipment is provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 643/720
Celluloid and similar cellulose manufacture.
Central station, light and power plant.
Cereal mill.
Chair manufacture.
Cheese factory.
Chick hatchery.
Coal yard, coal hoist, coal pocket or coal car trestle.
Coffin manufacture.
Cooperage company.
Cotton company.
Cotton ginning, baling and compressing.
Cotton oil mill.
Cotton seed products manufacture.
Dairy - wholesale.
Disinfectant manufacture.
Dye manufacturing.
Electric or acetylene welding.
Electrical supply manufacture.
Electrical power plant.
Elevator manufacture.
Enameling and painting.
Feed mill.
Fixture manufacture.
Flour milling and grain storage and elevators.
Food processing.
Furniture manufacture.
Fur warehouse.
Gasoline, wholesale storage.
Grain elevator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 644/720
Hardware manufacture.
Helicopter terminal.
Hosiery mill.
Horseshoeing.
Insecticide manufacturing.
Iron works, ornamental.
Knit goods manufacture.
Light agricultural implements manufacture.
Livery stable.
Machinery manufacture.
Mattress factory.
Mattress renovating.
Metal products, stamping and manufacturing.
Milk processing plant.
Outside storage, new materials.
Paper products manufacture.
Pattern shop.
Pecan processing.
Petroleum, wholesale storage.
Planing mill.
Poultry feed manufacturer.
Poultry slaughtering - dressing and storage.
Printing ink manufacture.
Public stable.
Railroad yards - roundhouse or shop.
Rice cleaning and polishing.
Riding academy.
Riding stable.
Rock wool manufacture.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 645/720
Rug manufacture.
Shoe factory.
Stable.
Stone cutting.
Storage battery manufacturing.
Storage of live poultry, or poultry dressing.
Textile manufacture.
Tool manufacture.
Veterinary hospital.
Water distillation.
Wood products manufacture.
Woodworking shops.
Any manufacturing or industrial use which is not noxious or offensive by reasons of emission
or [of] odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise, but specifically excluding uses listed in the “HM”
Heavy Manufacturing District.
(Ordinance 12-89, sec. 2c, adopted 9/14/89; Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
Sec. 25.02.422 Height regulations
No building shall exceed six standard stories in height unless set back from all lot lines or any required yard
lines one foot for each foot above such height limit. When building is located on a lot adjoining a single-family
district, a two-family or an Apartment District, it shall not exceed three standard stories in height unless it is set
back one foot from all required yard lines for each one foot or [of] additional height above such height limit.
Sec. 25.02.423 Area regulations
(a) Front yard. No front yard shall be required for a retail, commercial, or manufacturing use unless:
(1) The street is less than 60 feet in width, in which case a manufacturing or commercial structure
shall be placed not less than 30 feet from the centerline of said street. A 25-foot minimum front yard
shall be required for a residential, duplex or apartment use.
(2) Where the frontage on one side of a street within a block is partly in the “LM” District and
partially in a more restricted district, then the front yard shall conform to the front yard regulations of
the more restricted district.
(b) Side yard. No side yard shall be required for a retail, commercial or manufacturing use, except:
(1) On the side of a lot adjoining a single-family, two-family, or Apartment District and not
separated therefrom by an alley, there shall be a side yard of ten feet or ten percent of the average
width of the lot whichever is smaller, but a side yard shall not be less than five feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 646/720
(2) For a single-family, two-family or a multiple-family dwelling use, a side yard shall be required
on each side of the lot. The minimum width of the side yard shall be ten feet or ten percent of the
average width of the lot, whichever is smaller, but a side yard shall not be less than five feet, except
side adjacent to side street shall not be less than ten feet.
(c) Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required for a retail, commercial or manufacturing use, except where a lot
abuts single-family, duplex, or Apartment District in which event there shall be a rear yard on the rear of the lot
equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot but in no case shall a required rear yard be less than ten feet in depth
and the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet. No rear yard shall be required where the retail,
commercial, or manufacturing use is separated from the residential district by an alley. For a single-family, twofamily,
or multiple-family dwelling use, there shall be a rear yard on the rear of the lot equal to 20 percent of the
depth of the lot, but the rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Area of the lot. The minimum lot area requirements for a single-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwelling shall be the same as in the “A” District. Where dwelling facilities are provided above stores, the lot
area requirements shall be the same as those required for multiple-family dwellings in the Apartment District.
(e) Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be 60 feet for a single-family dwelling, two-family or
multiple-family dwelling use, for other uses, the width may be less than 60 feet.
(f) Parking regulations.
(1) The parking regulations for a single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings are the
same as those in the Apartment Multiple Dwelling District.
(2) The parking regulations for all local retail uses are the same as in the “LR” Local Retail
District.
(3) The parking regulations for commercial uses are the same as those in the “C” Commercial
District.
(4) Manufacturing, industrial, and processing establishments, repair shops, warehouses, storage
buildings, lumber and supply yards shall provide off-street parking space at a ratio of one space for
each five employees.
The maximum number of employees on duty at any time, day or night, shall be the basis
of determining parking requirements for any establishment. Where the number of
employees is indeterminate, off-street parking space shall be provided in a ratio of one
space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(5) Retail, office, service, industrial and manufacturing buildings shall provide and maintain offstreet
facilities for the loading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot and
adjacent to a public alley or private service drive to facilitate the movement of traffic on the public
streets. Such space shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 square feet
in the building or on the lot used for retail, storage or service purposes.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
(6) On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714. (Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
(g) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction
having exterior walls constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all
Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as
amended. (Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 647/720
Sec. 25.02.424–25.02.450 Reserved
Division 19. HM Heavy Manufacturing District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.451 Use regulations
In an “HM” District, no land shall be used and no building shall be used, erected or converted to any use other
than those listed below or those of a like and/or similar use:
Any use permitted in the “LM” Light Manufacturing District, no building shall be erected or
converted for dwelling purposes, provided, however, that dwelling quarters may be established
in connection with an industrial plant for watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises
and provided further any existing dwelling within any “HM” District may be repaired or
altered.
Abattoir.
Acetylene gas manufacture.
Acid manufacture.
Air products manufacture.
Aluminum manufacture.
Ammonia manufacture.
Asbestos products manufacture.
Ash dumps.
Asphalt manufacture, refining and storage.
Bag cleaning, where no dust filtering system is used.
Blast furnace.
Bleachery.
Bleaching powder manufacture.
Boiler works.
Bolt and nut manufacture.
Brass foundry.
Brick, pottery and tile manufacture other than making of handicraft products only.
Bronze manufacture.
Can manufacture.
Car manufacture.
Car wheel foundry.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 648/720
Carborudum manufacture.
Carriage and wagon manufacture.
Casein manufacture.
Cast iron pipe manufacture.
Casting foundry.
Cattle sheds and pens.
Caustic soda manufacture.
Cement manufacture.
Chalk manufacture.
Chlorine manufacture.
Clay products.
Concrete mixing and batching plant.
Concrete products manufacture.
Copper manufacturing.
Cordage mill.
Corrugated metal manufacture.
Crematory.
Creosote treatment and manufacturing.
Culvert manufacture.
Dextrine manufacture.
Dumping station.
Egg drying plant.
Emory cloth manufacture.
Engine manufacture.
Fat rendering.
Felt manufacturing.
Fertilizer manufacturing.
Forage works.
Foundry.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 649/720
Fur curing and tanning.
Furnace manufacturing.
Glass manufacture.
Glucose manufacture.
Glue and fertilizer manufacture.
Heating supplies and appliances manufacture.
Hide treating and tallow processing.
Hydrochloric acid and its derivatives manufacture.
Japanning and shellacking works.
Jute manufacturing.
Kalsomine manufacture.
Kerosene manufacture or storage.
Lard rendering.
Leather, curing or storage.
Linseed oil manufacture.
Lubricating oil manufacture.
Lumber mill.
Malleable casting manufacturing.
Marble working and finishing.
Meat packing plant and animal slaughtering.
Monument works.
Oil compounding and barrelling.
Oil refinery.
Oilcloth manufacture.
Oxygen gas manufacture.
Packing (meats, poultry) establishment.
Paint manufacture and mixing.
Paper and paper pulp manufacture.
Petroleum and petroleum products refining.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 650/720
Planing mill.
Plaster of Paris manufacture.
Rag treatment or manufactured products from rags.
Raw hides and skins, treatment and storage.
Reduction of ore, garbage, offal, etc.
Refining of crankcase oil.
Refuse dump.
Rug cleaning, if no dustproof cleaning room or dust filtering system is used.
Scrap metal reduction.
Shellac manufacture.
Smelting metals and metal ores.
Snuff manufacture.
Soap manufacture from vegetable and animal products.
Starch manufacture.
Steel mill.
Stockyards.
Stone crushing.
Storage of used lumber and used building materials.
Stove and range manufacture.
Tanning and curing of hides.
Tar products.
Terra cotta manufacture.
Varnish manufacture.
Waste paper products manufacture.
White lead manufacture.
Wood distillation, including manufacture of tar, charcoal, turpentine, and similar products.
Wood preserving treatment.
Any manufacturing or industrial process not heretofore listed and not prohibited by any other
law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 651/720
Accessory building and uses incident to the above.
(Ordinance 12-89, sec. 2d, adopted 9/14/89; Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
Sec. 25.02.452 Height regulations
No building shall exceed six standard stories in height unless set back from all lot lines or required yard lines
one foot for each one foot above such height limit. When a building is located on a lot adjoining a single-family,
two-family, or an apartment district, it shall not exceed three standard stories in height, unless it is set back one
foot from all required yard lines for each one foot of additional height above such height limit.
Sec. 25.02.453 Area regulations
(a) Front yard. No front yard shall be required for a commercial or manufacturing use unless:
(1) The street is less than 60 feet in width, in which case a manufacturing or commercial structure
shall be placed not less than 30 feet from the centerline of said street.
(2) The frontage of one side of a street within a block is partly in the “HM” District and partially in
a more restricted district, then the front yard shall conform to the front yard regulations of the more
restricted district.
(b) Side yard. No side yard shall be required for a retail, commercial, or manufacturing use, except on the side
of a lot adjoining a single-family, two-family, or Apartment District where there shall be a side yard having a
minimum width of ten feet or ten percent of the average width of the lot, whichever is smaller, but a side yard
shall not be less than five feet.
(c) Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required for a retail, commercial, or manufacturing use except where a lot
abuts a single-family, duplex, or Apartment District in which event there shall be a rear yard on the rear of the
lot equal to 20 percent of the depth of the lot, but in no case shall a required rear yard be less than ten feet in
depth or the required rear yard shall not be greater than 24 feet.
(d) Parking regulations.
(1) The parking regulations for all local retail uses are the same as in the “LR” Local Retail
District.
(2) The parking regulations for commercial uses are the same as those in the “C” Commercial
District.
(3) Manufacturing, industrial, and processing establishments, repair shops, warehouses, storage
buildings, lumber and supply yards shall provide off-street parking space at a ratio of one space for
each five employees. The maximum number of employees on duty at any time, day or night, shall be
the basis of determining parking requirements for any establishment. Where the number of
employees is indeterminate, off-street parking space shall be provided in a ratio of one space for each
1,000 square feet of floor area.
(4) Retail, offices, service, industrial and manufacturing buildings shall provide and maintain offstreet
facilities for the loading of merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot of
merchandise and goods within the building or on the lot [sic] adjacent to a public alley or private
service drive to facilitate the movement of traffic on the public streets. Such space shall consist of a
minimum area of ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 thousand square feet of floor space or fraction
thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet in the building or on the lot used for retail, storage, or service
purposes.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 652/720
(5) On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714. (Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
(e) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction
having exterior walls constructed of masonry materials as described in division 32, Regulations Applicable to all
Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building code, as amended, and fire code, as
amended. (Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 25.02.454–25.02.470 Reserved
Division 20. Reserved*
Secs. 25.02.471–25.02.500 Reserved
Division 21. Landscaping Requirements*
Sec. 25.02.501 Purpose
(a) Landscaping is accepted as adding value to property and is hereby declared to be in the interest of the
general welfare of the city. The provision of landscaped areas serves the following purposes:
(1) Reduces the amount of a development site that is devoted to impervious surface area;
(2) Reduces the amount and intensity of stormwater runoff;
(3) Reduces the presence of nonpoint pollutants in local waterways; and
(4) Generally improves the overall appearance of the city; and
(5) Provides enhanced economic and environmental systems for the public welfare.
(b) Landscaping is hereby required of new developments and certain types of redevelopments (as set forth in
section 2 below), and minimum landscape requirements for different types of development are as set forth
herein.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.502 Scope, exemptions and enforcement
(a) The standards and criteria contained within this article are deemed to be minimum standards and shall
apply to the following types of development:
(1) All new developments (i.e., on property that has never been developed);
(2) All redevelopments (i.e., on property that was previously developed, and the former building(s)
have been, or are planned to be, completely removed for reconstruction); and
(3) All development additions involving the expansion of an existing building and/or site that
exceeds 30 percent of the original building's floor area and/or that increases the size of the site/lot by
more than 30 percent of the site's/lot's original land area, except for single-family and two-family
homes per subsection 2(B)3. of this article.
(b) The following types of development shall be exempt from the required new landscaping provisions of this
article (but other general provisions of this article shall still apply, such as those for maintenance, visibility, etc.):
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 653/720
(1) A developed single-family attached, multifamily, or nonresidential lot of record that already has
an existing building(s) on it, provided that no redevelopment or building expansion is being sought;
(2) A developed single-family attached, multifamily, or nonresidential lot of record that already has
an existing building(s) on it that is to be expanded to no greater than 30 percent of the building(s)
original size, and which lot size is to be increased to no greater than 30 percent of the lot's original
size (i.e., both conditions must exist);
(3) A developed single-family detached or two-family lot of record that already has an existing
home constructed on said property.
(c) Any use requiring a special use permit (SUP) or a planned development (PD) zoning designation must
comply with these landscape standards unless special landscaping standards are otherwise provided for in the
ordinance establishing the SUP or PD district.
(d) The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his/her designee. If
at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the approved landscaping is found to be not in
conformance with the standards and criteria of this article, the city manager (or his/her designee) shall issue
notice to the owner, citing the violation and describing what action is required to comply with this article. The
owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 calendar days from date of said notice to establish/restore the landscaping,
as required. If the landscaping is not established and/or restored within the allotted time, then such person shall
be in violation of this article and revocation of any occupancy or use permitted under the comprehensive zoning
ordinance.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.503 Permits
For applicable development (see section 2 above), a detailed landscape plan (see section 4 below) shall be
submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission, along with the site plan review and approval
process (see division 23 of the zoning ordinance for site plan approval process), before any permit shall be
issued for building, paving, grading or site construction. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
any building or structure, all required screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the
approved landscape plan. (Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.504 Landscape plan
(a) For applicable development (see section 2 above), a detailed landscape plan shall be submitted and
approved by the planning and zoning commission, along with the site plan review and approval process (see
division 23 of the zoning ordinance for site plan approval process). The landscape plan may be shown on the site
plan (provided the site plan remains clear and legible) or may be drawn on a separate sheet. The planning and
zoning commission shall review the landscape plan and shall approve same if the plan is in accordance with this
article, and with the stated purpose and intent of this article. If the plan is not in conformance, it shall be
disapproved and the minutes of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which the plan was disapproved
shall state the reasons for denial of the plan.
(b) Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a person knowledgeable in plant material usage and landscape
design (e.g., landscape architect, landscape contractor, landscape designer, etc.), and they shall be sealed by a
licensed landscape architect.
(c) Landscaping plans shall contain the following minimum information:
(1) Minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet; show scale in both written and graphic form.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 654/720
(2) Location of all plant and landscaping material to be used, including plants, paving, benches,
screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, ponds (to include depth of water), topography of site, or
other landscape features. Also show the proposed site plan layout of all proposed buildings, paved
areas, sidewalks, and any other impervious surfaces, as well as a table showing how much of the total
site area is devoted to pervious vs. impervious surface area (as a percentage of total site area).
(3) Species and common names, container size, planted height, and spacing of all plant materials to
be used.
(4) Notes indicating 100 percent coverage of all required landscaped areas with an automatic,
underground irrigation system with freeze and moisture sensors (a generalized layout and description
of the irrigation system, including location of water sources, shall also be shown to ensure 100%
coverage of landscaped areas).
(5) Description of maintenance provisions.
(6) Name, address, phone number, seal and signature of the landscape architect who sealed or
signed the landscape plan.
(7) North arrow/symbol, and a location map showing where the property is located.
(8) Date of the landscape plan (and any plan revision dates, as applicable).
(9) Location, size, height, species and physical condition of any and all existing trees on the site
having a caliper size of eight inches or greater (including plan view outline of extent of the canopy
coverage of existing trees or stands of trees, including existing tree canopies on adjacent property that
are located within 50 feet of the site), and must show which trees will be removed during or due to
construction. Show distance of all preserved trees from any paving, buildings, walls, utilities,
sidewalks or other impervious surface area (minimum five-foot separation required for preserved
existing trees from all of these elements).
(10) Proposed strategies for tree preservation for any existing trees that will be preserved (showing
individual trees or tree masses that will be preserved, and the techniques that will be used to protect
them during construction).
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.505 Alternative landscape plan; revised landscape plan
(a) Alternative landscape plan. The planning and zoning commission may approve an alternative landscape
plan that modifies the minimum requirements of Sections 7 and 8 of this article if it finds that the alternative
landscaping proposed meets all of the following criteria,:
(1) It is sufficient to meet the spirit and intent of Section 7 or Section 8 (whichever is applicable to
that type of development);
(2) It better serves a legitimate “public good” purpose (such as better screening or buffering
between uses, increased opportunity to preserve valuable existing trees, etc.);
(3) It grants relief for a property owner in unusual circumstances (such as reconstruction of a
building that has been destroyed); and
(4) It will produce no adverse effect on neighboring properties, and it will create no inequity for
similarly zoned properties within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 655/720
(b) Revised landscape plan. Changes to the originally approved landscape layout will require submission and
city review and approval of a revised landscape plan for the property. A revised landscape plan shall be prepared
in the same manner, and showing the same information, as an original landscape plan (see section 4). A properly
submitted revised landscape plan shall be reviewed by city staff for conformance with this article, and shall be
scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission unless the changes are very minor in nature
(see subsection 1 below) in which case the plan may qualify for administrative approval by city staff.
(1) If the proposed changes to the original landscape layout are very minor in nature and do not
reduce the total lot coverage of landscaping, then the revised landscape plan may be approved by the
city manager, or his/her designee, upon a finding that the revised plan complies with this article, and
that it is in substantial conformance with, and does not conflict with, the originally approved
landscape plan for the property. If the city manager, or his/her designee, refuse to approve the revised
landscape plan for any reason, then the revised plan shall be scheduled for consideration on the next
available planning and zoning commission agenda if the applicant submits a written request to the
city for such consideration. In order to qualify for city staff approval (in lieu of approval by the
planning and zoning commission), the proposed changes must be minor in nature, such as: a) to
correct an inadvertent error on the originally approved landscape plan that does not significantly
affect the quantity of landscaping; b) to make minor adjustments to landscape layout due to minor
site plan layout changes or other city-approved changes during construction; c) to make minor
adjustments to types of plant materials, such as if a material is not readily available at the time of
planting or some other unforeseen eventuality; etc.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.506 General standards
The following criteria and standards shall apply to all landscape materials and installation:
(1) All required landscaped open areas shall be completely covered with living plant material.
Landscaping materials such as wood chips and gravel may be used under trees, shrubs and other
plants, but shall not comprise a significant portion of the total landscaped area. Any additional
landscaped (i.e., pervious) areas that are in excess of the required landscaped area shall also be
covered with living plant material, such as turf grass or other ground cover (i.e., shall be
“greenscaped” rather than being covered with gravel or other unattractive surfacing).
(2) Plant materials permitted under this article shall conform to the standards of the Approved
Plant List for the city (see section 12 of this article) and the current edition of the “American
Standard for Nursery Stock” (as amended), published by the American Association of Nurserymen.
Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and
insects.
(3) Large shade trees (see “large trees” in section 12, approved plant list) shall be a minimum of
three inches in caliper (measured 12 inches above the ground) and seven feet in planted height at time
of planting. Small ornamental trees (see “small trees” in section 12, approved plant list) shall be a
minimum of one and one-half inch in caliper (measured six inches above the ground) and five feet in
planted height at time of planting.
(4) Shrubs that are not of a “dwarf” variety shall be a minimum of two feet in planted height at
time of planting. Hedges or shrub massings, where installed for screening purposes, shall be planted
and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which will be six feet high
within three years after time of planting (except for parking lot/headlight screens, which shall form a
continuous, solid visual screen three feet high within two years after planting). Shrubs that are of a
“dwarf” or “miniature” variety shall be a minimum of one foot in planted height at time of planting
unless that particular variety and size of shrub is typically less than one foot in planted height in this
portion of North Central Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 656/720
(5) Vines that are not intended as ground covers shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in height (i.e.,
vine length) immediately after planting, and they may be used in conjunction with decorative fences,
screens or walls to meet landscape screening requirements if such strategy is approved by the
planning and zoning commission on the site plan and landscape plan.
(6) Proposed grass areas for new developments, and for the redevelopment of a property that is
subject to this article (see section 2), shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched and/or
seeded, except that solid sod Bermuda turf grass (or other good coverage evergreen ground cover, if
approved on the landscape plan) shall be used in all street and alley rights-of-way (i.e., the “parkway”
area between the property line and the street curb or alley paving, and including all street rights-ofway
in front of a development site), in swales, earthen berms or other areas subject to erosion and for
areas that will be subject to high foot traffic. The requirement to use solid sod shall be limited to
those areas where the surface soil is disturbed during the development (or redevelopment) of the
property, and shall not apply in the case of a single-family residence where the soil surface is not
disturbed in the street right-of-way.
(7) All turf and ground cover areas shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished
appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one (1) year of planting.
(8) All required landscaped areas shall be equipped with, and 100 percent covered by, an
automatic, underground irrigation system with freeze and moisture sensors to prevent watering at
inappropriate times. If appropriate and attractive xeriscape planting techniques are utilized (these
techniques are encouraged by the city, if designed and maintained appropriately), the planning and
zoning commission may waive the requirement for an underground irrigation system, and may accept
an alternative irrigation system/device, at the time of site plan and landscape plan approval.
Irrigation facilities within medians or adjacent to curbs shall be designed and installed
with low gallonage and low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into
the street. Freeze and moisture sensors will be placed in each controller to prevent
irrigation systems from activating during freezing weather (creating unsafe spillage and
ice on roads and/or sidewalks) and during other inappropriate times, such as rainy periods,
when use of irrigation water is wasteful and not necessary.
(9) All landscaping (including xeriscape landscaping) areas shall be protected by a six-inch
monolithic concrete curb (or by wheel stops or other appropriate landscaping device, if such is
approved by the planning and zoning commission on the landscape plan), and all landscaping areas
shall be maintained in a healthy, living, growing and thriving condition. All landscaped and open
space areas, including parking lots, shall be kept free of trash, litter and other similar debris.
(10) No irrigation devices shall be visible from public streets or walkways (except for underground
irrigation systems whose sprinkler heads are designed to “pop up” during use, and to lower back into
the ground after they turn off). Underground systems which are designed to irrigate portions of public
right-of-way and street parkways (such as between sidewalks and the street curb) shall be designed
such that main irrigation water lines are at least three feet away from the street curb (single sprinkler
head serving lateral lines shall “T” out from the main line toward the street curb - this minimizes
damage to the irrigation system if a vehicle jumps the curb into the parkway area).
(11) Earthen berms shall have side slopes not to exceed 33.3 percent (3:1 slope; three feet of
horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical height). All berms shall include necessary drainage
provisions, including any necessary erosion prevention measures, as may be required by the city's
engineer.
(12) All existing trees which are to be preserved (also see section 9 or [of] this article) shall be
provided with undisturbed, permeable surface area under (and extending outward to) the existing
dripline of the tree. All new trees shall be provided with permeable surface area under the dripline
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 657/720
that is a minimum diameter of five feet around the trunk of every tree. No paving or impervious
surface material may be placed closer than five feet from the trunk of any tree (unless otherwise
approved by the planning and zoning commission on the landscape plan, and provided that
appropriate root barriers or other root containment techniques are used to prevent long-term damage
to paving, particularly sidewalks, by root growth and spreading).
(13) All trees shall be maintained by the property owner (or by the immediately adjacent property
owner where trees are located within public right-of-way) such that they are “limbed up” to allow a
clear height of at least seven feet over all sidewalks and other pedestrian pathways, and a clear height
of at least 14 feet over all streets, drive aisles and other vehicular trafficways.
(14) All trees and landscape materials that are planted as required in this article (from the city's
approved plant list, section 12) shall be installed by someone who is knowledgeable in the
installation of landscaping materials, and shall be covered by a minimum two-year warranty against
health problems, disease, pests, decline and loss due to death of the trees or landscape materials
(except for seasonal plantings which require regular change-outs). The required two-year warranty
shall not apply to the trees required on individual single-family lots. It is the property owner's
responsibility to ensure that all trees and landscape materials continue to be maintained in a healthy,
living, growing and thriving condition. Property owners may be required to replace trees and
landscape materials which are not healthy or which have died.
(15) Only small ornamental trees, shrubs and groundcovers (i.e., no large shade trees) shall be
planted under existing or proposed overhead utility lines or within any water, sanitary sewer, storm
drainage or utility easement (unless such placement is approved by the city's engineer, and by the
planning and zoning commission on the landscape plan).
(16) Necessary driveways from public rights-of-way shall be permitted through all required
landscaping, provided that such driveways are approved on the site plan (and by any other
appropriate entity other than the city, such as TxDOT), and provided that such driveways are paved
and installed in accordance with city (and other applicable entities') regulations.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.507 Minimum landscaping requirements for nonresidential and multifamily developments
(a) Street yard/site landscaping: For all nonresidential and multifamily developments (including schools,
churches, day care facilities, and other similar uses in a residential district, and also including manufactured
home and single-family attached developments), at least 20 percent of the street yard shall be permanently
landscaped area. The street yard shall be defined as the area between the building front and the front property
line (which is not necessarily the front street right-of-way line if lots are platted between the building front and
the street itself).
(1) Corner lots fronting two streets shall provide the appropriate required street yard landscaping
on both street sides, and a minimum 100-square-foot landscaped area shall be provided at the street
intersection corner, which shall be in addition to (i.e., shall not be counted toward) the 20 percent
street yard landscaping requirement and in addition to the required street frontage landscape buffer
(see below).
(b) Street frontage landscape buffer: A minimum ten-foot landscape buffer strip adjacent to the right-of-way
of any major or minor thoroughfare (Type B or larger) shall be required. All other street frontages (smaller than
Type B) shall observe a minimum five-foot landscape buffer.
(1) Corner lots fronting two streets shall provide the appropriate required landscape buffer on both
street frontages (i.e., ten feet on any Type A or B thoroughfare frontage, and five feet on any other
smaller street frontage).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 658/720
(2) The landscaped buffer area may be included in the required street yard landscape area
percentage.
(3) One (1) large shade tree shall be required per 40 linear feet (or portion thereof) of street
frontage, and required trees shall be placed within the landscape buffer area unless otherwise
approved by the planning and zoning commission on the landscape plan. Trees should be grouped or
clustered (rather than “soldiers-in-a-row”) to facilitate site design and to provide an aesthetically
pleasing, natural looking planting arrangement.
(c) Building foundation landscaping: A minimum three-foot-wide landscaped area shall be required around
the perimeter of the building(s)'s foundation, except where sidewalks enter and where loading docks, fire lanes
or patios abut (i.e., patios attached to the main foundation) the building(s). The building foundation landscaping
shall be comprised of and planted with trees, shrubs and ground cover materials (i.e., not just turf grass). The
building foundation landscaping area on street side(s) of the building may be included in the required street yard
landscape area percentage.
(d) Interior parking lot landscaping: Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be pervious surface area and
shall be at least 50 square feet (or the equivalent of one parking space) in size, with no curbs or paving closer
than five feet to the trunk of any tree. Landscape islands having no trees shall be no less than five feet wide. The
portions of parking lots and truck maneuvering areas that are screened from public view, and that are located
completely behind the main building, and that are farther that 100 feet from any public street right-of-way line,
shall not be required to provide interior parking lot landscaping islands or trees as required in subsections 7(D)1.
and 7(D)2. below.
(1) The total area covered by pervious landscape islands shall equal a total of at least 16 square feet
per parking space.
(2) There shall be a minimum of one large shade tree planted on an interior landscaped island
within the parking lot for every ten parking spaces (or portion thereof). There shall be a landscaped
island with at least one large shade tree within 60 feet of every parking space (i.e., evenly distributed
throughout the parking area). A landscape island shall be located at the terminus of all parking rows,
and shall contain at least one large shade tree.
(3) All parking lots located within 100 feet of a public street shall be screened from view by a
minimum three-foot-tall continuous parking lot/headlight screen comprised of low-maintenance
evergreen shrubs (from the city's approved plant list, see section 12), berms, retaining walls, or a
combination of these materials (except where driveways, sidewalk accessways, or visibility clips are
located). Shrubs used for parking lot/headlight screening shall be planted such that they will form a
continuous, solid visual screen of at least three feet high within two years after planting.
(4) Within parking lots, landscape areas should be located to define parking areas, to assist in
clarifying appropriate traffic and pedestrian circulation patterns, and/or to accommodate the
preservation of existing trees. Where existing trees on a site are being preserved, the planning and
zoning commission may authorize a special exception, or an alternative design layout, for any
parking lot landscaping requirement above provided that such exception or alternative design is
necessary to allow the preservation, and long-term protection, of desirable existing trees on the site.
(5) The total required area of interior parking lot landscaping islands shall be in addition to (i.e.,
not included as part of) the required street yard landscape area percentage.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.508 Minimum landscaping requirements for single-family and two-family developments only
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 659/720
(a) For single-family detached and two-family developments only, each residential lot shall be planted with at
least one of the following combinations of trees (all required trees shall be from the Approved Plant List, section
12):
Option # Front Yard Back Yard
Option #1 1 large tree (3" min.) 2 large trees (3" min.)
Option #2 1 large tree (4" min.) 2 small ornamental trees
Option #3 1 large tree (3" min.) and
1 small ornamental tree
2 small ornamental trees
Option #4 1 large tree (3" min.) and
1 small ornamental tree
1 large tree (3" min.) and
1 small ornamental tree
Option #5 2 large trees (3" min.) 2 small ornamental trees
(b) Single-family attached (i.e., townhome) developments shall provide at least one (1) small ornamental tree
in the front yard, and at least one (1) large shade tree (three-inch minimum caliper) in the back yard, of each
townhome lot.
(c) Trees, except very small ornamental trees, shall not be planted between the street curb and the sidewalk
(due to maintenance issues) unless otherwise specifically approved as part of a Planned Development (PD).
(d) Entryway landscaping into a residential subdivision shall be placed on private property (i.e., not within
public right-of-way) and within an easement that is dedicated to an official homeowners' association for longterm
maintenance.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.509 Sight distance and visibility
(a) Rigid compliance with the city's zoning and other development regulations shall not be such as to cause
visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at intersections. Whenever an intersection of two (2) or more public
rights-of-way occurs, a triangular visibility area, as described below, shall be created. Landscaping and other
structures (including walls, fences, signs, art objects, etc.) within the triangular visibility area shall be designed
to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and eight feet. Trees may be permitted in
this area provided they are trimmed (i.e., “limbed-up”) in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the
cross-visibility area. The triangular areas shall be defined as:
(1) The areas on both sides of the intersection of two alleys or of an alley and a public street rightof-
way shall have a triangular visibility area with two sides of each triangle being a minimum of ten
feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the
other two sides.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 660/720
(2) The areas located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public street rights-ofway
(or a private driveway onto a public street) shall have a triangular visibility area with two sides
of each triangle being a minimum of 25 feet in length along the right-of-way lines (or along the
driveway curbline and the street right-of-way line) from the point of the intersection and the third
side being a line connecting the ends of the other two sides.
(b) No signs, fences, walls, art objects or landscaping (except for required grass and low ground cover) shall
be located closer than three feet from the edge of any street pavement.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.510 Maintenance
The owner, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all
landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall
include, but not to be limited to, mowing (of grass six inches or higher), edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering,
weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept
free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such material or plants that are not a part of the landscaping. All plant
materials shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year.
Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size, within 90 calendar
days. Trees with a trunk diameter in excess of six inches measured 24 inches above the ground may be replaced
with ones of similar variety having a trunk diameter of no less than three inches measured 24 inches above the
ground on a caliper-inch for caliper-inch basis (e.g., for a six-inch tree, two three-inch replacement trees shall be
required). A time extension may be granted by the city manager, or his/her designee, if substantial evidence is
presented to indicate abnormal circumstances beyond the control of the owner or his/her agent.
Failure to maintain any landscaped area in compliance with this article is considered a violation of this article
and may be subject to penalties of an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.511 Landscaping of dedicated streets, medians and other public rights-of-way
(a) General provisions. All unpaved street medians and parkways (areas along roads, within the right-of-way)
shall be prepared with a minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil, and then solid-sodded (e.g. Bermuda grass in
irrigated areas and low-maintenance buffalo grass in un-irrigated areas). In addition, one large shade tree, from
the city's approved plant list (see section 12 of this article), per 500 square feet of landscaping shall be provided
within all street medians. The location of all trees shall be coordinated with the city to avoid conflict with any
utilities within the medians and traffic movement. These landscape areas shall be maintained by the developer or
other entity (such as the owner of adjacent property, and properly formed homeowners' or property owners'
association, etc.) until adequate coverage is attained at a maintenance level compatible with like areas in other
parts of the city, unless other contractual arrangements are made between the developer (or other entity) and the
city (the city will assume responsibility after one year - this allows the landscaping materials to go through a full
cycle of seasonal change). Water stub-outs or curb stops will be placed at unpaved medians established by the
city. Special features, such as signage and ornamental landscaping or objects for entrance features, shall be
placed entirely upon private property and shall be maintained by the developer or other entity with a properly
established maintenance easement. Landscape plans for any landscaping, beautification or tree planting in street
medians and parkways shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to construction and planting in
accordance with section 4 of this article. All water usage shall be metered to a private individual or maintenance
entity that is approved by the city (such as a homeowners' or property owners' association). Within medians, no
plantings or irrigation facilities shall be permitted within areas of less than five feet in width. All such areas (i.e.,
portions of medians that are less than five feet wide) shall be covered with stamped concrete median pavers
tinted to look like red brick, in accordance with city design standards and with prior city approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 661/720
(b) Submittal of plans. Any developer or other entity desiring to install or maintain landscaping materials,
beautification elements, or irrigation facilities in any portion of a public street, median or other right-of-way
shall submit to the city complete plans for any and all proposed improvements prior to constructing or installing
any of these improvements in accordance with the city's site plan and landscape plan review procedures. The
plans shall include the following:
(1) A scale drawing (one inch = 40 feet) clearly indicating the location, type, size and description
of all proposed landscape materials and existing utilities. Planting design of materials must be
submitted to ensure adequate coverage.
(2) The name of the subdivision or addition, and the name and address of the developer and of the
city-approved individual or entity that will be responsible for maintenance of the improvements.
(3) A north arrow, scale and date of plan preparation.
(4) A clear indication of the configuration, location, type and size of all irrigation, piping, heads
and controllers, including the name, address and license seal of the irrigation designer.
(5) Such other information reasonably deemed necessary by the city.
(c) Review and approval by the city. The city shall review and approve or deny the submitted plans (in
accordance with the city's normal site plan and landscape plan review procedures), and shall have the right to
require revisions to the plans, as necessary, in order to ensure protection of public health, safety and welfare.
Any installation of landscape or beautification materials or irrigation facilities shall be in full compliance with
the plans and specifications as approved by the city.
(d) Agreement. The developer (or other entity) desiring to provide, install or maintain landscaping or
irrigation facilities in a public street, median or right-of-way must first enter into and execute a “median and
right-of-way landscaping and irrigation agreement” with the city, according to the rules and regulations as set
forth herein (hereinafter called “agreement”). The city manager (or his/her designee) is authorized to execute the
agreement on behalf of the city. With the execution of this agreement, the developer (or other entity) shall
provide a performance bond signed by the developer (or other entity) and a surety acceptable to the city, in the
total amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements. The performance bond shall ensure that the
work is preformed by the developer (or other entity) in conformity with the covenants, conditions and
agreements contained in the agreement.
In accordance with state law for public improvement projects, the city manager (or his/her designee) may require
the developer (or other entity) to also provide the city with a cash escrow to the city for ten percent of the total
cost of the proposed improvements prior to approval of the plans. In order to defray future costs of replacement
landscaping and irrigation that may be incurred by the city, the city manager (or his/her designee) may also
require such other terms and conditions in the agreement he/she deems are reasonably necessary to ensure the
proper installation and long-term maintenance of all landscaping and irrigation facilities.
(e) Landscape and irrigation criteria. In areas that will be maintained by the city, all landscape and irrigation
materials to be used by the developer (or other entity) shall be designed to conserve water and be of low
maintenance. All landscape and irrigation improvements shall conform to the requirements of the city governing
sight distance for traffic safety and other ordinances of the city.
All planting must be approved by the city. All plant types will be clearly shown on the landscape and irrigation
plans that are submitted to the city for review and approval.
The developer (or other entity) shall furnish, or cause to be furnished at its sole expense, all labor, equipment,
accessories, and services necessary to install all landscaping materials and irrigation facilities in accordance with
the plans as approved by the city. All installation will be inspected by the city, and any incorrectly,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 662/720
inappropriately or unapproved installed elements shall be corrected or removed by the developer (or other entity)
as directed by the city.
Irrigation equipment shall be installed in accordance with subsection 6(H) of this article.
(f) Maintenance requirement. The developer (or other long-term maintenance entity such as a homeowners' or
property owners' association), at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished all labor, materials,
equipment, accessories, and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become
damaged or die.
In residential developments, the developer shall maintain all landscaping and irrigation materials and equipment
until at least 90 percent of the lots have been sold and homes been constructed. If, after development, less than
90 percent of the lots in the residential subdivision have building permits issued for the construction and the
certificates of occupancy (COs) have been received for homes thereon, then in such event, the developer's
maintenance responsibilities shall continue until such 90 percent issuance is realized. With approval by the city,
the developer may then relinquish maintenance responsibility to a viable homeowners' association that has been
established and approved by the city.
In commercial developments, the developer, commercial property owners' association, or abutting property
owners shall permanently maintain all landscape and irrigation materials installed in public streets, medians or
other right(s)-of-way (per agreement with the city).
When a homeowners' association or commercial property owners' association, or other entity, is created for the
responsibility of maintaining any areas landscaped under the “median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation
agreement”, association documents shall be submitted for review and approval by city staff and the city council.
Upon installation, all landscape and irrigation materials within medians or right(s)-of-way shall become property
of the city.
city shall periodically inspect the areas landscaped under the “median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation
agreement”, to determine that such areas are being properly maintained by the developer, or other city-approved
entity. If the city finds that the developer or other responsible entity is not properly maintaining such areas, the
city shall notify the developer or other responsible entity in writing, specifying the deficiencies. If the developer
or responsible entity does not remedy such deficiencies within fifteen (15) calendar days following receipt of
such notice, the city shall have the option of performing the necessary maintenance work itself and bill the
developer or other responsible entity for all costs for such maintenance.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Sec. 25.02.512 Approved plant list
Large Trees (within parking areas or as street trees):
Texas Ash (Fraxinus texensis)
White Ash (Fraxinus americana)
Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum)
Pond Cypress (Taxodium mucronatum)
American Elm (Ulmus americana) (Existing specimens are to be preserved since they are
among Seagoville's largest native shade trees, but not recommended for planting.)
Lacebark Elm (Ulmus parvifolia)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 663/720
Cedar Elm (Ulmus crassifolia) (Avoid Winged Elm (Ulmus alata), which is similar but not
adapted.)
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)
Chinquapin Oak (Quercus muehlenbergii)
Live Oak (Quercus virginiana)
Shumard Oak (Quercus shumardii)
Chinese Pistache (Pistacia chinensis)
Black Hickory (Carya texana)
Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana)
Large Trees (best in nonvehicular areas):
Arizona Cypress (Cupressus glabra)
Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora)
Bur Oak (Quercus macrocarpa)
Pecan (Carya illinoiensis)
Common Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana)
Western Soapberry (Sapindus Drummondii)
Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua)
Thornless Honey Locust (Gleditsia triacanthos v. inermis)
Small Trees:
Eve's Necklace (Sophora affinis)
Possumhaw/Deciduous Holly (Ilex decidua)
Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria)
Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica)
Southern Wax Myrtle (Myrica cerifera)
Lacey Oak (Quercus glaucoides)
Vasey Oak (Quercus pungens var. vaseyi)
Aristocrat Pear (Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat') (Avoid Bradford Pear (P. c. ‘Bradford').)
Eldarica Pine (Pinus eldarica)
Mexican Plum (Prunus mexicana)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 664/720
Golden Rain Tree (Koelreuteria paniculata)
Redbud (Cercis canadensis)
Prairie Flameleaf Sumac (Rhus lanceolata)
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum (Viburnum rufidulum)
Desert Willow (Chilopsis linearis)
Carolina Buckthorn (Rhamnus caroliniana)
Mexican Buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa)
Evergreen Shrubs: (acceptable for low (5 feet or less) screening)
Dwarf Abelia (Abelia grandiflora “Edward Goucher”)
Japanese Boxwood (Buxus microphylla var. japonica)
Berries Jubilee Holly (Ilex cornuta “Berries Jubilee”)
Carissa Holly (Ilex cornuta “Carissa”)
Dazzler Holly (Ilex cornuta “Dazzler”)
Dwarf Burford Holly (Ilex cornuta “Dwarf Burford”)
Dwarf hinese Holly (Ilex cornuta “Rotunda”)
Dwarf Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria “Nana”)
Nandina (Nandina domestica)
Evergreen Shrubs (acceptable for minimum six-foot screening)
Glossy Abelia (Abelia grandiflora)
Cleyera (Ternstroemia gymnanthera)
Burford Holly (Ilex cornuta “Burford”)
Chinese Horned Holly (Ilex cornuta)
Needlepoint Holly (Ilex cornuta “Needlepoint”)
Large Evergreen Shrubs/Small Trees (for screening over six-foot tall):
Leyland Cypress (Cupressocyparis leylandii) (30-40') (There may be problems with fungus -
use sparingly)
Nellie R. Stevens Holly (Ilex cornuta “Nellie R. Stevens”) (10-15')
Cherry Laurel (Prunus caroliniana) (12-20')
Glossy Ligustrum (Ligustrum lucidum) (20-25')
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 665/720
Little Gem Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora “Little Gem”) (to 20')
Chinese Photinia (Photinia serrulata) (12-20') (Avoid Red-Tip Photinia (P. x fraseri))
Elaeagnus pungens “Fruitlandii”
Mary Nell Holly (Ilex cornuta x latifolia “Mary Nell”)
Other Shrubs:
Barberry (Berberis spp.)
American Beautyberry (Callicarpa americana)
Indian Hawthorn (Raphiolepis indica) (May be prone to freezing in this area - use sparingly)
Harbour Dwarf Nandina (Nandina domestica “Harbour Dwarf”)
Wilson Holly (Ilex x altaclarensis “Wilsonii”)
Savannah Holly (Ilex “Savannah”) (Requires acidic soil - use sparingly)
Rose-of-Sharon (Hibiscus syriacus) (Not very drought tolerant in this area - use sparingly)
Autumn Sage (Salvia gregii)
St. Johnswort (Hypericum patulum “Henryi”)
Spiraea spp.
Chastetree (Vitex agnus-castus)
Juniper (Juniperus spp.)
Loropetalum
Possumhaw/Deciduous Holly (Ilex decidua)
Prairie Flameleaf Sumac (Rhus lanceolata)
Evergreen Sumac (Rhus virens) (Tends to get very thin as it gets taller - use sparingly, and not
for screening)
Ground Covers:
Purpleleaf Honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica “Purpurea”)
English Ivy (Hedera helix) (shade only)
Asian Jasmine (Trachaelospermum asiaticum)
Trailing Juniper (Juniperus spp.)
Mondograss (Ophiopogon spp.)
Vinca minor (Avoid V. major.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 666/720
Liriope muscari (Avoid L. spicata.)
Hardy Plumbago (Ceratostigma plumbaginoides)
Notes: Other native or locally adapted plant materials that are proved to be durable, long-lived and low
maintenance in the Seagoville area (and as may be designated as viable xeriscape materials in “Landscape Water
Conservation ... Xeriscape”, published by the Texas Agricultural Extension Service) may be approved as
qualifying “approved plants” on the project's landscape plan which is processed during site plan and plat
approval for the project.
(Ordinance 08-05, sec. 1, adopted 4/7/05)
Secs. 25.02.513–25.02.530 Reserved
Division 22. PD Planned Development District Regulations*
Sec. 25.02.531 General purpose and description
(a) The city council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendation
from the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the creation of a Planned Development (PD) overlay
district.
(b) The Planned Development (PD) District is a district which accommodates planned associations of uses
developed as integral land use units such as office parks, retail/commercial or service centers, shopping centers,
residential developments having a mixture of housing options (e.g., single-family, multifamily, duplex, etc.), or
any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units
either by a single owner or a combination of owners. A Planned Development district may be used to permit
new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this article, to ensure the
compatibility of land uses, and to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the
community by meeting one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To provide for a superior design on [of] lots or buildings;
(2) To provide for increased recreation and open space opportunities for public use and enjoyment;
(3) To provide amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or to the
overall community;
(4) To protect or preserve natural amenities and environmental assets such as trees, creeks, ponds,
floodplains, slopes, viewscapes, or wildlife habitats;
(5) To protect or preserve existing historical buildings, structures, features or places;
(6) To provide an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to
provide adequate supporting public facilities and services; and
(7) To meet or exceed the standards of this article.
(c) While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that would not otherwise allow
the development to occur, procedures are established herein to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.532 Permitted uses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 667/720
(a) An application for a PD district shall specify the base zoning district(s) upon which the PD is based, and
the use or the combination of uses proposed (particularly if any of the proposed uses are not allowed by right in
the base zoning district). PD designations shall not be attached to SUP requirements. Specific use permits
allowed in a base zoning district(s) are allowed in a PD only if specifically identified as allowable by SUP at the
time of PD approval, and if specifically cited as an “additional use” (i.e., to those allowed by right in the PD) in
the ordinance establishing the PD. Any use that is not specifically cited as permitted (by right or by SUP) in the
applicable base zoning district(s) or the PD ordinance shall be prohibited unless the PD ordinance is amended
using the procedures set forth in this article and in division 36 of the zoning ordinance.
(b) In the case of residential PD districts, the proposed lot sizes shall be no smaller than the lot sizes allowed
in the base zoning district for each type of housing (e.g., single-family, duplex, etc.) except for minor changes in
a small percentage of the lots in order to provide improved design, or to provide flexibility in the layout of the
subdivision or diversity in lot size choices.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.533 Planned development requirements
(a) Any development requirements for a particular PD district that deviate from those of the base zoning
district(s) shall be set forth in the amending ordinance granting the PD district. These shall include, but may not
be limited to: allowed or additional (i.e., SUP) uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and
widths, building height and size, building exterior construction, lot coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access,
screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, project phasing or scheduling, property management
associations, and other requirements as the city council and planning and zoning commission may deem
appropriate.
(b) In the PD district, uses and development standards shall conform to the standards and regulations of the
base zoning district(s) unless specifically stated otherwise in the PD ordinance. The base zoning district(s) shall
be stated in the PD granting ordinance. All applications to the city shall list all requested deviations from the
standard requirements for the base zoning district(s) as set forth throughout the zoning ordinance as applicable to
each base zoning district (applications without this list will be considered incomplete). The PD district shall
conform to all other regulations of the applicable base zoning district(s), as well as all other applicable
regulations of the zoning ordinance, unless specifically changed or excluded in the ordinance establishing the
PD. A PD that is based upon more than one base zoning district shall also include a legal (i.e., metes and
bounds) description and graphic exhibit describing/showing the proposed boundaries of each respective area and
its base zoning district (e.g., shown as “Proposed PD-R-2”, “Proposed PD-LR”, etc.).
(c) The ordinance granting a PD district shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD
district granted therein, as well as a general statement citing the reason for the PD request.
(d) The minimum acreage for a planned development request shall be as follows:
(1) Residential development (R-1 through 5, D or TH): 20 contiguous acres.
(2) Multifamily development (A or MHP): Ten contiguous acres.
(3) Nonresidential development (O, LR, C, LM, HM, H/O): Ten (10) contiguous acres.
(4) Mixed Use (residential and nonresidential): 30 contiguous acres.
(e) The minimum acreages for a planned development request cited in subsection D above may be reduced, or
waived altogether, by city council upon approval and adoption of the PD ordinance (with such acreage reduction
or waiver specifically cited in the PD ordinance) if the city council makes a finding that at least one of the
following special circumstances exist for a specific land parcel:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 668/720
(1) The property is located entirely, or at least 75 percent within, the Downtown Redevelopment
Overlay District;
(2) The property is located along U.S. 175, and has at least 200 feet of frontage along U.S. 175; or
(3) The property is surrounded on at least 75 percent of its perimeter by property that has already
been developed (i.e., has been final platted and has significant development improvements, such as
roads, utilities, storm drainage structures, fire lanes and hydrants, and other similar development
improvements, either under active construction or already completed on it).
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.534 Concept plan and site plan requirements for a PD
In establishing a planned development district in accordance with this article, the city council shall approve and
file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each PD district. To facilitate
understanding of the request during the review and public hearing process, the concurrent submission of a
concept plan shall be required along with the PD zoning application. A preliminary/construction plat may be
submitted in lieu of the concept plan for a single- or two-family PD (see the Subdivision Ordinance for
submission and other requirements) if the applicant prefers to do so, and if the applicant wishes to expend the
resources and funds necessary to prepare a complete preliminary/construction plat submission.
(1) Concept plan. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant at the time of the planned
development request. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the
proposed PD district in a graphic manner and, as may be required, supported by written
documentation of proposals and standards for development. The city may prepare application form(s)
that further describe and explain the following requirements:
(A) Residential PD concept plan. A concept plan shall be submitted with any residential PD
zoning request for a development comprised of single-family or two-family (duplex) dwellings
on individually platted lots, and shall show general uses, phasing of the development, access,
thoroughfares, alleys (if proposed), preliminary lot arrangements, proposed densities, proposed
screening, landscaped or private amenity areas, project scheduling, and other pertinent
development data. (See the Subdivision Ordinance for additional information on concept plan
submission as it relates to the platting of land.)
(i) For a single- or two-family PD (or portion of a PD) - A preliminary/construction plat
(see the Subdivision Ordinance) shall be submitted for approval within one year from the
approval date of the concept plan for all or some portion of the PD covered by the overall
PD concept plan. If a preliminary/construction plat is not submitted within one year, then
the PD concept plan shall expire in which case the property owner must submit a new
zoning application for approval of a new PD concept plan (along with a zoning
application to amend the PD ordinance and its accompanying concept plan) must be
submitted for review and approval, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
article, prior to preliminary/construction plat review/approval (and any subsequent
issuance of a building permit) for any portion of the PD district.
(B) Nonresidential or multifamily PD concept plan. A concept plan shall be submitted with
any nonresidential, multifamily, single-family attached, or manufactured (mobile) home PD
zoning request, and shall clearly show all pertinent aspects of the type and nature of the
proposed development. The concept plan shall show the types of use(s) proposed; access,
topography and boundaries of the PD area; existing physical features of the site; existing and
proposed streets, alleys, easements and lot lines; location of existing or proposed public
facilities; building heights and locations; parking areas and ratios; fire lanes; screening and
landscaped areas; project phasing and scheduling; and other pertinent development data to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 669/720
adequately describe the proposed development (see division 23 of the zoning ordinance for
concept plan requirements and procedures).
(i) For a nonresidential, multifamily, single-family attached, or manufactured (mobile)
home PD (or portion of a PD) - A detailed site plan shall be submitted for approval (in
accordance with subsection (2) below, and with division 23 of the zoning ordinance)
within one (1) year from the approval date of the concept plan for all or some portion of
the PD covered by the overall PD concept plan. If a detailed site plan is not submitted
within one (1) year, then the PD concept plan shall expire in which case the property
owner must submit a new zoning application for approval of a new PD concept plan
(along with a zoning application to amend the PD ordinance and its accompanying
concept plan) must be submitted for review and approval, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this article, prior to detailed site plan review/approval (and any
subsequent issuance of a building permit) for any nonresidential, multifamily, singlefamily
attached, or manufactured (mobile) home portion of the PD district.
(2) PD site plan (detailed). Submission and approval of the detailed PD site plan shall be in
accordance with division 23 of the zoning ordinance, and shall accompany an application for a
nonresidential, multifamily, single-family attached, or manufactured (mobile) home planned
development zoning if the applicant prefers to submit the detailed site plan in lieu of the required PD
concept plan. The detailed PD site plan will establish the final plans for development of the planned
development district (or any portion thereof), and it shall substantially conform to the site layout and
development data approved on the PD concept plan (adopted along with the PD ordinance). If a PD
concept plan was previously approved for the overall PD district, then a detailed PD site plan (along
with the required engineering/architectural site construction plans and preliminary/construction plat)
may be submitted for only the sections or lots that are proposed for immediate development rather
than for the entire PD. If no concept plan was approved with the ordinance establishing the PD, then
a concept plan for the entire PD must be submitted and approved prior to approval of a detailed site
plan (along with the required engineering/architectural site construction plans and
preliminary/construction plat) for only the portion(s) of the PD that are proposed for immediate
development.
For any single- or two-family residential district (A, R-1 through 5 or Duplex), a
preliminary/construction plat shall qualify as the site plan.
(3) Lapse, extension or reinstatement of PD concept plan or PD site plan shall be in accordance
with the provisions above and the provisions in division 23 of the zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.535 Approval process and procedures
(a) The procedure for establishing a planned development zoning district shall follow the procedures for
zoning amendments as set forth in division 36 of the zoning ordinance. This procedure shall be expanded to
include concurrent consideration and approval (or denial) of the concept plan that is submitted along with the PD
zoning request application. The public hearings conducted for, and the subsequent actions taken upon, the PD
zoning request shall also include the accompanying concept plan, and if the PD is approved then the concept
plan shall become a part of the ordinance establishing the PD district.
(b) The ordinance establishing the planned development zoning district shall not be approved (or adopted)
until the accompanying concept plan is approved by the city council, and until all other procedural requirements
set forth in division 36 and division 23 of the zoning ordinance are satisfied.
(c) When a zoning request for a planned development district is being considered, a written report from the
city manager (or his/her designee) discussing the project's impact upon planning, engineering, water utilities,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 670/720
electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire and traffic, as well as written comments from applicable
public agencies (such as the applicable school district and/or utility companies), may be submitted to the
planning and zoning commission prior to the commission making any recommendations to the city council. In
the event written comments and advisement are not forthcoming in a reasonable amount of time, the commission
may, at its discretion, make a recommendation to the city council without said comments or advisement.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.536 Designation of PDs on the zoning map
All planned development zoning districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this article, as may be
amended, shall be prefixed by a “PD” designation and assigned a unique identification number (e.g., PD-1, PD-
2, PD-3, and so on), and shall also be referenced on the zoning district map. A list of such planned development
districts, showing the uses permitted and any other special stipulations of each PD district, shall be maintained as
part of this article. (Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.537 Prior planned development ordinances remaining in effect
Prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, the city council previously established certain planned
development districts, some of which are to be continued in full force and effect. The ordinances or parts of
ordinances approved prior to the ordinance codified in this article, specified in Appendix A-1, shall be carried
forth in full force and effect and are the conditions, restrictions, regulations and requirements which apply to the
respective planned development districts shown on the zoning district map as of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this article. Each prior PD ordinance is hereby assigned a unique identification number
(e.g., PD-1, PD-2, PD-3, and so on) as shown in Appendix A-1, and subsequent PD ordinances adopted after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be similarly numbered for identification purposes.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 1, 12/15/05)
Editor's note–Appendix A-1 to Ord. 27-05, referred to in section 7 above, is not printed herein.
Secs. 25.02.538–25.02.550 Reserved
Division 23. Concept Site Plan And Site Plan Review Process
Sec. 25.02.551 Purpose
This article establishes a site plan review process for proposed nonresidential, mixed-use and higher density
residential developments. The purpose of the review is to ensure efficient and safe land development,
harmonious use of land, compliance with the comprehensive plan and other appropriate design standards, safe
and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, adequate parking and loading, and adequate water supply,
drainage and stormwater management, sanitary facilities, coverage, and other utilities and services. (Ordinance
27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.552 Applicability
(a) Site plan review and approval shall be required for all nonresidential, mixed-use, townhouse, single-family
attached, and multifamily residential projects and structures, and for any planned development district or
specific use permit (public hearings may also be required, see division 22 and division 26 of the zoning
ordinance). Nonresidential structures within a residential zoning district (e.g., church, school, day care facility,
private recreation facility, etc.) are subject to the site plan review and approval requirements of this article.
(b) No building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments until a site plan and all other
required engineering/construction plans are first approved by the city. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all construction and development conforms to the site plan and engineering/construction plans, as
approved by the city. The site plan review process shall include up to four steps:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 671/720
(1) Preapplication conference;
(2) Concept plan review (voluntary, except for planned developments or specific use permits);
(3) Site plan review/approval; and
(4) Construction of project (after city approval of required site plan and other associated plans,
including preliminary/construction plat and engineering plans).
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.553 Exemptions and exceptions
Site plan review shall not be required for single-family (detached) or two-family residential developments,
unless the proposed subdivision will include a private amenity or facility (such as a private recreation/swimming
facility, clubhouse, etc.) or a golf course. In these instances, site plan submission and approval (in accordance
with this article) will be required for the private amenity or facility, or the golf course clubhouse/hospitality area
(also see subsection 4(A)10. below). (Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.554 Concept/site plan submission requirements
An application for concept plan (voluntary except for planned developments or specific use permits) or site plan
approval shall be comprised of the following (all required items/information must be received by the city
manager, or his/her designee, in order for a concept plan or site plan application to be considered complete (see
section 6 below) - incomplete submissions will not be reviewed until all deficient items and information have
been received):
(1) An application form (format provided by the city) with notarized signatures of the owner or
his/her designated representative if the applicant is not the owner of the subject property;
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
(2) Filing fee established by resolution of the city council. (Ordinance 26-15 adopted 12/14/15)
(3) Verification that all taxes and assessments on the subject property have been paid (see section 5
below).
(4) Copies of the concept plan or site plan (on 24" x 36" sheet, and drawn to a known engineering
scale that is large enough to be clearly legible), and other required information, the quantity of which
shall be determined by the city manager (or his/her designee).
(5) General layout for the required public improvements (water, wastewater, grading/storm
drainage, streets, water quality, fire lanes and hydrants, screening and landscaping, etc.), the quantity
of which shall be determined by the city manager, or his/her designee.
(6) Reduced copies (11" x 17") of the site plan as required by the city manager, or his/her designee.
(7) Landscaping and irrigation plans (with site plan; not required with concept plan), the quantity
of which shall be determined by the city manager, or his/her designee.
(8) Building facade (elevation) plans (with site plan; not required with concept plan) drawn to
scale, the quantity of which shall be determined by the city manager, or his/her designee.
(9) Any additional information/materials (such as plans, maps, exhibits, legal description of
property, information about proposed uses, etc.) as deemed necessary by the city manager, or his/her
designee, in order to ensure that the development request is understood.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 672/720
(10) If the application is for a single-family subdivision, a preliminary/construction plat may
qualify as a site plan, not withstanding other information contained herein that may still be deemed as
required with the application.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.555 Payment of all indebtedness attributable to subject property
No person who owes delinquent taxes, fees, delinquent paving assessments, development fees, or any other
delinquent debts or obligations to the city, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property shall be
allowed to submit an application for concept plan or site plan approval until the taxes, fees, assessments, debts,
or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by the owner or previous owner thereof shall have
been first fully paid, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the city has been made for the payment of such debts
or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, debts and
obligations have been paid. (Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.556 Official submission date and completeness of application
(a) For the purpose of these regulations, the “official submission date” shall be the date upon which a
complete application for approval of a concept plan or site plan (that contains all elements and information
required by this article) is submitted to the city manager (or designee). No application shall be deemed officially
submitted until the city manager (or designee) determines that the application is complete and a fee receipt is
issued by the city. Failure by the city manager (or designee) to make a determination of incompleteness within
ten (10) calendar days following the date on which the application was first received by the city, shall result in
the application being deemed complete, and the “official submission date” shall become the 11th calendar day
following initial receipt of the application by the city. In no event shall determination of the submission date act
as a waiver or estoppel to any of the requirements under this article.
(b) Concept plan and site plan applications which do not include all required information and materials (as
outlined below and per other city development review policies which may change from time to time) will be
considered incomplete, shall not be accepted for official submission by the city, and shall not be scheduled on a
planning and zoning commission agenda until the proper information is provided to city staff.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.557 Supplemental requirements
The city's staff may require other information and data for specific concept plans/site plans. This data may
include but is not limited to geologic information, water yields, flood data and/or hydrological studies,
environmental information, traffic impact analysis, road capacities, market information, economic data for the
proposed development, hours of operation, elevations and perspective drawings, lighting, and similar
information. Approval of a concept plan or site plan may establish conditions for construction based upon such
information. (Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.558 Principles and standards for concept plan and site plan review and evaluation
The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the adequacy of proposed development
within the city, and to ensure that all developments are, to the best extent possible, constructed according to the
city's codes and ordinances.
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall review the concept plan or site plan for compliance with all
applicable city ordinances and with the Comprehensive Plan; for harmony with surrounding uses and with longrange
plans for the future development of Seagoville; for the promotion of the health, safety, order, efficiency,
and economy of the city; and for the maintenance of property values and the general welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 673/720
Concept plan or site plan review and evaluation by the city manager, or his/her designee, shall be performed
with respect to the following:
(1) The plan's compliance with all provisions of the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, and
other applicable ordinances of the city.
(2) The impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing natural resources on the
site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding properties and neighborhood.
(3) The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious design, facade
treatment, setbacks, building materials, maintenance of property values, and any possible negative
impacts.
(4) The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system.
(5) The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces
are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged.
(6) The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
(7) The coordination of streets so as to arrange a convenient system consistent with the
Thoroughfare Plan of the city, as amended.
(8) The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise,
movement, or activities from adjacent properties when necessary, and to complement and integrate
the design and location of buildings into the overall site design.
(9) Exterior lighting to ensure safe movement and for security purposes, which shall be arranged
so as to minimize glare and reflection upon adjacent properties.
(10) The location, size, accessibility, and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such
areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
(11) Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or
grading.
(12) Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas that are, or that may be, subject to
flooding.
(13) The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, solid waste disposal, and other utilities
necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
(14) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan of the city, as amended.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.559 Approval process and revisions
(a) Preapplication conference. The applicant(s) should avail themselves of the advice and assistance of the
city officials, and should consult early and informally with the city manager, the public works director, the city's
planner, the city's engineer, and other applicable administrative officers before preparing a concept plan (a
voluntary plan, except for planned developments or specific use permits) or a site plan in order to save time,
money and to avoid potential unnecessary delays.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 674/720
Prior to formal application for approval of any concept plan or site plan, the applicant(s) shall request and attend
a preapplication conference with the city manager (or designee), the city's planner, the city's engineer, the public
works director, and any other pertinent city official(s) in order to become familiar with the city's development
regulations and the development process. At the preapplication conference, the developer may be represented by
his/her land planner, engineer and/or surveyor.
(b) City staff review. Upon official submission of a complete application for concept plan or site plan
approval, the city shall commence technical review of the development proposal by forwarding a copy of the
application to development review team members (such as the city manager, city engineer, city planner, public
works director, fire chief, etc.). Development review team members shall review the application and shall
ascertain its compliance with these and other applicable city regulations. Following city staff review of the plan
and supporting documents, and following discussions with the applicant on any revisions deemed advisable and
the kind and extent of improvements to be installed, the applicant shall resubmit additional copies of the
corrected plan to the city manager (or designee) no later than seven (7) calendar days prior to the planning and
zoning commission meeting. Failure to resubmit corrected copies of the plan back to the city in time shall be
cause for the city manager (or designee) to forward the plan application to the commission as it was originally
submitted rather than the corrected version (corrected copies of the plan resubmitted to the city less than seven
days prior to the meeting date shall not be accepted or forwarded to the commission). If, upon resubmission of
the corrected plan to the city, the city manager (or designee) determines that the application is still incomplete or
not correct (i.e., not ripe for consideration), the plan application shall be subject to denial.
(c) Action by the planning and zoning commission. All concept plan and site plan applications shall be
reviewed by the planning and zoning commission, and if in conformance with the provisions of this article and
all other applicable regulations and codes of the city, they shall be approved by the commission.
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall schedule consideration of the concept plan or site plan on the regular
agenda of the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) calendar days after the submission is received
(or, in the case of an incomplete submission, after the submission is deemed complete). The planning and zoning
commission shall review the concept plan or site plan and shall approve, approve subject to certain conditions,
or disapprove the concept plan or site plan. If the planning and zoning commission disapproves a plan
application, the commission shall state such disapproval and the reasons therefor. The applicant or property
owner may appeal such decision to city council by filing a written notice of appeal in the office of the city
manager (or designee) no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date upon which the commission denied the
application. The Notice of Appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the appeal. The city
council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date upon
which the Notice of Appeal was filed. The city council may change the decision of the commission only by a
three-quarters (3/4) vote of the full city council. The city council may also, where appropriate, remand the
concept plan or site plan application back to the commission for reconsideration if it believes that there is a
compelling reason to do so (such as the introduction of significant new facts or testimony, etc.). The planning
and zoning commission shall determine final approval or disapproval of all concept plan or site plan applications
unless a disapproval is appealed to the city council, in which case the city council shall be the final authority
approving or disapproving the plan application.
(d) Revisions to the approved site plan:
(1) Minor revisions/amendment. It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design
may necessitate minor changes in the approved site plan. In such cases, the city manager, or his/her
designee, shall have the authority to approve minor modifications to an approved site plan (which
shall be submitted as an “amended site plan” which substantially conforms to the previously
approved site plan), provided that such modifications do not significantly change traffic circulation,
building location(s) on the site, proximity of building(s) to nearby residential areas, increase the size
or height of building(s), or any other conditions specifically attached as part of the planning and
zoning commission's (or city council's, if the plan was appealed) approval of the site plan.
Submission materials and requirements for approval of an amended site plan shall be as determined
by the city manager, or his/her designee. If the city manager, or his/her designee, refuses to approve
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 675/720
an amended site plan, then the applicant shall resubmit the amended site plan as a “revised site plan”
as described in subsection 9(D)2 below, whereupon the revised site plan shall be scheduled for
consideration by the planning and zoning commission.
(2) Major revisions. In the event of revisions that are more extensive in nature (i.e., do not conform
to the description for minor amendments above), a “revised site plan” must be resubmitted, reviewed
by the city manager (or his/her designee), and reconsidered by the planning and zoning commission
in accordance with the site plan review and approval procedures set forth in this article.
Sec. 25.02.560 Lapse of concept plan or site plan approval
The approval of a concept plan or site plan shall be effective for a period of six (6) months (i.e., 183 calendar
days) beyond the date that the plan was approved by the planning and zoning commission (or by the city
council, in the event of an appeal) except as provided herein. By 12:01 a.m. on the 184th day following
commission approval of the plan, the applicant must have completed a city-required “progress benchmark” as
set forth below. If this is not accomplished, then the approved concept plan or site plan shall be deemed to have
expired and shall become null and void. The series of “progress benchmarks” for a project, pursuant to the
provisions of this paragraph, are as follows:
Approved Plan Next “Progress Benchmark”
Concept Plan
(voluntary, except with
PDs and SUPs)
Approval of the final site plan (per zoning ordinance) and
approval of the prelim./construction plat (per subdiv. ordinance)
within six months following approval of the concept plan; also,
continued active engineering review of the
engineering/construction plans (which were submitted along
with the preliminary/construction plat and final site plan).
Site Plan Engineering release and commencement of construction of
public improvements, and application for a building permit for at
least one of the buildings on the approved site plan, within six
months following approval of the site plan.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.561 Extension and reinstatement procedure
(a) Prior to the lapse of approval for a concept plan or site plan, the applicant may petition the city (in writing)
to extend the plan approval. Such petition shall be considered at a public meeting before the planning and zoning
commission, and an extension may be granted by the commission at such meeting. If no petition for extension of
concept plan or site plan approval is submitted, then the plan shall be deemed to have expired and shall become
null and void. Any new request for concept plan or site plan approval shall be deemed a “new project”; shall be
submitted with a new application form, with a new filing fee, and with new plans and materials in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this article; and shall be reviewed for compliance with the ordinances and
regulations in effect at the time the new application is made.
(b) In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the planning and zoning commission shall take
into account the reasons for the lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached
to the original approval, and the extent to which development regulations would apply to the concept plan or site
plan at that point in time. The commission shall either extend the concept plan or site plan or deny the request, in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 676/720
which instance the originally approved plan shall be deemed null and void. The property owner must thereafter
submit a new concept plan or site plan application for approval as a “new project”, and shall conform to the
zoning and development regulations then in effect.
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.562 Concept plan requirements
(a) Applicability. Submission and approval of a concept plan (a voluntary plan except for planned
development or specific use permit zoning requests, and except for the types of developments outlined below)
can be the first step in the approval process for a development project (either residential or nonresidential) if the
applicant prefers to do so. City review and approval of a concept plan has many benefits for both the city and the
applicant. The applicant benefits in that he/she gains preliminary review and scrutiny (as well as input and
suggestions) on the overall conceptual layout of the proposed development from the city's development review
team. Approval of a concept plan may also offer the applicant some level of confidence that subsequent plan
submissions will be favorably received and approved with few major changes to the project's design and layout
provided that the project complies with city regulations. For example, once the site plan and
preliminary/construction plat (and corresponding engineering plans) are submitted for a nonresidential project,
unforeseen changes in site layout can prove to be expensive in terms of design and engineering costs and time
lost due to major plan revisions. The city benefits in that it is allowed to become familiar with and involved in
the project early in the development process (which is particularly important for large-scale developments and
subdivisions). This allows the city to plan for and closely coordinate the provision of public facilities and
services, thereby potentially avoiding future problems such as undersized utility lines, inadequate roadway
capacities, unanticipated shortfalls in public services, and fiscal inefficiencies resulting from lack of planning
and coordination.
Submission and approval of a concept plan is mandatory for a zoning request for a planned development or
specific use permit. Submission and approval of a concept plan is also required in the following circumstances:
(1) In conjunction with a zoning or rezoning request for a property that is five (5) acres or larger
that is intended for development or redevelopment either at that time or in the future;
(2) Prior to submission of an application for a site plan (and preliminary/construction plat) for a
property that is five (5) acres or larger that is intended for development; or
(3) In conjunction with any project where any type of public road is to be established, constructed,
improved and/or realigned.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of a concept plan is to allow opportunity for the planning and zoning commission to
preview various development-related aspects of the project, including proposed major thoroughfare and collector
street patterns; land use patterns and trends; environmental issues and constraints; building orientation and
massing; conformance to the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance (if the subject property is within the city's
corporate limits), subdivision ordinance, future land use plan, thoroughfare plan and other applicable plans and
guidelines; and the property's relationship to adjoining subdivisions or properties. Review of a concept plan
would also assist the city in evaluating the possible impacts of the proposed development in terms of provision
of essential public facilities and services, respecting and preserving important natural features and the
environment, provision of open space and recreational opportunities, and protecting the general health, safety
and welfare of the community.
(c) Extent of area that should be included in a concept plan. When the overall development project is to be
developed in phases, the concept plan area shall include the entire zoned property from which the phases are
being developed, as well as an approximate development schedule. Where significant natural or man-made
features, such as thoroughfares or creeks, make inclusion of the entire property in the concept plan unnecessary
to adequately review the items to be shown on a concept plan, the plan may include a smaller study area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 677/720
Boundaries such as major thoroughfares (existing or proposed), creeks, political subdivisions, or other such
natural or man-made features may be used to delineate the smaller study area.
(d) Procedures and submission requirements for concept plan approval. Submission of an application for
concept plan approval shall be preceded by a preapplication conference with the city (see subsection 9(A)
above). The concept plan shall be prepared by a qualified civil engineer, land planner, architect or surveyor, at a
scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') and on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches (24" x
36"), and it shall show/include the following:
(1) A title block within the lower right-hand corner of the concept plan with the proposed name of
the project/subdivision, the name and address of the owner/developer and the land planner, engineer
architect or surveyor responsible for the design or survey, the scale of the drawing (both written and
graphic scale), the date the drawing was prepared, total site acreage, and the location of the property
according to the abstract and survey records of Dallas or Kaufman County, Texas (as applicable);
(2) A vicinity or location map that shows the location of the proposed development within the city
(or its ETJ) and in relationship to existing roadways;
(3) The boundary survey limits of the tract and scale distances with north clearly indicated;
(4) The names of adjacent subdivisions (or the name of the owners of record and recording
information for adjacent parcels of unplatted land), including parcels on the other sides of roads,
creeks, etc., and any existing developments (including buildings, driveways, parking areas, etc.) on
all surrounding properties within 200 feet of the subject property. The concept plan shall include a
depiction of all contiguous holdings of the subject property's owners, the existing/proposed uses of
the subject property, a general arrangement of future land uses, including the approximate number of
lots and any residential uses anticipated, and a generalized circulation plan for the subject property;
(5) The existing zoning, existing/proposed uses, existing natural features, and existing
development layouts on all surrounding properties within 200 feet of the subject property; the
location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to
the tract; any existing easements (with recording information); existing buildings and driveways;
railroad rights-of-way; topography (contours at five-foot intervals) with existing drainage channels or
creeks (including the 100-year floodplain, if applicable); any other important natural features (such as
rock outcroppings, caves, wildlife habitats, etc.); all substantial natural vegetation; and adjacent
political subdivisions, corporate limits, and/or school district boundaries;
(6) Proposed strategies for tree preservation (showing individual trees or tree masses that will [be]
preserved, and the techniques that will be used to protect them during construction);
(7) The layout and width (right-of-way lines) of existing and proposed thoroughfares, collector
streets and/or intersections, and a general configuration of proposed streets, lots and blocks, including
proposed median openings and left turn lanes on future divided roadways (existing and planned
driveways on the opposite side of divided roadways must also be shown for coordination and sharing
of future median openings);
(8) A general arrangement of land uses and buildings on the subject property, including but not
limited to proposed nonresidential and residential densities; building heights, square footages,
massing, orientation, loading/service areas, recycling containers, compactors and dumpster
enclosures, pedestrian walkways, and parking areas; any proposed sites for parks, schools, public
facilities, public or private open space; floodplains/drainageways; and other pertinent development
related features; and
(9) The phasing of development (the anticipated order of development for the overall property).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 678/720
(e) Effect of review. The concept plan shall be used only as an aid to show the anticipated layout of the
proposed development, and to assess the adequacy of public facilities or services that will be needed to serve the
proposed development. Any proposed use or development depicted on the concept plan shall not be deemed
formal authorization or approval by the city until a final site plan is approved for the development (concept plan
approval is to be thought of as a general acknowledgment by the city that the proposed layout generally
conforms to the city's zoning regulations, and that the proposed development can be adequately served by
required public facilities or services). If the applicant chooses to construct only the initial phase(s) of a multiphase
project designated in the concept plan, a new concept plan may be required for site plan approval of
subsequent phases, if the proposed development layout, character, or other conditions affecting the development
substantially change from one phase to the next.
The approved concept plan shall be valid for a period of six (6) months (i.e., 183 calendar days) from the date of
concept plan approval by planning and zoning commission (see Section 10).
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Sec. 25.02.563 Site plan review
(a) Applicability and purpose. Submission and city approval of a site plan is required as stated in section 2.
The purpose of final site plan approval is to ensure that a development project is in compliance with all
applicable city ordinances and guidelines prior to commencement of construction. Approval of the site plan,
preliminary/construction plat, landscape plan, building facade plan, and engineering plans are required prior to
site construction.
(b) Extent of area that should be included in a site plan. When the overall development project is to be
developed in phases, the site plan area shall include only the portion of the overall property that is to be
developed/constructed.
(c) Procedures and submission requirements for site plan approval. Submission of an application for site plan
approval shall be preceded by a preapplication conference with the city (see section 9(A)). The site plan shall be
prepared by a qualified civil engineer, land planner, architect or surveyor, at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches (24" x 36"), and it shall clearly show in
detail how the site will be constructed (such as paving, buildings, landscaped areas, utilities, etc.). The site plan
shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) A title block within the lower right-hand corner of the site plan with the proposed name of the
project/subdivision, the name and address of the owner/developer and the land planner, engineer
architect or surveyor responsible for the plan, the scale of the drawing (both written and graphic
scale), the date the drawing was prepared, total site acreage, and the location of the property
according to the abstract and survey records of Dallas or Kaufman County, Texas (as applicable);
(2) A vicinity or location map that shows the location of the proposed development within the city
(or its ETJ) and in relationship to existing roadways;
(3) The boundary survey limits of the tract (and each proposed lot) and scale distances with north
clearly indicated;
(4) The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions (or the name of the owners of record and
recording information for adjacent parcels of unplatted land), including parcels on the other sides of
roads, creeks, etc.;
(5) The existing zoning, existing/proposed uses, existing natural features, and existing
development layouts on all surrounding properties within two hundred feet (200') of the subject
property; the location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within
or adjacent to the tract; any existing easements (with recording information); existing buildings and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 679/720
driveways; railroad rights-of-way; topography (contours at two-foot intervals) with existing drainage
channels or creeks (including the 100-year floodplain, if applicable); any other important natural
features (such as rock outcroppings, caves, wildlife habitats, etc.); all substantial natural vegetation;
and adjacent political subdivisions, corporate limits, and/or school district boundaries;
(6) Proposed strategies for tree preservation (showing individual trees or tree masses that will [be]
preserved, and the techniques that will be used to protect them during construction);
(7) The layout and width (right-of-way lines and curblines) of existing and proposed
thoroughfares, collector streets and/or intersections, and specific configuration of proposed streets,
lots and blocks, proposed driveways (show driveway widths and distances between driveways, edgeto-
edge), and proposed/future median openings and left turn lanes on future divided roadways
(existing and planned driveways on the opposite side of divided roadways must also be shown for
coordination and sharing of future median openings and alignment of driveways across non-divided
roads);
(8) Specific locations and footprints of buildings, including but not limited to proposed
nonresidential and residential densities; building heights, square footages (for multitenant or
multipurpose buildings, show square footage for each intended use), massing, orientation,
loading/service areas (including proposed screening), recycling containers, compactors and dumpster
enclosures (including proposed screening), pedestrian walkways, and parking areas (including
parking ratio calculations); any proposed sites for parks, schools, public facilities, public or private
open space; floodplains/drainageways; all proposed and existing utilities and easements; drainage
structures; retention/detention ponds with proposed aesthetic treatments; screening walls; fences;
signage; fire lanes and fire hydrants; lighting; visibility easements; and other pertinent development
related features; and
(9) A landscape plan showing turf areas, tree types and sizes, screening walls, ornamental
plantings, planting schedule (including species, planted height, spacing, container/caliper size,
numbers of each plant material, etc.) any existing wooded areas, trees to be planted, and irrigation
plans (if required).
(10) Building facade (elevation) plans showing elevations with any attached (wall-mounted)
signage to be used, as determined appropriate by the city manager, or his/her designee.
Provision of the above items shall conform to the principles and standards of this article and the Comprehensive
Plan. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the city is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute
a separate list of specific requirements for site plan review applications. Upon periodic review, the city manager
(or his/her designee) shall have the authority to update such requirements for site plan and development review
applications. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these requirements.
(d) Effect of Review. The site plan shall be considered authorization to proceed with construction of the site
provided all other required city approvals are obtained (such as preliminary/construction plat, engineering plans,
landscape plan, building facade plans, building permits, etc.). The approved site plan shall be valid for a period
of six months (i.e., 183 calendar days) from the date of approval by the planning and zoning commission (also
see section 10).
(Ordinance 27-05, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/05)
Secs. 25.02.564–25.02.580 Reserved
Division 24. AG Agricultural District Regulations
Sec. 25.02.581 General description
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 680/720
The “AG” District is intended to be used primarily in areas where agricultural uses should be retained, where
scattered non-farm growth should be prevented, and as a temporary classification for newly annexed lands.
Sec. 25.02.582 Principal permitted uses
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or enlarged
which is arranged, intended, or designed for other than one of the following uses:
(1) Agriculture. Any customary agricultural use, building, or structure, including nurseries,
greenhouses, orchards, truck farms, and animal farms.
(2) Residential. One-family detached dwelling.
(3) Institutional. Churches and parish houses; cemeteries and crematories for the human dead;
school and colleges, including dormitories; public buildings and structures of the recreational,
cultural, administrative and public service type; parks, playgrounds, neighborhood recreation centers.
(4) Private recreation. Private noncommercial recreation areas, including country clubs, riding
stables, swim clubs, and similar uses.
(5) Dairies. Dairies and related establishments for processing milk products, not including
retailing.
(6) Public utilities. Public utilities and railroad rights-of-way and tracks not including terminals,
railroad yards, reservoirs, water towers, pumping plants, or storage yards.
(7) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted only if expressly authorized by the
commission:
(A) Utility station and communications - Static transformer station, booster station,
transmitters and utility stations, when operating requirements necessitate locating in the district;
provided there is no yard or garage for service or storage, and provided further that the premises
upon which utility station is erected and maintained shall be appropriately landscaped and
screened so as to be in harmony with the general appearance of the neighborhood and not
objectionable as to noise, odor, vibration or other disturbances.
(B) Radio or television transmitter tower.
(8) Accessory uses. Buildings or structures customarily incidental to any aforesaid permitted or
conditionally permitted uses, including the following:
(A) Temporary fruit stands on any premises used for agricultural purposes.
(B) Parking facilities - Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of
residents of the premises.
(C) Swimming pools - Private swimming pools.
(D) Real estate and professional signs - Real estate small announcement and professional
signs subject to the same provisions as the R-1 Single-Family District.
Sec. 25.02.583 Building and area regulations
(a) Height regulations. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(b) Lot area, width and yard requirements. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 681/720
Use Area Width Front Side Yard Rear
Agricultural structure – – 50 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft.
Single-family dwellings 2 acres 150 ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. 50 ft.
Other permitted uses 2 acres 200 ft. 75 ft. 30 ft. 50 ft.
(c) Exterior fire-resistant construction. All main buildings, excluding accessory buildings that are strictly for
agricultural use, shall have all exterior side walls and 75 percent of the front and rear exterior walls below the
first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, shall be constructed of masonry materials as described in
division 32, Regulations Applicable to all Districts, section 25.02.712, and in accordance with the city building
code, as amended, and fire code, as amended.
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
(d) Area of dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be 2,400 square feet. (Ordinance 35-16,
sec. 9, adopted 12/19/16)
Secs. 25.02.584–25.02.600 Reserved
Division 25. Nonconforming Uses
Sec. 25.02.601 Designation of nonconforming use
Any use of property existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this article that does not
conform with the regulations prescribed in the preceding sections of this article shall be deemed a
nonconforming use, except that any duplex or apartment use existing at the time of passage of the ordinance
codified in this article shall be thereafter deemed a conforming use.
Sec. 25.02.602 Continuation if nonconforming use discontinued for period in excess of six months
The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this article, although such
use does not conform to the provisions thereof, may be continued, but if said nonconforming use is discontinued
for a period of time in excess of six months, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
Sec. 25.02.603 Continuation if structural alteration
The lawful use of the building at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this article may be
continued although such does not conform to the provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout
the building provided no structural alteration except those required by law or ordinance are made therein. If no
structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of the building may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or more restricted classification; provided, however, that in the event a nonconforming use of a
building is once changed to a nonconforming use of a higher or more restricted classification, it shall not later be
reverted to the former lower or less restricted classification.
Sec. 25.02.604 Right of nonconforming use to continue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 682/720
The right of nonconforming use to continue shall be subject to such regulations as to maintenance of the
premises and conditions of operation as may, in the judgment of the board of adjustment, be reasonably required
for the protection of adjacent property.
Sec. 25.02.605 Nonconforming use not to be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total
destruction by fire or other cause; exception
A nonconforming use shall not be extended nor a nonconforming structure rebuilt in case of obsolescence or
total destruction by fire or other cause, except that a single-family residential dwelling structure in a singlefamily
dwelling district, partially or totally destroyed, may be rebuilt by the owner at the same size as when it
was destroyed, or larger, but the owner shall not be required to build to a minimum house size greater than the
size of the destroyed house, even if required by the area regulations of the zoning district in which the property
is situated. In case of partial destruction by fire or other cause of a nonresidential structure, not exceeding 50
percent of the value, the building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If there is greater than 50
percent and less than total destruction, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair of a nonresidential
structure, after a public hearing and having due regard for the property and the character of the surrounding
property and the conservation and preservation of property.
(Ordinance 24-02, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/02)
Sec. 25.02.606 Violation not to create estoppel
A violation of this article and a request for a nonconforming designation or request for relief under this
designation shall not create an estoppel of the trial of any lawsuit which may be filed in any court.
Secs. 25.02.607–25.02.630 Reserved
Division 26. Special Uses
Sec. 25.02.631 Uses which may be authorized by ordinance
The city council may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and, after recommendation
from the planning and zoning commission containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to
protect adjoining property, authorize by ordinance the location of any of the following in the specified districts:
(1) Any use of the public building or buildings to be erected or used by the city, county, state, or
federal government in any district.
(2) Private schools, kindergartens and nurseries teaching the same subjects as public elementary
and high schools in the district, provided the building or buildings are set back from all required yard
lines in the district in which they are to be located two feet for each foot of building height and
provided off-street parking facilities are provided. For schools and kindergartens, a minimum
building area of 30 square feet per pupil and minimum site area of 200 square feet per pupil shall be
provided.
(3) Institutions of religious, educational or philanthropic nature in any district.
(4) Private housing projects and shopping center consisting of not less than three acres and when
accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and showing the arrangement of the project in detail
together with essential requirements such as parking facilities, location of buildings and the uses to
be permitted, and means of egress and ingress in any district.
(5) Airport or landing field or airport facilities in any district.
(6) Day nurseries in any district keeping more than four children.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 683/720
(7) Dog kennels and veterinarian hospitals in the Commercial District or on a farm five acres or
more in any district.
(8) Temporary commercial amusement enterprises such as circuses, carnivals, driving ranges,
miniature golf courses, pony rides, miniature train rides and rodeos in any district.
(9) Riding academy or public stable on a site of five acres or more in any district.
(10) Radio broadcasting towers and stations, television towers and television transmitting stations
in any district.
(11) Any installation of a public utility either privately or publicly owned in any district.
(12) Gas and electrical public utility regulating stations in any district.
(13) Hospitals, children's homes, convalescent homes, old people's homes, maternity homes in the
“A” District or in any district where a site of five acres or more is provided.
(14) Homes for the insane, alcoholic, feeble-minded and narcotics in the “C” District or in any
district where a site of 20 acres or more is provided.
(15) Lodges, boarding houses, rooming houses in the “A” District.
(16) Community buildings in an “A” district or on a site of three acres or more in any district.
(17) Drive-in theatres in the Local Retail District or on sites of ten acres or more in any district.
(18) Greenhouses and nurseries in any district.
(19) Reserved.
(20) Rock quarries, sand, gravel, and earth excavations. At the time the permit is granted, the city
council may impose reasonable conditions for the protection of public health and safety, any may
provide for the restoration of such property to a usable condition after uses have been terminated.
(21) Dental and medical offices and clinics in the “A” District.
(22) Feed stores in the “LR” District.
(23) Automobile wrecking yard in the Heavy Manufacturing District.
(24) Junkyard in the Heavy Manufacturing District.
(25) Temporary and seasonal sales establishments, such as flea market or produce stand in any
district.
(26) Cemetery in any district.
(27) Roller skating rink in “LR” District.
(28) Motor raceway in “LR” or “AG” District.
(29) Travel trailer park in any district.
(30) Sewage treatment plant in any district.
(31) Concrete batch plant in any district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 684/720
(32) Single-family and multifamily dwelling units in nonresidential districts.
(33) Used car lots in “LR” District.
(34) Sale of mobile/manufactured homes, subject to the following conditions:
(A) “C” Commercial zoned property of 3.5 acres or more.
(B) Underpinning must be furnished for all homes parked within 100 feet of any public
street;
(C) Full landscape plan must be submitted and approved as part of SUP;
(D) Decorative frontal fencing (such as wrought iron) shall be required; and
(E) No alterations may be made to any home parked within the first 100 feet of any public
street.
(35) Wind energy conversion system (WEC) in any district, provided that such device is in
accordance with the definitions of such devices in division 37 (Definitions), as amended, and in
accordance with all special regulations for such devices in division 32 (Regulations Applicable to all
Districts), section 25.02.713 (Wind Energy Conversion Systems).
(36) Bakery, commercial in “C” District.
(37) Bar, beer tavern, lounge in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(38) Brewery, distillery in “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(39) Cargo container in “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(40) Convenience store/mini-mart (1,000–5,000 square feet) in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM”
Districts.
(41) Tobacco shop in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(42) Drive-in service in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(43) Drive-through service in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(44) Walk-up service in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(45) Microbrewery/brewpub in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(46) Night club/dance hall in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(47) Outside display, used materials, in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(48) Outside storage, new materials in “C” District.
(49) Outside storage, used materials in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(50) Outside storage of any type of materials exceeding eight feet (8') in height in “C,” “LM” and
“HM” Districts.
(51) Restaurant, dine-in only (< 4,000 square feet) in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 685/720
(52) Restaurant, dine-in/convenience (< 4,000 square feet) in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM”
Districts.
(53) Restaurant, fast food in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(54) Restaurant, outdoor/patio dining in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(55) Restaurant/private club in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(56) Travel center in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(57) Winery in “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(58) Winery, boutique in “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(59) Wine-tasting room in “LR,” “C,” “LM” and “HM” Districts.
(60) Addition of the sale of prepackaged food or beverages to the operation of a retail or business
operation already in existence on the effective date of this section (May 2010) in any district.
(61) Sales of prepackaged food and/or beverages, in combination, that exceeds 10% of an
establishment's gross annual sales revenues in any district.
(62) Mortuary uses, only in stand-alone buildings, in local retail districts.
(63) Wedding services and event center uses, only in stand-alone buildings, in local retail districts.
(64) Hotel and motel in a “C” District. A special use permit in a commercial district for a hotel or
motel use may be approved only when there is a finding and determination by the city council,
following a favorable recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, that the type of hotel
or motel proposed is compatible and consistent with and will have no adverse affect on existing uses
in the area, that the proposed use is equal to or exceeds development standards of other uses and that
the proposed use will not adversely affect the ability to locate, in the future, additional uses that are
allowed within the zoning district of the area.
Hotel and motel developments shall be subject to the following development standards:
(A) A minimum lot size for a hotel or motel development shall be no less than four acres,
with the exception that a lot size less than four acres may be permitted provided the city
council, following a favorable recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, and
after review of submitted data and facts, finds and determines that such facility is an appropriate
use, design and lay-out for the site and area. Under no circumstance shall a lot of less than two
acres be utilized for this use.
(B) Shall provide staff on-site 24 hours a day;
(C) Shall contain a lobby with a minimum of 150 square feet;
(D) Shall provide a minimum of three (3) amenities from the list below:
(1) Indoor/outdoor pool.
(2) Spa/sauna.
(3) Weight room/fitness center.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 686/720
(4) Playground.
(5) Sports court.
(6) Plaza/atrium.
(7) Game room.
(8) Jogging trail.
(9) Conference room (1,000 square foot minimum).
(10) Full service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35).
(Ordinance 467, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/78; Ordinance 17-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89; Ordinance 07-91, sec. 1,
adopted 5/2/91; Ordinance 33-03, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/03; Ordinance 40-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/16/03; Ordinance
24-08, sec. 1, adopted 9/17/09; Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10; Ordinance 03-2017, sec. 2, adopted 3/6/17;
Ordinance 22-2017 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 25.02.632 Changes in zoning
Where the planning and zoning commission is considering a change in zoning from a residential or apartment
zoning to a lower classification and the area in question involves three or more acres under one or more owners,
or it contains lesser area and would constitute the extension of an existing district whereby the provision of offstreet
parking facilities, screening walls, fences or planting and open space would create a protective transition
between a lesser and more restricted district, or if it would create a protective transition between a lesser and
more restricted district, or if it would constitute the extension of an existing special use area, the planning and
zoning commission may, within its discretion, make the following recommendations to the city council:
(1) Recommend against the change in zoning.
(2) Recommend a change in zoning.
(3) Recommend that a special use permit for such area be granted together with its
recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks, means of egress
and ingress to the public street, provisions for drainage, parking space and street layouts, and
protective screening and open space.
(Ordinance 17-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Sec. 25.02.633 Special use permit
Every special use permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be considered as an amendment to the
zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. In granting such permit, the city council may impose conditions
which shall be complied with by the grant [grantee] before certificate of occupancy. The following are
regulatory measures which can be included in the consideration of a special use permit:
(1) Special parking requirements.
(2) Submission of a site plan showing the proposed development.
(3) Approval of means of ingress and egress.
(4) Approval of building size and location.
(5) Control of outside lighting and screening.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 687/720
(6) Special setbacks and/or building lines.
(7) Surfacing of parking areas and drives.
(8) Installation of curbs and drainage structures.
(9) Approval of use or uses permitted.
(Ordinance 17-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89)
Secs. 25.02.634–25.02.650 Reserved
Division 27. Exceptions and Variances
Sec. 25.02.651 Vision clearance
On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub, or hedge
may be maintained as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view, and when topography prevents a clear
view, this bank shall be moved.
Sec. 25.02.652 Front yard
The front yards heretofore required shall be adjusted in the following cases:
(1) Where 35 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets is developed with buildings that have observed, with variation of five feet or less, a front yard
greater or lesser in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street
than the building line so established by the existing buildings. However, this regulation shall not be
interpreted as requiring a building line of more than 50 feet.
(2) Where the frontage between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have not
observed a front yard as described in (1) above, then:
(A) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land and will not be more than 200 feet
from existing buildings on either side, the building line shall be a line drawn between the two
closest front corners of the adjacent buildings on the two sides.
(B) Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 200 feet of an existing
building on one side only such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing
adjacent building. However, this regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a building line
of more than 50 feet.
(3) Where a building line has been established by ordinance and such line requires a greater
setback than is prescribed by this article in the district in which the building line is located, no
building shall be erected closer to the street than the line so established.
(4) Where a building line is shown on a plat recorded with the County Clerk prior to the passage of
the ordinance codified in this article, and such building line provides a front yard of 25 feet or more
in depth and a side yard of ten feet or more in depth and is part of a comprehensive plan for the
orderly development of a subdivision, either with uniform or staggered building line, no building
shall be erected closer to the street than the building line or lines so shown. However, any building
line established by ordinance shall take precedence over a building line shown on a recorded plat.
(5) Open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eave roof extensions may project into the
required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet; provided, however, that no supporting
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 688/720
structure for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. The supporting structure
of an open carport or other structure for the storage of automobiles shall not be located within the
required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station or similar business may
extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than 12 feet. The
building line of a gasoline filling station shall mean the actual wall of the filling station and shall not
be interpreted as being the curb of a walk or driveway, or as the front of a canopy or the column
supporting same.
Sec. 25.02.653 Side and rear yards
(a) Every part of the required side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings
as permitted herein and the ordinary projection of window sills, belt cornices and other ornamental features
projecting not to exceed 12 inches. Eaves and awnings on main residential structures may project to within three
feet of a side or rear lot line.
(b) Accessory buildings may be built in the rear yard except that when such accessory building is located
closer than 15 feet to the main building it shall observe the same side yard as required for the main building.
(c) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, balconies opening upon fire towers, and
ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into rear yards may be permitted by the building official into the
required rear yard for a distance not to exceed 3-1/2 feet.
(d) Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet
above the ground [first] floor level of the building may project into a required side yard provided such
projections not be erected closer than two feet from the side lot lines.
Sec. 25.02.654 Lot area
On any lot located in a residential district and that is separately owned prior to the passage of the ordinance
codified in this article, a single-family house may be erected even though the lot has less area than required by
these regulations.
Sec. 25.02.655 Location of dwellings and buildings
Only one main building for single-family, two-family, or multiple-family use with permitted accessory buildings
may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. Every dwelling shall face or front upon a street or officially
approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of 30 feet. Where a lot
is used for retail, commercial, industrial, or a combination of same, or for a combination of retail and dwelling
purposes, more than one main building may be located upon the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all
the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts and when all such main
buildings face upon a street or officially approved place, other than an alley. Whenever two or more main
buildings or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a street
or officially approved place, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by
the city plan commission so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. No parking area, storage
area, or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area
requirements for any dwelling or other area use.
Sec. 25.02.656 Erection of duplex in R-5 District
Two-family dwellings may be erected in a single-family R-5 Dwelling District where 40 percent of the street
frontage between intersecting streets was developed with two-family dwellings prior to passage of the ordinance
codified in this article, and the corresponding frontage on the opposite side of the street may likewise be used for
two-family dwellings as provided for in the “D” Duplex District classification, provided however, that the area
and parking regulations are complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 689/720
Sec. 25.02.657–25.02.670 Reserved
Division 28. Completion of Existing Buildings
Sec. 25.02.671 Generally
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this article and which entire
building shall be complete within one year from the passage of the ordinance codified in this article. Nothing
herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a
building permit has been heretofore issued and which entire buildings shall be complete within six months from
the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this article. If any amendment to this article is hereafter
adopted changing the boundaries of districts, the provisions of this article with regard to buildings, or premises
existing or buildings under construction or building permits issued at the time of the passage of the ordinance
codified in this article, shall apply to building permits issued in the area affected by such amendment at the time
of the passage of such amendment.
Sec. 25.02.672–25.02.680 Reserved
Division 29. Screening
Sec. 25.02.681 Required locations
Whenever a residential area is platted adjacent to an existing less restrictive area or a major thoroughfare, the
developer shall separate the residential area from all such less restricted existing developed areas and major
thoroughfare with a screening fence. In the event a less restrictive area is developed adjacent to a residential
area, and a screening fence has not been previously provided, the developer utilizing the undeveloped property
shall provide the necessary screening fence.
Sec. 25.02.682 Exceptions
The requirements in section 25.02.681 above shall not be applicable where the residential area is separated from
a less restricted area by a dedicated street other than a major thoroughfare.
Sec. 25.02.683 Definitions
Residential areas shall include single-family, duplex, townhouses and apartment districts. For the purpose of this
article, a screening fence is defined as a fence meeting the adopted standard specifications of the city.
Secs. 25.02.684–25.02.690 Reserved
Division 30. Unplatted Property
Sec. 25.02.691 Generally
The city plan commission of the city shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the city limits of the
city until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the city council.
The city plan commission of the city shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within any area where a
petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the city is pending before the city
council.
In the event the city plan commission holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the
same time hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 690/720
make a recommendation on both matters to the city council so that the city council can, if it desires, act on the
matter of permanent zoning and annexation at the same time.
Secs. 25.02.692-25.02.700 Reserved
Division 31. Boundaries of Districts
Sec. 25.02.701 Generally
Rules where uncertainty may arise: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this article, the following rules apply:
(1) The district boundaries are street, alley and property lines unless otherwise shown, and where
the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this article are bounded
approximately by street, alley, or property lines, the street, alley or property lines, shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
(2) Where the district boundaries are otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may
hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be property
lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of the ordinance
are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the
districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
(3) In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a
part of this article shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
(4) In case of a district boundary line dividing a platted lot into two parts, the district boundary line
shall be construed to be the property line nearest the less restricted district.
(5) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council,
the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth
be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
Secs. 25.02.702–25.02.710
Division 32. Regulations Applicable To All Districts*
Sec. 25.02.711 Sale, lease or rental of sexually explicit material
(a) In this section “material” means a book, magazine, newspaper, photograph, motion picture, film[,]
videotape, laser disc, or anything tangible that is capable of being used to arouse interest, whether through the
medium of reading, observation, sound, or any combination of such media.
(b) No person shall operate or cause to be operated within 1,000 feet of a church, a public or private
elementary or secondary school, or a district restricted to residential use by the comprehensive zoning code of
the city:
(1) A business or enterprise which offers material for sale, lease, or rental, or which is used for
exhibiting or presenting to patrons material, with knowledge that said material explicitly depicts or
describes:
(A) Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 691/720
(B) Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse, actual or
simulated.
(c) For purposes of this section, a distance shall be measured along the property lines of the street fronts and
from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections where they occur, or to the nearest property
line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary
of a district restricted to residential use by the comprehensive zoning code of the city or to the nearest boundary
line of a public park adjacent to a residential area.
(Ordinance 597 adopted 11/7/85)
Sec. 25.02.712 Exterior construction standards
(a) “Masonry Construction” shall be construed to mean that form of construction composed of brick, stone,
decorative concrete block or tile, or other similar building units or materials (or combination of these materials)
laid up unit by unit and set in mortar, and shall exclude wall area devoted to doors and windows. As applicable
to meeting the minimum requirements for the exterior construction of buildings within each zoning district, this
term shall include the following materials:
(1) Hard fired brick (kiln fired clay or slate material, can include concrete brick if it is to the same
ASTM standard for construction as typical hard fired clay brick; severe weather grade; minimum
thickness of three inches when applied as a veneer; shall not include unfired or underfired clay, sand
or shale brick);
(2) Stone (includes naturally occurring granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other
similar hard and durable all-weather stone that is customarily used in exterior building construction;
may also include cast- or manufactured-stone product, provided that such product yields a highly
textured, stone-like appearance, its coloration is integral to the masonry material and shall not be
painted on, and it is demonstrated to be highly durable and maintenance-free; natural or man-made
stone shall have a minimum thickness of three and five-eighths inches when applied as a veneer);
(3) Decorative concrete block (highly textured finish, such as split-face, indented, hammered,
fluted, ribbed or similar architectural finish; coloration shall be integral to the masonry material and
shall not be painted on; minimum thickness of three and five-eighths inches when applied as a
veneer; shall not include lightweight or featherweight concrete block or cinderblock units); does not
qualify as “masonry construction “ for single- or two-family residential structures;
(4) Concrete precast or tilt-wall panels (only allowed if a highly textured, architectural finish
which is at least as textured in appearance and physically as face brick or stone; can be brick-like or
stone-like in appearance; coloration shall be integral to the masonry material and shall not be painted
on; shall not include smooth, untextured or inadequately textured finishes); does not qualify as
“masonry construction” for single- or two-family residential structures, for multifamily, for
townhomes, or for structures within the city's original downtown overlay area; and
(5) Glass blocks or tiles (of the type customarily used in exterior building construction; shall not
comprise more than 30% of any exterior wall surface, nor more than 20% of the building's total
exterior on all wall surfaces combined; shall not be highly reflective or mirror-like finish); does not
qualify as “masonry construction” for single- or two-family residential structures, or for structures
within the city's original downtown overlay area.
(b) Alternative Non-Masonry Exterior Materials - The following materials shall not qualify nor be defined as
“masonry construction” in meeting the minimum requirements for the exterior construction of buildings, unless
specifically approved by the city's building official for single-family or duplex residential structures, or by the
planning and zoning commission on an approved site plan for single-family attached, multifamily, institutional,
office, retail, commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 692/720
(1) Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS), acrylic matrix, synthetic plaster, or other similar
synthetic material;
(2) Cementitious fiberboard siding (such as “HardyPlank”, HardyBoard”, etc.);
(3) PVC or other plastic-based siding material;
(4) Lightweight or featherweight concrete blocks or cinderblocks;
(5) Any other cementitious product not listed above; or
(6) Stucco, exterior plaster, adobe or mortar wash surface material.
(c) Standard Masonry Construction - See “Masonry Construction”.
(d) Special Exception for Alternative Non-Masonry Exterior Materials:
(1) All written requests for a special exception for alternative non-masonry exterior building
materials to qualify for any portion of the “masonry construction” requirement for any structure shall
be submitted in writing to the city, and shall be clearly noted and described in detail on a color facade
plan that is submitted along with the building permit application (for single-family and duplex
structures only) or with the site plan (for all other types of structures including multifamily, singlefamily
attached, nonresidential structures, etc.) or. [sic] The city may require submission of an actual
sample(s) of the proposed exterior finish material(s) prior to consideration of such material(s) by the
planning and zoning commission.
(2) The planning and zoning commission may approve a request for a special exception for an
alternative non-masonry exterior construction material(s) for any portion of the “masonry
construction” requirement for a structure if it is determined to be equivalent or better than the exterior
materials otherwise required by this article and by the city's building code (as part of the site plan
approval process for applicable structures such as multifamily, single-family attached, nonresidential,
etc.).
(3) Consideration for a special exception to the applicable exterior masonry construction
requirement for any structure shall be based only upon the following:
(i) Architectural design, creativity and innovation;
(ii) Compatibility with surrounding structures;
(iii) Relative ease of maintenance of the material(s);
(iv) Long-term durability and weather-resistance of the material(s); and
(v) Long-term stability in property value due to the high quality of the material(s).
(Ordinance 05-06, sec. 1, adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 25.02.713 Wind energy conversion systems (WECs)
Wind energy conversion systems shall require a specific use permit (SUP) in all zoning districts and flood plain
areas. Large wind energy systems shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot size of five (5.0) acres. All
wind energy systems shall be subject to the following additional requirements (unless one or more of the
following requirements are specifically waived or modified in the SUP ordinance):
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 693/720
(1) An accurately drawn-to-scale survey/site plan is required with the SUP application and shall
include the following:
(A) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
(B) Location, dimensions, setbacks and types of existing major structures on the property;
(C) Location of the proposed wind system tower, and setbacks/dimensions from all existing
structures on site, from all property lines, and from structures on adjacent properties;
(D) Locations and dimensions/setbacks from all public rights-of-way that are contiguous
with the property;
(E) Overhead utility lines, and approximate locations/canopy coverage of large existing trees
on the property;
(F) Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower
height, tower type and rated kW output;
(G) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings;
(H) Tower blueprint or drawing;
(I) Elevation drawings showing the design and height of the proposed energy system, and any
screening that will be provided to screen the system tower from public view.
(2) Wind towers and generators proposed to be installed within the 100-year floodplain shall also
have approval of the city's engineer and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Such
tower sites shall take such measures, as required by the city's engineer, to protect the sites from
damage from potential flooding. The city's engineer shall require a floodplain permit and a licensed
engineer's certification that the tower/generator will not pose a threat or safety hazard due to flood
conditions.
(3) No portion of the tower structure of a wind energy system shall be located within any required
front, side or rear yard, and the tower and all of its appurtenances shall be located behind (i.e., not in
front of) the main building unless otherwise authorized (i.e., varied) in the SUP ordinance. No
portion of a system may protrude over a property line without acquisition of an easement for the
encroachment from the adjacent property owner(s), nor over an easement without proper written
release from the utility provider or entity who owns or controls such easement.
(4) A wind energy system may exist only as an accessory use, and it may not be
constructed/installed until a primary structure exists on the property. A wind energy system may only
supply power to structures on the lot/parcel where the system is located (i.e., not to an off-site
structure).
(5) For property sizes less than or equal to five (5.0) acres in area, the tower height shall be a
maximum of sixty-five (65.0) feet. For property sizes greater than five (5.0) acres in area, the tower
height shall not exceed one hundred (100.0) feet unless otherwise approved in the SUP ordinance.
Blade clearance shall be a minimum of twenty (20.0) feet above the ground.
(6) Wind energy conversion systems must comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports, and must also
comply with applicable ASHTO engineering standards.
(7) The tower for a wind energy system shall be set back a minimum distance of two (2.0) times
the tower's height from all property lines, public rights-of-way and occupied buildings, and shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 694/720
set back a minimum distance of one and one-half (1.5) times the tower's height from the applicant's
own building(s) on the property unless constructing the WEC according to subsection (16) below.
(8) The tower for a wind energy system shall be set back a minimum distance of one and one-half
(1.5) times the tower's height from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted
otherwise by the affected utility.
(9) No tower shall be erected closer than two hundred (200.0) feet or a distance of five (5.0) times
the diameter of the larger rotor, whichever is the greater distance, to another wind energy tower.
(10) All wind energy systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system. This includes
both aerodynamic over speed controls (including variable pitch, tip and other similar systems) and
mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall not
be considered a sufficient braking system for over speed protection.
(11) Safety and security measures.
(A) A clearly visible warning sign that states “Caution, High Voltage” must be placed at the
base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(B) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to
prevent unauthorized access.
(C) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder
readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 12 feet from the ground.
(D) All access doors to wind energy systems and their appurtenances (e.g., cabinets, junction
boxes, etc.) shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized
persons.
(12) All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system, other than wires necessary to
connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and
the grounding wires shall be located underground.
(13) Wind energy systems shall be required to comply with the noise standards and requirements
contained within this code.
(14) Visual appearance.
(A) A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(B) The wind tower and generator shall remain painted or finished the neutral white, light
grey or silver color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer.
(C) All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning
signs, or owner identification on a wind generator, tower, building, or other structure associated
with a wind energy system, shall be prohibited. Such signs as described above shall be no larger
than four (4.0) square feet in size, and shall be located near the base of the tower.
(D) No flags, pennants, banners or similar materials may be displayed on or attached to any
portion of a wind energy system, including its tower, unless a proper permit is obtained from
the city for a temporary sign/display, in accordance with article 21.09 (Signs).
(15) Nuisance prevention.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 695/720
(A) Wind energy systems shall be sited, to the greatest extent practical, to minimize the
impact of shadow flicker or blade glint upon any inhabited structures (except for the owner's) or
public roadways. Systems found to be a nuisance or a traffic hazard shall be shut down until the
flicker or glint problem is remedied.
(B) Wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) rules, and shall not cause static noise interference with other individuals'
television reception or with private or public telecommunications (e.g., public safety
communications, 911 dispatch, etc.).
(16) No wind energy system shall be placed or constructed on the roof of any existing structure
unless such structure is/was designed and constructed to structurally accommodate and support a
roof-mounted wind energy system. Certification by a structural engineer shall be required for any
roof-mounted system. No roof-mounted WEC shall exceed a maximum height of sixty-five (65.0)
feet, as measured from the lowest ground level elevation point of the structure to which it is mounted,
to the top of the tower (i.e., at the center of the hub).
(17) A building permit shall be required for the installation of a wind energy system.
(A) The owner shall submit an application to the building official. The application shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, a line drawing of the electrical
components, and two copies of the site plan for the wind energy system, and any fee the city
requires for an accessory use or building.
(B) No permit for a wind energy system shall be issued until evidence of written approval has
been given to the city that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator, and the utility company has expressed
written approval for the system. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(C) Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base and footings. An engineering
analysis of the tower showing compliance with the city's building code, and certified by a
licensed professional engineer, shall also be submitted. This analysis is frequently supplied by
the manufacturer.
(D) Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the
manner of installation conforms to the city's electrical code. This information is frequently
supplied by the manufacturer.
(E) A building permit issued for a wind energy system shall expire if the system is not
installed, functioning and passed city inspection within six (6) months (i.e., 180 calendar days)
following the date the permit is issued.
(18) Abandonment.
(A) A wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month (i.e., 365 calendar
days) period will be deemed to be abandoned. The building official (or designee) may issue a
notice of abandonment to the owner of a wind energy system that is deemed to have been
abandoned. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30
calendar days from the date that the notice was mailed to the owner. The building official (or
designee) shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has
been withdrawn if the owner provides sufficient information that demonstrates the wind energy
system has not been abandoned, and that it is in compliance and operational in accordance with
the city's regulations for WECs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 696/720
(B) If the wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the owner of the wind energy
system shall remove the wind generator and tower structure (including all its appurtenances)
from the property at the owner's sole expense within three (3) months (i.e., 90 calendar days)
after the notice of abandonment has been sent to the owner. If the owner fails to completely
remove the wind generator, tower and any associated appurtenances, the building official (or
designee) may pursue a legal action to have the wind generator and tower structure removed at
the owner's expense.
(19) Future subdivision of any property upon which a wind energy system is located shall only be
allowed if the WEC is a legally conforming use/structure, and if all setback, height and other
requirements for WECs (as such exist at the time of such future subdivision) remain in compliance.
(Ordinance 24-08, sec. 2, adopted 9/17/09)
Sec. 25.02.714 Special parking, loading and vehicular stacking requirements
(a) Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities.
(1) A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet (8') by twenty feet (20') with
direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not
constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. An escape
lane, of at least eight (8) feet in width and with negotiable geometric design, must be provided to
allow vehicles to get out of stacking lane in the event of a stalled vehicle, emergency, accidental
entry, etc.
(2) For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or
mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces. One escape lane shall be
provided.
(3) For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of five (5) spaces shall be
provided for the first vehicle stop (usually the menu/order board), and two (2) spaces shall be
provided for each additional vehicle stop (order/pickup windows, etc.). One escape lane shall be
provided from the beginning of the stacking lane to the first stop (e.g., menu/order board).
(4) For other retail operations (i.e., other than restaurants, banks, etc. specifically cited in this
section) and kiosks that provide drive-through or drive-up service (e.g., pharmacy, dry cleaners, etc.),
a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided.
(5) For a full-service carwash, each vacuum or gas pump lane shall be provided with a minimum
of four (4) stacking spaces. For the finish/drying area, adequate vehicle stacking and storage space
must be provided to keep finished vehicles out of circulation aisles, access easements, fire lanes,
streets, etc.
(6) For each automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) carwash bay, a minimum of three (3)
stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One stacking space shall be
provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing.
(7) For each wand-type self-service (open) carwash bay, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces, in
addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One stacking space shall be provided at the exit end
of each wash bay for window drying and other detailing, unless a separate area/shade structure is
provided (outside of circulation aisles) for these activities.
(8) For automobile quick-lube type facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces shall be
provided for each service bay in addition to the service bay itself.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 697/720
(b) Overhead doors. In all nonresidential zoning districts, overhead/roll-up service bay doors shall not face
any public street unless otherwise provided below:
(1) An oil/lube change establishment and an automated carwash bay shall be the only uses that can
have overhead/roll-up service bay doors on opposite sides of the building for drive-through
convenience. For a corner lot, only one set of service bay doors (either entrance or exit) may face
onto the secondary roadway (for example: along a freeway frontage road one set of doors can face
onto the perpendicular side-street and the other/opposite set of doors faces the interior side yard;
along a major or minor arterial one set of doors can face onto the perpendicular side-street and the
other/opposite set of doors faces the interior side yard; etc.). For a through lot, or for a lot having
three or more sides facing a public street, or for another peculiar circumstance pertaining to how a
development site is situated, a waiver may be requested and may be approved by the planning and
zoning commission during site plan approval process.
(2) Legally nonconforming overhead/roll-up service bay doors in existence as of the effective date
of this section may remain used for their current purpose. However, any change of use on the
property to any non-automotive-related retail, personal service or food service use (such as a grocery
store, convenience store, mini-mart, restaurant, cafeteria, etc.) shall require permanent closure and
removal of such doors, and conversion of the openings to either fixed-pane windows or solid exterior
construction that matches, to the greatest extent practical, the colors and finishes of the building.
(c) Use of required parking and loading spaces. Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used
only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for refuse containers, cart corrals, recycling kiosks,
signs or sign support structures, telecommunications towers or support structures, storage or display of boats,
trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials or products for sale/lease/rent.
(d) Municipal facilities. Fire stations and other municipally owned administrative and service facilities are
exempt from this section.
Sec. 25.02.715 Drive-through, drive-in and walk-up services
(a) Sale of prepackaged items. An establishment shall not sell or serve prepackaged beverages through drivethrough,
drive-in, drive-up or walk-up facilities. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to sales and
service of food or beverages to:
(1) Customers who must physically leave their vehicles and enter a building in order to purchase
such food or beverages; or
(2) Sale or service of food to a customer by a fast food or a dine-in/convenience restaurant.
(b) Vehicle stacking. On-site vehicle stacking for drive-through facilities shall be provided in accordance with
section 25.02.714.
(c) Exterior speakers. Exterior speakers shall not operate at a volume that disturbs neighboring property
owners, and shall comply with the city's noise regulations in this code.
(d) Adjacent to residential. Drive-through, drive-in, drive-up and walk-up facilities (i.e. the point-of-order
menu board and the actual window or portal through which goods are distributed) shall not be located closer
than fifty (50) feet to a residential zoning district boundary.
Sec. 25.02.716 Site and building lighting
(a) Purpose. Standards for controlling lighting and glare are set forth to reduce the annoyance and
inconvenience to property owners and traffic hazards to motorists. These standards are intended to allow
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 698/720
reasonable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and occupants while requiring adequate
levels of lighting of parking areas.
(b) Nonresidential site lighting and glare standards.
(1) Site and building lighting shall not produce obnoxious glare or direct illumination across the
site's property line from a visible source of illumination that creates a nuisance or detracts from the
use or enjoyment of adjacent property. All outside lights shall be comprised of a light source and
reflector that act together such that the light beam is controlled and not directed across any
neighboring property line above a height of three (3) feet. The allowable maximum intensity
measured at the property line adjoining a residential district shall be 0.25 footcandles, and at the
property line adjoining a nonresidential district shall be 0.5 footcandles. Light poles shall not exceed
the maximum height allowed in the subject property's zoning district, and they shall be placed on the
site a setback equal to their height from all adjacent residential property.
(2) All off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses which are used after dark shall be
illuminated beginning one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of
business operation. If only a portion of a parking area is used after dark, only that part is required to
be illuminated.
(3) Building floodlighting shall only be allowed using white, shielded/not visible, steadily
illuminating light sources (i.e., shall not be tinted using colored bulbs, gels or lenses, shall not change
colors or blink or change intensity in any way, etc.).
(4) Freestanding “art forms” shall not be internally lighted. Such fixtures shall only be externally
illuminated using tightly focused uplighting from a white, shielded/not visible, steadily illuminating
light source (i.e., shall not be tinted using colored bulbs, gels or lenses, shall not change colors or
blink or change intensity in any way, etc.).
(c) Luminaires. Light sources shall be of a down-light type, indirect, diffused or shielded type luminaires
installed and maintained so as to reduce glare effect (i.e., minimum seventy-degree (70°) cutoff when measured
from horizontal) and light overspill onto adjacent streets and properties. Bare bulbs above seventy-five (75)
watts and strings of lamps are prohibited, except for temporary lighting as provided in subsection (d) below.
(d) Special seasonal or temporary lighting (low wattage). Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited, except
during holidays special lighting shall be permitted for a maximum time period of forty-five (45) calendar days
for each holiday used. In nonresidential zoning districts only, strings of low-wattage “holiday” or “twinkling”
lights are only allowed during these holiday periods unless otherwise approved for permanent display on a
nonresidential building (or its premises, such as on an outdoor dining patio or in trees on the site) by the
planning and zoning commission during the site plan and facade plan approval process.
(e) Gaseous/electrified tubing and backlit lighting elements. The use of gaseous, LED or other electrified or
illuminated tubing or backlit “band” lighting to outline or decorate buildings, signs or other site features shall be
limited as follows:
(1) In residential or agricultural zoning districts: Prohibited.
(2) In nonresidential zoning districts:
(A) Allowed to decorate only one (1) predominantly horizontal architectural element on a
building (e.g., along the rooflines including any peaks/arches/bump-ups/etc., or horizontally
along the building's facade as lighted tubing or a backlit “band”) provided that such
tubing/“band” does not exceed six inches (6") in width. Any lighted “band” on a building in
addition to, or that exceeds the maximum width of, the single allowed lighted element described
above shall be counted and regulated as part of the building's “wall signage” per the sign
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 699/720
ordinance (article 21.09 of this code, as amended). Vertically-oriented gaseous, LED or other
electrified or illuminated tubing or “bands” on a building or on any site fixture are prohibited.
(B) Building-mounted awnings may be backlit provided they do not comprise more than ten
percent (10%) of a building facade's total surface area, or the outermost edges only of awnings
may be outlined or decorated with gaseous or electrified tubing (i.e., entire awnings may not be
outlined, only the outermost edges).
(C) Building-mounted, projecting porch covers may be outlined or decorated with gaseous or
electrified tubing to highlight the main entrance into the building. Only the outermost
panel/plane that is more or less parallel to the building's front facade may be backlit (i.e., not
the entire projecting porch cover).
(D) The outer edges of canopies sheltering vehicular areas (such as at gas stations,
convenience stores, drive-through bank facilities, etc.) may be outlined or decorated with one
gaseous, LED or electrified/illuminated tubing strip having a maximum width of six inches
(6"), or with a backlit “band” provided that such “band” does not exceed the thickness of the
canopy or eighteen inches (18") in width, whichever is smaller (i.e., the “band” may not
protrude beyond the upper or lower edge of the canopy).
(E) Freestanding “art forms” shall not be illuminated by or with gaseous, LED or other
electrified or illuminated tubing or devices. Special seasonal figurines, decorations and holiday
display fixtures shall be permitted for a maximum time period of forty-five (45) calendar days
for each holiday used.
(f) Municipal facilities. Fire stations and other municipally-owned administrative and service facilities are
exempt from this section.
(g) Waiver. A waiver to any provision of this section may be requested and may be approved by the planning
and zoning commission during the site plan and facade plan approval process.
Sec. 25.02.717 Outside display, storage and retail sales
(a) Outside display. Where it is allowed, outside display of merchandise and seasonal items (e.g., Christmas
trees, pumpkins or other seasonal produce items, landscaping/gardening materials, temporary floral or other
holiday-oriented sales tents, etc.) shall:
(1) Not be placed/located more than twenty feet (20') from the main building nor on top of any
structure.
(2) Not occupy any required parking spaces (except on a temporary basis only, which is a
maximum of 45 calendar days per display and a maximum of two displays per calendar year - a city
permit shall be required for any allowed outside display occupying any required parking spaces for
any length of time).
(3) Not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation,
either on site or off site, in any way.
(4) Not extend above ten (10) feet in height nor into public right-of-way, over any easement, or
onto adjacent property.
(5) Not be left outside overnight - all outside display items shall not remain outside overnight, but
shall be removed and stored within a building at the end of business each day (except for seasonal
landscaping/gardening and large new/unused/non-consumable items that cannot reasonably be moved
indoors each evening such as landscaping materials, plants, trees, fertilizer/soil amendments,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 700/720
Christmas trees, swingsets/play structures, etc. which may remain outside for as long as sales of such
seasonal items is actively occurring - a city permit shall be required for any outside display remaining
outside overnight for any length of time).
(6) Be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a clean,
litter-free manner.
(b) Outside storage.
(1) Where it is allowed, outside storage shall:
(A) Be limited to a maximum of five percent (5%) of the total lot area in the Local Retail
(LR) zoning district;
(B) Be limited to a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total lot area in the Commercial (C)
zoning district;
(C) Be limited to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area in the Light
Manufacturing (LM) and Heavy Manufacturing (HM) zoning districts;
(D) Not be located in front of (i.e., on any street side of), or on top of, any structure;
(E) Be screened, at a minimum height of six feet (6'), by one or a combination of the
following methods (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property):
(i) Solid masonry (brick, concrete block or concrete panels) wall similar in materials
and color to the main building(s);
(ii) Wrought iron with solid landscape screening; or
(iii) Alternate equivalent screening may as be approved through the site plan approval
process.
(F) Not exceed the height of the screening wall/fence - outside storage exceeding eight feet
(8') in height shall require a specific use permit in accordance with Division 26 (Special Uses).
(2) Outside storage units, portable (PODs). Portable outside storage units shall:
(A) Be allowed, without a permit, on a short-term basis (see subsection (G) below) in any
zoning district;
(B) Not be located in front of the main building(s), except as provided for a residence in
subsection (L) below;
(C) Not be located within any required front, side or rear yard setback (except as provided for
a residence in subsection (L) below), or within any fire lane, easement or right-of-way;
(D) Not occupy any required vehicular parking (except as provided for a residence in
subsection (L) below), stacking, loading or maneuvering space;
(E) Be completely screened from view of public streets (either by the building itself or by a
screening device), except as provided for a residence in subsection (L) below;
(F) Be easily accessible by transport vehicle;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 701/720
(G) Not remain on site for longer than thirty (30) calendar days (for a storage unit that is
needed to temporarily store/secure construction materials at a city-permitted construction site or
to temporarily store/secure personal residential possessions while moving/relocating or during
house remodeling, such time frame may be extended for the duration of the construction, or the
moving/relocation or house remodeling, provided a permit is first issued by the city, provided
the building permit for the construction site remains valid (if applicable), and provided that
such unit is immediately removed from the premises upon completion of construction or upon
completion of moving/relocation or house remodeling, as applicable);
(H) Be limited to the placement of no more than two (2) storage units on any lot, tract or
parcel (unless such units are needed for a city-permitted construction site, in which case more
than two units may be approved and permitted by the building official);
(I) Not exceed twenty (20) feet in length, or eight (8) feet in width, or eight (8) feet in height
(a container of larger size in one or more of these dimensions shall be defined as a “cargo
container”);
(J) Not be illuminated in any way;
(K) Not be used for any use other than the storage of materials or goods (i.e., no business
operations, etc.); and
(L) A maximum of one (1) portable outside storage unit may be used for a single-family or
two-family residence, on a short-term basis only in accordance with subsection (G) above,
during home construction, moving/relocation, or house remodeling. Such storage unit may be
placed in the driveway of such residence (with no screening required) and within the front, side
or rear setback (as applicable to driveway location), but shall not encroach into any fire lane,
easement, adjacent property or right-of-way.
(3) Cargo containers. Cargo containers shall:
(A) Not be allowed in any residential zoning district (except for a nonresidential use only,
such as a school or day care or church, in a residential district, on a short-term basis, and
subject to all the same requirements as a portable outside storage unit except as provided
below); and
(B) Be subject to all of the same requirements as a portable outside storage unit, except they
may not exceed forty (40) feet in length, or eight (8) feet in width, or ten (10) feet in height.
(c) Outside retail sales. All retail sales shall occur completely within a permanent main building on the site
(i.e., not in a parking lot, on the street or a public sidewalk, in a vehicle or trailer, under a tent, etc.) except for a
drive-in restaurant where a carhop delivers food, and collects payment for such food, at designated outdoor
ordering stations, and except for temporary holiday tent sales (such as Christmas trees, holiday floral tent sales,
etc.) provided that the outside sales operation is by the actual owner/tenant of the property (i.e., not by itinerant
vendors who are not affiliated with the actual owner/tenant of the property).
(Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
Sec. 25.02.718 Carports, canopies and porte cocheres
(a) Residential uses. Carports, canopies and porte cocheres may be constructed in residential zoning districts
only if the primary structure on the property was constructed prior to 2002. All carports, canopies and porte
cocheres constructed pursuant to this section shall:
(1) Have a minimum fifteen (15) foot setback from the property line;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 702/720
(2) Be supported by masonry or metal columns set in concrete;
(3) Be constructed of construction materials that match the size, shape and material used to
construct the main building;
(4) Have a roof that is either gable or flat in design;
(5) Two or more sides of the carport must be open;
(6) Have a maximum height of twelve (12) feet;
(7) The parking area must be constructed of an improved surface; and
(8) There may not be an entry to the rear of the property if the only available access point would be
an unimproved alley.
(b) Nonresidential uses. A carport, canopy or porte cochere for a nonresidential use (regardless of zoning
district) shall:
(1) Not encroach into a required front, side or rear yard setback;
(2) Not extend over a public street, a city easement (unless approved by the city's engineer), or a
solid waste container (i.e., dumpster);
(3) Have a minimum 14-foot clearance when extending over a fire lane or vehicular drive aisle;
and
(4) Be supported by masonry columns (or masonry-encased columns) that are architecturally
integrated and match the materials and colors of the main building.
(Ordinance 10-16 adopted 3/7/16)
Sec. 25.02.719 Distance separations between certain uses
Convenience stores/mini-marts. A minimum separation distance of one thousand feet (1,000') shall be
maintained between convenience stores/mini-marts, as measured from property line to property line.
Sec. 25.02.720 Conversions of existing structures; additional retail uses; accessory uses
(a) Conversion of structure to retail use. The conversion of an existing structure to a retail or other business
use shall only be in accordance with all city codes and ordinances, and shall only occur upon a finding that the
proposed use is in compliance with the applicable zoning district, and that the premises/site will meet parking
and other requirements for the proposed use.
(b) Addition of prepackaged food or beverage sales. The addition of the sale of prepackaged food or
beverages to the operation of an existing retail or business establishment shall be considered a new use, and shall
only be allowed with the approval of a specific use permit in accordance with Division 26 (Special Uses).
(c) Prepackaged food or beverage sales as an accessory use. If the sales of prepackaged foods and beverages,
in combination, exceeds ten percent (10%) of an establishment's gross annual sales revenues, then such
prepackaged food and beverage sales shall be considered a primary use, and shall only be allowed with the
approval of a specific use permit in accordance with Division 26 (Special Uses).
(Ordinance 04-10 adopted 5/6/10)
Secs. 25.02.721–25.02.730 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 703/720
Division 33. Permits and Certificates
Sec. 25.02.731 Certificate of occupancy and compliance
(a) No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building official stating that the building
or proposed use of a building or premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these
regulations.
(b) Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for building
permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alteration of such building shall have
been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept
on file in the office of the building official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
propriety or tenancy interest in the building affected.
(Ordinance 652, sec. 1, adopted 12/17/87; Ordinance 02-92, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/92; Ordinance 2-2000, sec. 1,
adopted 1/20/00)
Sec. 25.02.732 Zoning application fee structure
The zoning application fee structure shall be established by resolution of the city council. Applications
withdrawn within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the application is submitted may qualify for a partial
refund in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Applications withdrawn after twenty-four (24)
hours from the time application is submitted shall not qualify for a refund. (Ordinance 26-15 adopted 12/14/15)
Secs. 25.02.733–25.02.750 Reserved
Division 34. Enforcement
Sec. 25.02.751 Generally
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city. All
applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the use of the property, and such
other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of
such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building official.
Secs. 25.02.752–25.02.760 Reserved
Division 35. Penalty for Violation
Sec. 25.02.761 Generally
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith
or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or engage in any use in violation
of any provision hereof or of any site plan or other detailed statement submitted and approved hereunder, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the city shall be liable to a fine of not
more than $2,000.00 for each offense, and each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation
of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith and having charge of the premises or who may have assisted in the
commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as
herein provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 704/720
If a building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained,
or if a building, other structure, or land is used in violation of this article, the city council, in addition to other
remedies, may institute appropriate action to:
(1) Prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use;
(2) Restrain, correct, or abate the violation;
(3) Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or
(4) Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use on or about the premises.
(Ordinance 14-98, sec. 1, adopted 10/15/98)
Sec. 25.02.762–25.02.780 Reserved
Division 36. Changes and Amendments
Sec. 25.02.781 Initiation of administrative procedures
All zoning and site plan requests to be considered by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city
council, shall be initiated by filing an application with the city. The applications required by this division shall
be on forms supplied by the city which shall be available in the offices of the city.
Sec. 25.02.782 Submittal and filing
No application shall be deemed “filed” until such application is determined to be complete and the fee
established in the master fee schedule or other ordinances of the city for processing the application has been
paid.
Sec. 25.02.783 Authority to initiate a request
(a) All platting, zoning and site plan requests, and/or requests to amend the comprehensive plan or the
thoroughfare plan may be initiated by the owner of the affected property or his/her authorized representative
who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee for the request, or the city council may direct to
initiate such a request on behalf of the city.
(b) The governing body may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of
the districts or regulations herein established.
(c) Amendments to the text of this article shall be initiated only by action of the city council to initiate such a
request on behalf of the city or by the city manager or city manager's designee.
Sec. 25.02.784 Application withdrawal
(a) After submission and filing as provided in this division the planning commission or governing body may
consider to allow a withdrawal with or without prejudice. An application for the same lot or tract withdrawn
with prejudice may not be resubmitted for consideration for a period of one year.
(b) Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted and filed in writing to the city manager or
designee.
(c) Application fees are not refundable except in cases in which the city manager or designee determines that
an application was accepted in error, or the fee paid exceeded the amount due under the provision of this article
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 705/720
or other ordinances of the city, in which case the amount of the overpayment may be at discretion refunded to
the applicant.
Sec. 25.02.785 Conduct of public hearings
(a) Notice of public hearing.
(1) Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be sent to
all owners of property within a distance of at least 200 feet from the boundaries of the subject
property at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Such notice shall be served by using the last
known address as listed on the last approved city tax roll and depositing the notice postage paid in the
United States mail.
(2) In addition, notice of such hearing shall be published one time in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such hearing, and a sign
giving notice of a proposed zone change shall be placed on the subject property at least ten (10) days
prior to the public hearing.
(3) Notice of hearings on proposed changes in the text of the zoning ordinance shall be
accomplished by one publication not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in the official
newspaper of the city.
(b) Public hearing postponement, recess, and continuations.
(1) A public hearing for which notice has been given may be postponed by announcing the
postponement at or after the time and place the hearing is scheduled to begin.
(2) A public hearing may be recessed and continued any time after the hearing has commenced.
(3) If a postponement or continuance of a public hearing is to a specific date and time no later than
60 days from the first or most recent hearing, the announcement of the postponement or continuance
at the public hearing in which the application has been postponed or continued shall he sufficient
notice and no additional notice is required.
(4) Postponed or continued public hearing shall be presumed to be held in the same location,
unless a different location for the hearing is announced at the time of the postponement or
continuance.
(5) In the event that any request or amendment is being considered, whether or not a public hearing
is involved, and it is continued at the request of the applicant more than one (1) time, an additional
fee shall be required to cover the reasonable costs to the city, including the cost of any additional
advertising cost and the cost of the city's consultants due to the postponement.
(c) Conduct of public hearing. Subject to the presiding officer's inherent authority to conduct meetings, the
public hearing shall generally be conducted as follows:
(1) Open public hearing;
(2) Report by the city representative;
(3) Presentation by the applicant;
(4) Testimony and questions by the public;
(5) Closure of the public hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 706/720
Sec. 25.02.786 City council
(a) Authority. The city council shall conduct a public hearing and make determinations on the following
matters:
(1) Text amendments to this article.
(2) Zoning changes and map amendments, including reclassification of the zoning designations on
land, specific use permits, and planned developments.
(3) Amendments to the comprehensive plan.
(4) Amendments to the thoroughfare plan.
(5) Exceptions and appeals as may be set out in this article.
(b) Joint hearings. The city council may hold a public hearing, after publishing the required notice, jointly and
with any public hearing required to be held by the planning and zoning commission, but the city council shall
not take action until it has received a final report from the planning and zoning commission.
(c) Council hearing notice. Before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date of the hearing by the city council,
notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(d) Council approval or denial. Following the closure of the public hearing, the city council may take the
following actions:
(1) Approval of an item. The council may approve the request or amendment either as requested,
or in the form of a more restrictive district, and subject to such appropriate conditions as are allowed
by law. However, when a proposed zoning request is heard by the city council that has been denied
by the planning and zoning commission, a three-fourths (3/4) majority vote by the city council shall
be required for approval.
(2) Approval of any request for a text amendment to this article or a zoning change and map
amendment shall be granted only if the city council determines that the request or amendment is
consistent with the comprehensive plan and the purposes of this article. In the event the request or
amendment concerns a text amendment to this article or a zoning change and map amendment, the
city council shall enact an ordinance amending this article or amending the official zoning map,
whichever is applicable.
(3) Denial of an item. The council may deny the request or amendment with prejudice. If a request
or amendment is denied with prejudice, a new application may be submitted for the same lot or tract
of land, or any portion thereof, within one year only if the new request is for a more restrictive or less
intense use or development. Unless the new proposal is more restrictive or less intense than the
previously denied proposal, then no other application pertaining to a change of zoning and map
amendment may be submitted on the same lot or tract of land, or any portion thereof, for a period of
one (1) year from the date of its denial by the council. If a request or amendment is denied by the
council without an indication of “with” or “without” prejudice, then the action shall be considered to
be “denied with prejudice.”
(4) Denial without prejudice. The city council may deny the request or amendment without
prejudice, in which case an application for a change in zoning and map amendment other than that
which was requested on the original application may be filed at the applicant's discretion.
(5) Reapplication due to changed conditions. A proposal to rezone a tract or parcel of land which
has been previously rejected by the city council may be resubmitted within one year only if there is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 707/720
an actual change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the tract or parcel of land or the
property surrounding it. In that event, the applicant must submit to the city manager or designee in
writing, a resume describing such changed conditions. The city manager or designee shall investigate
the property or cause such an investigation to be made and shall report to the planning and zoning
commission whether or not such changed conditions exist. Upon hearing this report, the planning and
zoning commission shall either grant or deny the request to refile the proposal for rezoning.
(e) Protest of proposed change in zoning. Property owners of the effected property or adjacent to and within a
radius of two hundred (200) feet of a property for which a change in zoning is being considered have the right to
file a written protest against the request. The land area of this two hundred (200) feet radius includes streets,
alleys and other public right-of-way.
(f) Whenever such written protest is signed by the property owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area
of the lots or land included in such zoning change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and
within the above mentioned two hundred (200) feet radius, such change in zoning shall require a favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the council.
(g) For purposes of determining representation on this written protest, the written protest of any one owner of
land owned by two or more persons shall be presumed to be the protest of all owners.
Sec. 25.02.787 Protest against changes
In case, however, of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area
of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 200
feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite
thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the legislative body of such
municipality.
Sec. 25.02.788 Changes to be reflected on zoning map
The official zoning map of the city shall be kept in the office of the city secretary, and all changes in the district
boundaries shall be noted thereon immediately after approval by the governing body of the city.
(Ordinance 18-10 adopted 12/9/10)
Secs. 25.02.789–25.02.800 Reserved
Division 37. Definitions
Sec. 25.02.801 Certain words defined
Certain words in this article are defined for the purpose hereof as follows. Words in the present tense include the
future; words in the singular number include the plural number; the words in the plural number include the
singular; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the word “lot” includes the word “plot”; the word
“shall” is mandatory and not directive.
Accessory building. In a residence or apartment district, a subordinate building, attached to or detached from the
main building, without separate utilities, not used for commercial purposes and not rented and containing
servants' quarters, a washroom, a storage room for domestic storage only, and space for one or more
automobiles. In any other district, a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to and used only in
conjunction with the main building.
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent (i.e., 0.05%) of
alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. Includes ales,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 708/720
beers, meads, spirits, wines, wine coolers, and other fermented or distilled beverages.
Alley. A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting
thereon.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house arranged, designed or occupied as the residence by a
single family, individual, or group of individuals.
Apartment house. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied as three or more apartments or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families
living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Apartment hotel. Any building larger than an apartment house designed or built to be occupied as a series of
separate apartments and by persons living independently of each other.
Area of the lot. The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of street, and
alleys.
Bakery, commercial. A large-scale food manufacturing operation that produces baked goods such as bread, buns,
biscuits, ice-cream cones, cakes, pies, and other baked products of which flour or meal is the principle ingredient
primarily for commercial/wholesale customers (i.e., not retail sales) for off-site distribution and consumption.
Bakery, retail (also known as a bake shop). A small-scale, retail sales establishment that specializes in the
production, decorating and sale of oven-baked cakes, pies, doughnuts and other similar specialty dessert items
primarily for off-site consumption. If on-site dining/consumption areas and/or drive-through service are allowed
and provided, the establishment shall also comply with on-site vehicular parking and stacking requirements in
section 25.02.714(a).
Bar (includes beer tavern and lounge). An area or an establishment where the primary activity is the onpremises
sale, serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages, provided the establishment has all applicable
local, state and federal permits/licenses for such. Does not ordinarily include live music, the playing of recorded
music (other than one coin-operated jukebox) or dancing (see “night club/dance hall”). The sale and service of
food and snacks is incidental to the primary use of alcoholic beverage sales/consumption.
Basement. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade,
but located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
Block. An area within the city enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or, if said word is
used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets
which intersect said street on said side.
Boarding house. A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for five or more persons are served for
compensation.
Breezeway. A covered passage one story in height connecting a main structure and an accessory building.
Brewery/distillery. A commercial-scale or industrial-scale establishment that annually brews more than 5,000
barrels of ales, beers, meads, or other alcoholic beverages (other than wine, see “winery” and “winery,
boutique”), and that has all applicable local, state and federal permits/licenses for such alcoholic beverage
production.
Building. Any structure or building for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
movable property of any kind.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 709/720
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line and beyond which buildings may not be
erected.
Building, end of. Those sides of the building having the least dimensions and in which doors or openings are not
customarily provided for ingress and egress.
Business. Includes retail, commercial, and manufacturing uses and districts as herein defined.
Cafeteria (also includes a cafe). See “restaurant, dine-in/convenience” or “restaurant, dine-in only,” as
applicable.
Candy shop. A retail-only sales establishment that specializes in the retail sale of candy, confections and other
specialty non-baked dessert items (for retail sales of baked dessert items, see “bakery, retail”).
Cargo container. A standardized, reusable shipping or storage vessel used in the transportation of freight or the
storage of goods, that is capable of being mounted and moved on a rail car, a truck or a ship.
Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade but so
located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from grade to
ceiling.
Clinic, medical. An institution or station for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted outpatients.
Convalescent home. Any structure used for or occupied by persons recovering with illness or suffering from the
infirmities of old age.
Convenience store/mini-mart. A small-scale retail store of at least 1,000, but no larger than 5,000, square feet in
total building square footage which primarily sells groceries, tobacco products, sundries/toiletries, household
and other non-food items, newspapers and magazines, candy and snacks, prepackaged (i.e., not cooked or
prepared on-site) convenience food items such as sandwiches and salads, heated fast food items (such as hot
dogs, etc.), for off-site use and consumption. (For on-site motor fuel sales, see “gasoline/motor fuel sales”; for
on-site food service/consumption, see “restaurant, fast food,” “restaurant, dine-in/convenience,” or “restaurant,
dine-in only,” as applicable; for drive-in, drive through or walk-up convenience services, see “drive-in service,”
“drive-through service” or “walk-up service,” as applicable).
Court. An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two sides by the walls of the building. An inner court
[is] entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a
street, alley, yard, or other permanently open space.
Customary home occupations. A customary home occupation customarily carried on [in] the home by a member
of the occupant's family without structural alterations in the building or any of its rooms, without the installation
of machinery other than that customary to normal household operation or additional equipment without the
employment of additional persons, without the use of a sign to advertise the occupation and which does not
cause the generation of additional traffic in the street.
Dance hall. See “night club.”
Day nursery. A place where children are left for care between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
Depth of rear yard. The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other than accessory
building and the rear lot line.
Depth of lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Distillation of liquors, spirits. See “brewery/distillery.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 710/720
District. A section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the building are
uniform.
Drive-in service (also includes drive-up service). A facility that is designed to allow customers to obtain goods
in predominantly disposable containers while remaining in their vehicles via an employee who physically
delivers such goods to their vehicles (does not include convenience services such as a remote banking, pharmacy
or dry cleaners drive-in facility where only services or nonconsumables are distributed). A drive-in service
facility shall have one on-site vehicular parking space for each order/dining station plus additional on-site
parking in accordance with zoning ordinance requirements for the primary use, and vehicular stacking as
provided in section 25.02.714(a), and shall not provide food or beverage service to vehicles parked off site or
within public rights-of-way.
Drive-through service. A facility that is designed to allow customers to obtain goods in predominantly
disposable containers while remaining in their motor vehicles via a drive-through window wherein the server
does not physically leave the confines of the building (does not include convenience services such as a remote
banking, pharmacy or dry cleaners drive-through facility where only services or non-consumables are
distributed). A drive-through service facility shall have on-site parking in accordance with zoning ordinance
requirements for the primary use, and vehicular stacking as provided in section 25.02.714(a), and shall not
provide food or beverage service to vehicles parked off site or within public rights-of-way.
Drive-up service. See “drive-in service.”
Drug store. See “pharmacy/drug store.”
Dwelling, one-family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one
family, or by one family and not more than four boarders or lodgers.
Dwelling, two-family. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than
two families, or by two families and not more than four boarders or lodgers. (Two boarders or lodgers to each
unit.)
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as
living quarters.
Efficiency apartment. An apartment having a combination living and bedroom. (No separate bedroom.)
Event center. A facility that is used primarily for the purpose of leasing or renting for private parties on a
temporary basis.
Family. A family is any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more
than four individuals are unrelated by blood.
Farm. An area of two acres or more, which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit, trees and grain and their storage on the area as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine including dairy farms with the necessary
accessory uses and for treating and storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory
use shall be secondary to that of the normal activities; and provided further that it does not include the
commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals.
Front yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of the lot between
the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or
any projection hereof other than the projection of the usual steps or eave overhang.
Gasoline/motor fuel sales, automated (retail). A gasoline/motor fuel sales facility that is completely automated
(i.e., with no attendant).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 711/720
Gasoline/motor fuel sales (retail). That portion of a property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases
used as fuel are stored, sold and dispensed from fixed equipment (i.e., fuel pumps) into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles.
Grade. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only.[:] It is the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of
the wall adjoining the street; for buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, it is the average of the
elevation of the sidewalks at the center of all walls adjoining the street; for buildings having no walls adjoining
the street.[:] It is the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building; any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as
adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk has been constructed, the city engineer shall establish such sidewalk
level or its equivalent for the purpose of these regulations.
Grocery store. A retail store of over 5,000 square feet that primarily sells groceries and consumable food items,
but that may also sell tobacco products, sundries/toiletries, household and other non-food items, newspapers and
magazines, candy and snacks, floral items, prepackaged (i.e., not cooked or prepared on-site) convenience food
items such as sandwiches and salads, in-house delicatessen-prepared and bakery-prepared food items (such as
fresh meats, cheeses, salads, entrees, side dishes, desserts, etc.), audio and video rentals, etc. for off-site use and
consumption. On-site deli-food and bakery-food consumption is allowed by right provided such dining areas
comprise no more than 10% of the total publicly accessible sales floor area of the store. (For on-site motor fuel
sales, see “gasoline/motor fuel sales”; for drive-in, drive through or walk-up convenience services, see “drive-in
service,” “drive-through service” or “walk-up service,” as applicable).
Gross floor area. The gross floor area of an apartment house shall be measured by taking the outside dimensions
of the apartment building at each floor level excluding, however, the floor area of basements or attics not used
for residential purposes.
Height. The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average established grade at
the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher or, if no street grade has been established, to
the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the mean height
level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the following
structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tank[s], water towers,
radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height.
Hobby shop. An accessory use housed in a dwelling or in an accessory building in which the residents of the
premises engage in recreational activities, none of which shall disturb the neighbors on either side or in the rear
thereof, and from which no revenue may be derived, in which no goods may be publicly displayed, offered for
sale, or advertised for sale, nor may any sign be used in connection therewith.
Home occupations. Any occupation that is customarily performed at home that does not involve a structural
change in the building, that does not require the employment of help, the installation of equipment or the display
of a sign, and shall not include beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, doctors' offices for treatment of patients.
Home workshop. See hobby shop.
Hospital. An institution or place where sick or injured inpatients are given medical or surgical care either at
public (charity) or private expense.
Hotel and motel. A building or arrangement of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which the rooms are usually occupied singly for hire, in
which there are no provisions for cooking in individual rooms or apartments.
Housing project. An area of three or more acres arranged according to a site plan to be submitted to and to be
approved by the city planning and zoning commission and the city council on which is indicated the amount of
land to be devoted to housing facilities, their arrangement thereon, together with the arrangement of access
streets and alleys and the entire area is to be zoned as an apartment zone upon the recommendation of the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 712/720
planning and zoning commission and the action of the city council, and in which it shall not be necessary to
subdivide the area into lots and blocks. The site plan shall indicate that all access streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm
sewers and storm sewer inlets shall be provided as required by the city and built in accordance with city
specifications.
Kindergarten. A school for children of pre-public-school age in which constructive endeavors, object lessons
and helpful games are prominent features of the curriculum.
Lodging house. A building other than a hotel, where lodging for five or more persons is provided for
compensation.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory building, and including such open spaces as
are required under this article, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
County Clerk, or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to
passage of this article.
Manufactured home. A “manufactured home” is a structure constructed after June 15, 1976, transportable in one
or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Microbrewery/brewpub. A food service establishment (“dine-in” only, no drive-through, drive-in or walk-up
service) that also brews no more than 5,000 barrels of malt beverages (such as beers and ales) annually on the
premises solely for on-site consumption by patrons (i.e., no carry-out or drive-through beverage sales), provided
the establishment has all applicable local, state and federal permits/licenses for such, The area used for brewing
operations shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the establishment.
Mobile home. A “mobile home” is a structure constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, airconditioning,
and electrical systems.
Mobile home park. A “mobile home park” is any premises on which two or more mobile homes/manufactured
homes are parked or situated and used for living or sleeping purposes, or any premises used or held out for the
purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for one or more mobile homes/manufactured homes whether
such vehicles stand on wheels or on rigid supports. A trailer park is a mobile home park.
Mortuary (or funeral home). A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a
building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Night club (also includes “dance hall”). An area or an establishment where the primary activity is dancing to
live or recorded music, and that may also include the on-premises sale, serving and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, as well as the sale and service of food and snacks, provided the establishment has all applicable local,
state and federal permits/licenses for such.
Nonconforming uses. A building, structure of use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of
this article or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 713/720
is situated.
One-family dwellings. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by one family, or by one
family and not more than four boarders or lodgers.
Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and
unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches.
Outside display, new materials. The temporary placement and display, in an unenclosed or unroofed area, of any
new/unused non-consumable goods, materials or merchandise for less than 24 hours on sales/business days only
(i.e., not on a continuous basis), and which are removed from display at the end of each sales/business day and
stored indoors overnight.
Outside display, prepackaged food or beverages. The temporary placement and display, in an unenclosed or
unroofed area, of any prepackaged food or beverage items for less than 24 hours on sales/business days only
(i.e., not on a continuous basis), and which are removed from display at the end of each sales/business day and
stored indoors overnight.
Outside display, used materials. The temporary placement and display, in an unenclosed or unroofed area, of any
used or salvaged non-consumable goods, materials or merchandise for less than 24 hours on sales/business days
only (i.e., not on a continuous basis), and which are removed from display at the end of each sales/business day
and stored indoors overnight.
Outside storage, new materials. The keeping, in an unenclosed or unroofed area, of any new/unused nonconsumable
goods, materials or merchandise in the same place for more than 24 hours (i.e., overnight).
Outside storage, prepackaged food or beverages. The keeping, in an unenclosed or unroofed area, of any
prepackaged food or beverage items in the same place for more than 24 hours (i.e., overnight).
Outside storage, used materials. The keeping, in an unenclosed or unroofed area, of any used or salvaged nonconsumable
goods, materials or merchandise in the same place for more than 24 hours (i.e., overnight).
Outside storage units, portable (PODs). A storage unit, or container, that is delivered to a location on a truck,
placed on a premises, and used for storage usually on a temporary basis (i.e., not permanent).
Parking space. An area of not less than 180 square feet (measuring approximately nine feet by 20 feet) not on a
public street or alley, surfaced with an all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed, together with an all-weather
surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress in any
dwelling, duplex, or apartment district, shall not include the parking of trucks or buses for commercial purposes.
Head-in parking adjacent to public thoroughfare wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street, shall not be
classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use.
Pharmacy/drug store. A retail store that includes the sale of prescription drugs, non-prescription medicines,
medical supplies, cosmetics, a limited selection of grocery and household items, tobacco products,
sundries/toiletries, newspapers and magazines, greeting cards, candy and snacks, prepackaged food items, etc.
for off-site use and consumption.
Place. An open, unoccupied space reserved for purposes of access to abutting property.
Prepackaged beverages, retail sales of. In general, consumable beverage items that are prepackaged and sealed
for retail sale and off-premises consumption, and that are not freshly dispensed on site. Does not include on-site
dispensed/brewed soda fountain drinks or hot beverages, prepackaged/bottled uncarbonated waters. flavored
uncarbonated or lightly carbonated waters, uncarbonated or lightly carbonated sports drinks, and carbonated
soda beverages that are sold individually by fast food restaurants along with on-site prepared fast food items.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 714/720
Prepackaged foods, retail sales of. In general, consumable food items that are prepackaged and sealed for retail
sale and off-premises consumption, and that are not cooked, prepared, assembled or packaged on site (e.g.,
ready-to-eat and ready-to-heat-and-eat sandwiches, salads, pastries, refrigerated/perishable snack items,
peeled/sliced fruits and vegetables, etc.). Does not include longer shelf-life, unrefrigerated prepackaged food
items like chips, cookies, crackers, candies, instant meals/entrees, etc.
Private garage. An accessory building or portion thereof in which not more than five privately owned motordriven
vehicles are stored by occupants of the premises, not more than one of which may be a truck of not to
exceed one or 1-1/2 ton capacity.
Public garage. A building or portion of a building used for repair[,] care, or servicing or [of] motor-driven
vehicles, or where motor-driven vehicles are equipped for operation, or kept for hire or sale, but not including
the open storage of trucks, trailers and vans.
Private stables. A stable with a capacity for not more than four horses or mules.
Public stables. A stable with a capacity for more than four horses or mules.
Rear yard. The required rear yard is an open space unoccupied and unobstructed extending across the rear of a
lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth of 20 percent of the depth of the lot.
Accessory buildings may occupy not to exceed 30 percent of the area of the required rear yard, except that in the
“A” district where access to accessory buildings is from a public alley, more than 30 percent of the required rear
yard may be covered by such buildings provided that the minimum distance between the rear of the main
building and the accessory building equals at least 20 percent of the depth of the lot.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular, portable structure, designed to be transported over the highways and
containing living or sleeping accommodations, such structure being designed and actually used as a temporary
dwelling during travel for recreation and pleasure purposes, and not exceeding eight feet in width and not
exceeding 40 feet in length. Any portable, vehicular structure with living or sleeping accommodations in excess
of the length and width herein stated, regardless of the design and use thereof, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be classed as a mobile home/manufactured home. The term “recreational vehicle” may include the terms
“travel trailer,” “camper,” “motor home,” or any other term given such vehicle, if the same is within the
definition of “recreational vehicle.”
Restaurant, dine-in/convenience. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served and
consumed within the primary building on the premises using predominantly non-disposable dishes/containers in
one or more of the following methods:
(1) Cafeteria-style where patrons make their selections while going through a serving line and
taken to a table for on-site consumption;
(2) Where patrons are normally provided with individual menus and are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where such are consumed;
(3) Where patrons may call orders in advance for carry-out service in disposable containers
provided they leave their vehicles and physically enter the building to pick up/pay for such carry-out
items; or
(4) Where drive-through/convenience window service is allowed and provided (see “drive-through
service”) in accordance with this article.
In addition to inside dining, a dine-inconvenience restaurant may also include outside/patio dining of up to an
additional 25% of the inside dining floor area provided that additional on-site parking for this area is provided in
accordance with zoning ordinance requirements for restaurant uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 715/720
Restaurant, dine-in only. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served and consumed within
the primary building on the premises using predominantly non-disposable dishes/containers in one or more of
the following methods:
(1) Cafeteria-style where patrons make their selections while going through a serving line and
taken to a table for on-site consumption;
(2) Where patrons are normally provided with individual menus and are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where such are consumed; or
(3) Where patrons may call orders in advance for carry-out service in disposable containers
provided they leave their vehicles and physically enter the building to pick up/pay for such carry-out
items.
In addition to inside dining, a dine-in restaurant may also include outside/patio dining of up to an additional 25%
of the inside dining floor area provided that additional on-site parking for this area is provided in accordance
with zoning ordinance requirements for restaurant uses.
Restaurant, fast food. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served and consumed either
within the primary building on the premises using predominantly disposable dishes/containers in one or more of
the following methods:
(1) Counter-service-style where patrons make and pay for their selections at an order counter, or
cafeteria-style where patrons make their selections while going through a serving line, and they then
take their selections to a table for on-site consumption or take them away for off-site consumption; or
(2) Where patrons may place, pay for, and receive their orders in disposable containers via drivethrough/
convenience window service if such is allowed and provided (see “drive-through service”) in
accordance with this article.
In addition to inside dining, a fast food restaurant may also include outside/patio dining of unlimited floor area
provided that additional on-site parking for this area is provided in accordance with zoning ordinance
requirements for restaurant uses.
Restaurant, outdoor/patio dining. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served and
consumed outside (i.e., not within an enclosed building on the premises) in an area that is part of, and contiguous
with, the primary restaurant, using either disposable or non-disposable dishes/containers in one or more of the
following methods:
(1) Cafeteria-style where patrons make their selections while going through a serving line and
taken to an outside table for on-site consumption; or
(2) Where patrons are normally provided with individual menus and are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same outside table or counter where such are consumed.
Outside/patio dining areas shall comply with applicable on-site parking requirements for restaurants in
accordance with zoning ordinance requirements for restaurant uses.
Restaurant/private club. A dine-in only restaurant (i.e., no drive-through, drive-in or walk-up services) that has
all applicable local, state and federal permits/licenses for the on-site sales and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, and that does not have or provide any type of carry-out sales of alcoholic beverages, in accordance
with state law.
Servants' quarters. An accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main
building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a
separate domicile.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 716/720
Shopping center. An area consisting of three acres or more arranged according to a site plan to be submitted to
and to be approved by the city planning and zoning commission and the city council, on which is indicated the
amount of land to be devoted to the shopping village, the detailed arrangement of the various buildings, parking,
area, streets and type of zoning desired. It shall be required that installation of all utilities, drainage structures,
the paving of streets, parking areas, alley[s] and the installation of sidewalks be in accordance with the city
specification for each type of improvement.
Side yard. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated between the building and side line
of the lot and extending through from the front yard to the required rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a
front line shall be deemed a side line.
Storage garage. A building or portion thereof used for the storage of more than five passenger motor vehicles
and trucks of not more than 1-1/2 ton capacity.
Store. An establishment devoted exclusively to the retail sale of a commodity within a primary building on the
premises.
Story, half. A story having an average height of not more than eight feet, covering a floor area of not more than
75 percent of the area of the floor of the first story below.
Story[,] standard. One having 11 feet six inches between floors.
Street. Any thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, and more than 20 feet in width, which has been
dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column,
beam or girder.
Tobacco shop. A retail-only sales establishment that specializes in the retail sale of various forms and flavors of
smoking tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, tobacco pipes and other tobacco-smoking paraphernalia (i.e., for smoking
tobacco pipes, rolling handmade tobacco cigars and cigarettes, etc.) that are produced off site (i.e., are not
cooked, baked, dried/cured, etc. on site).
Tourist court. One or more buildings designed or used as temporary living quarters for automobile transients in
which individual cooking facilities may or may not be provided. If facilities are provided for individual cooking
so that the units may be occupied as dwelling units, the same area, density and yard regulations as required in
the “A” Apartment District, shall be observed. In all cases, one off-street parking space shall be provided for
each room or suite of rooms in the tourist court.
Travel center (also, “truck stop”). A large-scale gasoline/motor fuel sales facility of over 5,000 square feet
which primarily involves fueling and travel services for tractor trucks and the trucking industry. A travel center
may also provide limited/minor on-site truck repair and maintenance services (such as an automated truck wash
bay, a minor repair bay, etc.) and limited on-site personal hygiene facilities (such as showers and changing
rooms for truck crews), and it may also sell groceries, tobacco products, sundries/toiletries, household and other
non-food items, newspapers and magazines, candy and snacks, prepackaged (i.e., not cooked or prepared on site)
convenience food items such as sandwiches and salads, heated fast food items (such as hot dogs, etc.), for offsite
use and consumption. A travel center may not provide on-site overnight lodging facilities (e.g., motel
rooms) other than parking spaces for truck crews who wish to sleep within their own vehicles. (For on-site food
service/consumption, see “restaurant, fast-food,” “restaurant, dine-in/convenience,” or “restaurant, dine-in only,”
as applicable; for drive-in, drive through or walk-up convenience services, see “drive-in service,” “drive-through
service” or “walk-up service,” as applicable).
Truck stop. See “travel center.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 717/720
Two-family dwelling. A detached building having separate accommodation for occupation by not more than two
families, or by two families and not more than four boarders and lodgers.
Used car lots. A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display and sale of automobiles that are in
condition to be driven on or off the lot. A used car lot shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles,
dismantling of automobiles or the storage of automobile parts.
Walk-up service. A facility that is designed to allow customers to order, pay for, and obtain goods in
predominantly disposable containers by walking up to an exterior service window or portal while not physically
entering the building (does not include convenience services such as a remote banking/ATM machines,
pharmacy or dry cleaners walk-up facility where only services or nonconsumables are distributed). A walk-up
service facility shall have on-site vehicular parking in accordance with zoning ordinance requirements for the
primary use(s) on the property, and shall not provide food or beverage service to vehicles parked off-site or
within public rights-of-way.
Wedding services. A private secular (nonchurch) facility which is leased or rented on a temporary basis for
private wedding parties or other private parties.
Width of side yard. The mean horizontal distance between a side wall of a building and the side line of the lot.
Wind energy conversion system (WEC). A wind-driven energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine/rotor (blades), a tower (freestanding, engineered, monopole structure only upon which the wind
turbine/generator is mounted - no lattice-type or guyed tower structures allowed), and associated control or
conversion electronics, that has a rated capacity of not more than 100kW output at any given time, and that is
intended for on-site production of electricity in order to reduce consumption of commercial utility power.
Wind energy conversion system, large (LWEC). A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of
more than 10kW, but not more than 100kW, output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production
of electricity for a residence, agricultural structure, or business.
Wind energy conversion system, small (SWEC). A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of
not more than 10kW output at any given time, and that is intended for on-site production of electricity for a
residence, agricultural structure, or small business.
Wind energy system tower height. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower (i.e., to the center of
the hub), excluding the wind turbine itself.
Wind energy turbine/generator. The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components
mounted on top of the tower.
Wine-tasting room. A business establishment that is devoted to the sampling and sales of wine or sparkling wine
produced off the premises. Incidental sales of food items is allowed with applicable food service permits.
Winery. A business establishment that produces 10,000 or more cases of wine per year. No maximum site or
building area, and building(s) may include space allocated to bottling/crushing activities, lab and office space,
tasting room(s), storage, indoor events room(s), and outdoor event or picnic area(s). A winery shall provide at
least two of the following four activities on site: crushing, fermentation, bulk aging/storage, and/or bottling.
Winery, boutique. A business establishment that produces up to 10,000 cases of wine per year. Maximum site
area of three (3) acres, with up to 10,000 square feet of building area, including space allocated to
bottling/crushing activities, lab and office space, tasting room(s), storage, indoor events room(s), and small
outdoor event or picnic area(s). A boutique winery shall provide at least two of the following four activities on
site: crushing, fermentation, bulk aging/storage, and/or bottling.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 718/720
Yard. An open, unoccupied space other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and which is
unobstructed from the ground to the sky.
(Ordinance 18-89, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/89; Ordinance 24-08, sec. 3, adopted 9/17/09; Ordinance 04-10 adopted
5/6/10; Ordinance 03-2017, sec. 3, adopted 3/6/17)
Sec. 25.02.802–25.02.820 Reserved
Division 38. Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict
Sec. 25.02.821 Generally
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, they shall be held to the minimum requirements of the
promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intended by
this article to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, premises,
heights of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by the agreements, the
provisions of this article shall govern.
Sec. 25.02.822–25.02.840 Reserved
Division 39. Preserving Rights In Pending Litigation and Violations Under Existing Ordinances
Sec. 25.02.841 Generally
By the passage of the ordinance codified in this article, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been
legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use.
Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It
is further the intent and declared purpose of this article that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or
forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the zoning ordinance was repealed and the present
zoning ordinance adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal but prosecutions and suits for such
offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all
respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed.
(Ordinance 428 adopted 2/3/77)
Sec. 25.02.842–25.02.860 Reserved
Division 40. Board of Adjustment
Sec. 25.02.861 Creation; powers and duties
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five members, each to be appointed by a
majority of the city council for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon
written changes and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointment by the original appointing
authority of a suitable person to serve out the unexpired term of any member whose place on the board has
become vacant for any cause.
The board shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman
from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The board shall elect a secretary
and such other officers as it deems necessary, either from its membership or from staff representatives assigned
by the city manager to work with the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 719/720
The board is hereby vested with power and authority, in appropriate causes and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards to make such exceptions to the terms of this article in harmony with its general purpose and
intent and in accordance with general or special rules therein contained for the purpose of rendering full justice
and equity to the general public. The board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that
such rules are not inconsistent with this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman,
who may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the
public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
(Ordinance 28-14 adopted 10/6/14)
(b) Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeals shall be taken
within 15 days' time after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and with the board of adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings upon the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts, stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record or
application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(c) The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which the board is
required to pass under this article.
(3) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement
of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
article shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(d) In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of Articles 1011-A and
including 1011-J of the revised Civil Statutes of Texas, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken.
(Ordinance 428 adopted 2/3/77)
(e) A quorum for the conduct of business shall consist of four (4) members of the board. The concurring vote
of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of
any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under this article or to effect any variance in said ordinance. No members of the board shall abstain from
participation unless they have a conflict of interest as defined by state law or local ordinance. The chairman may
participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the board and shall be entitled to vote. (Ordinance 28-
14 adopted 10/6/14)
(f) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by and [any] decision of the board of adjustment or
any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city may present to a court of record a petition,
duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 720/720
illegality. Such petition shall be presented within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
board and not thereafter.
Sec. 25.02.862–25.02.880 Reserved
Division 41. Validity
Sec. 25.02.881 Validity
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part of provisions thereof,
other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ordinance 428 adopted 2/3/77)